1.1 א  אָדָם שֵׁת, אֱנוֹשׁ.    1 Adam, Seth, Enosh;
1.2 ב  קֵינָן מַהֲלַלְאֵל, יָרֶד.    2 Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared;
1.3 ג  חֲנוֹךְ מְתוּשֶׁלַח, לָמֶךְ.    3 Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech;
1.4 ד  נֹחַ שֵׁם, חָם וָיָפֶת.  {ס}    4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. {S}
1.5 ה  בְּנֵי יֶפֶת--גֹּמֶר וּמָגוֹג, וּמָדַי וְיָוָן וְתֻבָל; וּמֶשֶׁךְ, וְתִירָס.  {ס}    5 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. {S}
1.6 ו  וּבְנֵי, גֹּמֶר--אַשְׁכְּנַז וְדִיפַת, וְתוֹגַרְמָה.  {ס}    6 And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Diphath, and Togarmah. {S}
1.7 ז  וּבְנֵי יָוָן, אֱלִישָׁה וְתַרְשִׁישָׁה, כִּתִּים, וְרוֹדָנִים.  {ס}    7 And the sons of Javan: Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim. {S}
1.8 ח  בְּנֵי, חָם--כּוּשׁ וּמִצְרַיִם, פּוּט וּכְנָעַן.    8 The sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
1.9 ט  וּבְנֵי כוּשׁ--סְבָא וַחֲוִילָה, וְסַבְתָּא וְרַעְמָא וְסַבְתְּכָא; וּבְנֵי רַעְמָא, שְׁבָא וּדְדָן.  {ס}    9 And the sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raama, and Sabteca. And the sons of Raama: Sheba, and Dedan. {S}
1.10 י  וְכוּשׁ, יָלַד אֶת-נִמְרוֹד; הוּא הֵחֵל, לִהְיוֹת גִּבּוֹר בָּאָרֶץ.  {ס}    10 And Cush begot Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth. {S}
1.11 יא  וּמִצְרַיִם יָלַד אֶת-לודיים (לוּדִים) וְאֶת-עֲנָמִים, וְאֶת-לְהָבִים--וְאֶת-נַפְתֻּחִים.    11 And Mizraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
1.12 יב  וְאֶת-פַּתְרֻסִים וְאֶת-כַּסְלֻחִים, אֲשֶׁר יָצְאוּ מִשָּׁם פְּלִשְׁתִּים--וְאֶת-כַּפְתֹּרִים.  {ס}    12 and Pathrusim, and Casluhim--from whence came the Philistines--and Caphtorim. {S}
1.13 יג  וּכְנַעַן, יָלַד אֶת-צִידוֹן בְּכֹרוֹ--וְאֶת-חֵת.    13 And Canaan begot Zidon his first-born, and Heth;
1.14 יד  וְאֶת-הַיְבוּסִי, וְאֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי, וְאֵת, הַגִּרְגָּשִׁי.    14 and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite;
1.15 טו  וְאֶת-הַחִוִּי וְאֶת-הַעַרְקִי, וְאֶת-הַסִּינִי.    15 and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite;
1.16 טז  וְאֶת-הָאַרְוָדִי וְאֶת-הַצְּמָרִי, וְאֶת-הַחֲמָתִי.  {ס}    16 and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite. {S}
1.17 יז  בְּנֵי שֵׁם--עֵילָם וְאַשּׁוּר, וְאַרְפַּכְשַׁד וְלוּד וַאֲרָם; וְעוּץ וְחוּל, וְגֶתֶר וָמֶשֶׁךְ.  {ס}    17 The Sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech. {S}
1.18 יח  וְאַרְפַּכְשַׁד, יָלַד אֶת-שָׁלַח; וְשֶׁלַח, יָלַד אֶת-עֵבֶר.    18 And Arpachshad begot Shelah, and Shelah begot Eber.
1.19 יט  וּלְעֵבֶר יֻלַּד, שְׁנֵי בָנִים:  שֵׁם הָאֶחָד פֶּלֶג, כִּי בְיָמָיו נִפְלְגָה הָאָרֶץ, וְשֵׁם אָחִיו, יָקְטָן.    19 And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg; for in his days the earth was divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.
1.20 כ  וְיָקְטָן יָלַד, אֶת-אַלְמוֹדָד וְאֶת-שָׁלֶף, וְאֶת-חֲצַרְמָוֶת, וְאֶת-יָרַח.    20 And Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah;
1.21 כא  וְאֶת-הֲדוֹרָם וְאֶת-אוּזָל, וְאֶת-דִּקְלָה.    21 and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah;
1.22 כב  וְאֶת-עֵיבָל וְאֶת-אֲבִימָאֵל, וְאֶת-שְׁבָא.    22 and Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba;
1.23 כג  וְאֶת-אוֹפִיר וְאֶת-חֲוִילָה, וְאֶת-יוֹבָב; כָּל-אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי יָקְטָן.  {ס}    23 and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan. {S}
1.24 כד  שֵׁם אַרְפַּכְשַׁד, שָׁלַח.    24 Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah;
1.25 כה  עֵבֶר פֶּלֶג, רְעוּ.    25 Eber, Peleg, Reu;
1.26 כו  שְׂרוּג נָחוֹר, תָּרַח.    26 Serug, Nahor, Terah;
1.27 כז  אַבְרָם, הוּא אַבְרָהָם.  {ס}    27 Abram--the same is Abraham. {S}
1.28 כח  בְּנֵי, אַבְרָהָם--יִצְחָק, וְיִשְׁמָעֵאל.  {ס}    28 The sons of Abraham: Isaac, and Ishmael. {S}
1.29 כט  אֵלֶּה, תֹּלְדוֹתָם:  בְּכוֹר יִשְׁמָעֵאל נְבָיוֹת, וְקֵדָר וְאַדְבְּאֵל וּמִבְשָׂם.    29 These are their generations: the first-born of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
1.30 ל  מִשְׁמָע וְדוּמָה, מַשָּׂא חֲדַד וְתֵימָא.    30 Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,
1.31 לא  יְטוּר נָפִישׁ, וָקֵדְמָה; אֵלֶּה הֵם, בְּנֵי יִשְׁמָעֵאל.  {ס}    31 Jetur, Naphish, and Kedem. These are the sons of Ishmael. {S}
1.32 לב  וּבְנֵי קְטוּרָה פִּילֶגֶשׁ אַבְרָהָם, יָלְדָה אֶת-זִמְרָן וְיָקְשָׁן וּמְדָן וּמִדְיָן--וְיִשְׁבָּק וְשׁוּחַ; וּבְנֵי יָקְשָׁן, שְׁבָא וּדְדָן.  {ס}    32 And the sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bore Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan: Sheba, and Dedan. {S}
1.33 לג  וּבְנֵי מִדְיָן, עֵיפָה וָעֵפֶר וַחֲנוֹךְ, וַאֲבִידָע, וְאֶלְדָּעָה; כָּל-אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי קְטוּרָה.  {ס}    33 And the sons of Midian: Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah. {S}
1.34 לד  וַיּוֹלֶד אַבְרָהָם, אֶת-יִצְחָק; בְּנֵי יִצְחָק, עֵשָׂו וְיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    34 And Abraham begot Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau, and Israel. {S}
1.35 לה  בְּנֵי, עֵשָׂו--אֱלִיפַז רְעוּאֵל וִיעוּשׁ, וְיַעְלָם וְקֹרַח.  {ס}    35 The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jalam and Korah. {S}
1.36 לו  בְּנֵי, אֱלִיפָז--תֵּימָן וְאוֹמָר צְפִי וְגַעְתָּם, קְנַז וְתִמְנָע וַעֲמָלֵק.  {ס}    36 The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek. {S}
1.37 לז  בְּנֵי, רְעוּאֵל--נַחַת זֶרַח, שַׁמָּה וּמִזָּה.  {ס}    37 The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. {S}
1.38 לח  וּבְנֵי שֵׂעִיר, לוֹטָן וְשׁוֹבָל וְצִבְעוֹן וַעֲנָה, וְדִישֹׁן וְאֵצֶר, וְדִישָׁן.  {ס}    38 And the sons of Seir: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan. {S}
1.39 לט  וּבְנֵי לוֹטָן, חֹרִי וְהוֹמָם; וַאֲחוֹת לוֹטָן, תִּמְנָע.  {ס}    39 And the sons of Lotan: Hori, and Homam; and Timna was Lotan's sister. {S}
1.40 מ  בְּנֵי שׁוֹבָל, עַלְיָן וּמָנַחַת וְעֵיבָל שְׁפִי וְאוֹנָם; וּבְנֵי צִבְעוֹן, אַיָּה וַעֲנָה.  {ס}    40 The sons of Shobal: Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the sons of Zibeon: Aiah, and Anah. {S}
1.41 מא  בְּנֵי עֲנָה, דִּישׁוֹן; וּבְנֵי דִישׁוֹן, חַמְרָן וְאֶשְׁבָּן וְיִתְרָן וּכְרָן.    41 The sons of Anah: Dishon. And the sons of Dishon: Hamran, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
1.42 מב  בְּנֵי-אֵצֶר, בִּלְהָן וְזַעֲוָן יַעֲקָן; בְּנֵי דִישׁוֹן, עוּץ וַאֲרָן.  {פ}    42 The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, and Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz, and Aran. {P}
1.43 מג  וְאֵלֶּה הַמְּלָכִים, אֲשֶׁר מָלְכוּ בְּאֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם, לִפְנֵי מְלָךְ-מֶלֶךְ, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  בֶּלַע, בֶּן-בְּעוֹר, וְשֵׁם עִירוֹ, דִּנְהָבָה.    43 Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before their reigned any king over the children of Israel: Bela the son of Beor; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
1.44 מד  וַיָּמָת, בָּלַע; וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו, יוֹבָב בֶּן-זֶרַח מִבָּצְרָה.    44 And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
1.45 מה  וַיָּמָת, יוֹבָב; וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו, חוּשָׁם מֵאֶרֶץ הַתֵּימָנִי.    45 And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
1.46 מו  וַיָּמָת, חוּשָׁם; וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו הֲדַד בֶּן-בְּדַד, הַמַּכֶּה אֶת-מִדְיָן בִּשְׂדֵה מוֹאָב, וְשֵׁם עִירוֹ, עיות (עֲוִית).    46 And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Avith.
1.47 מז  וַיָּמָת, הֲדָד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו, שַׂמְלָה מִמַּשְׂרֵקָה.    47 And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
1.48 מח  וַיָּמָת, שַׂמְלָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו, שָׁאוּל מֵרְחֹבוֹת הַנָּהָר.    48 And Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his stead.
1.49 מט  וַיָּמָת, שָׁאוּל; וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו, בַּעַל חָנָן בֶּן-עַכְבּוֹר.    49 And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
1.50 נ  וַיָּמָת, בַּעַל חָנָן, וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו הֲדַד, וְשֵׁם עִירוֹ פָּעִי; וְשֵׁם אִשְׁתּוֹ מְהֵיטַבְאֵל בַּת-מַטְרֵד, בַּת מֵי זָהָב.    50 And Baal-hanan died, and Hadad reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Pai; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
1.51 נא  וַיָּמָת, הֲדָד;  {פ} וַיִּהְיוּ אַלּוּפֵי אֱדוֹם, אַלּוּף תִּמְנָע אַלּוּף עליה (עַלְוָה) אַלּוּף יְתֵת.    51 And Hadad died. {P} And the chiefs of Edom were: the chief of Timna, the chief of Alvah, the chief of Jetheth;
1.52 נב  אַלּוּף אָהֳלִיבָמָה אַלּוּף אֵלָה, אַלּוּף פִּינֹן.    52 the chief of Oholibamah, the chief of Elah, the chief of Pinon;
1.53 נג  אַלּוּף קְנַז אַלּוּף תֵּימָן, אַלּוּף מִבְצָר.    53 the chief of Kenaz, the chief of Teman, the chief of Mibzar;
1.54 נד  אַלּוּף מַגְדִּיאֵל, אַלּוּף עִירָם; אֵלֶּה, אַלּוּפֵי אֱדוֹם.  {פ}    54 the chief of Magdiel, the chief of Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom. {P}
2.1 א  אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  רְאוּבֵן שִׁמְעוֹן לֵוִי וִיהוּדָה, יִשָּׂשכָר וּזְבֻלוּן.    1 These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun;
2.2 ב  דָּן יוֹסֵף וּבִנְיָמִן, נַפְתָּלִי גָּד וְאָשֵׁר.  {פ}    2 Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. {P}
2.3 ג  בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, עֵר וְאוֹנָן וְשֵׁלָה--שְׁלוֹשָׁה נוֹלַד לוֹ, מִבַּת-שׁוּעַ הַכְּנַעֲנִית; וַיְהִי עֵר בְּכוֹר יְהוּדָה, רַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--וַיְמִיתֵהוּ.  {ס}    3 The sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah; which three were born unto him of Bath-shua the Canaanitess. And Er, Judah's first-born, was wicked in the sight of the LORD; and He slew him. {S}
2.4 ד  וְתָמָר, כַּלָּתוֹ, יָלְדָה לּוֹ, אֶת-פֶּרֶץ וְאֶת-זָרַח; כָּל-בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, חֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    4 And Tamar his daughter-in-law bore him Perez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five. {S}
2.5 ה  בְּנֵי-פֶרֶץ, חֶצְרוֹן וְחָמוּל.  {ס}    5 The sons of Perez: Hezron, and Hamul. {S}
2.6 ו  וּבְנֵי זֶרַח, זִמְרִי וְאֵיתָן וְהֵימָן וְכַלְכֹּל וָדָרַע--כֻּלָּם חֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    6 And the sons of Zerah: Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in all. {S}
2.7 ז  וּבְנֵי, כַּרְמִי--עָכָר עוֹכֵר יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר מָעַל בַּחֵרֶם.  {ס}    7 And the sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who committed a trespass concerning the devoted thing. {S}
2.8 ח  וּבְנֵי אֵיתָן, עֲזַרְיָה.  {ס}    8 And the sons of Ethan: Azariah. {S}
2.9 ט  וּבְנֵי חֶצְרוֹן, אֲשֶׁר נוֹלַד-לוֹ--אֶת-יְרַחְמְאֵל וְאֶת-רָם, וְאֶת-כְּלוּבָי.    9 The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him: Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.
2.10 י  וְרָם, הוֹלִיד אֶת-עַמִּינָדָב; וְעַמִּינָדָב הוֹלִיד אֶת-נַחְשׁוֹן, נְשִׂיא בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה.    10 And Ram begot Amminadab; and Amminadab begot Nahshon, prince of the children of Judah;
2.11 יא  וְנַחְשׁוֹן הוֹלִיד אֶת-שַׂלְמָא, וְשַׂלְמָא הוֹלִיד אֶת-בֹּעַז.    11 and Nahshon begot Salma, and Salma begot Boaz;
2.12 יב  וּבֹעַז הוֹלִיד אֶת-עוֹבֵד, וְעוֹבֵד הוֹלִיד אֶת-יִשָׁי.    12 and Boaz begot Obed, and Obed begot Jesse;
2.13 יג  וְאִישַׁי הוֹלִיד אֶת-בְּכֹרוֹ, אֶת-אֱלִיאָב--וַאֲבִינָדָב, הַשֵּׁנִי, וְשִׁמְעָא, הַשְּׁלִשִׁי.    13 and Jesse begot his first-born Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimea the third;
2.14 יד  נְתַנְאֵל, הָרְבִיעִי, רַדַּי, הַחֲמִישִׁי.    14 Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth;
2.15 טו  אֹצֶם, הַשִּׁשִּׁי, דָּוִיד, הַשְּׁבִעִי.    15 Ozem the sixth, David the seventh.
2.16 טז  וְאַחְיֹתֵיהֶם, צְרוּיָה וַאֲבִיגָיִל; וּבְנֵי צְרוּיָה, אַבְשַׁי וְיוֹאָב וַעֲשָׂהאֵל--שְׁלֹשָׁה.    16 And their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three.
2.17 יז  וַאֲבִיגַיִל, יָלְדָה אֶת-עֲמָשָׂא; וַאֲבִי עֲמָשָׂא, יֶתֶר הַיִּשְׁמְעֵאלִי.    17 And Abigail bore Amasa; and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.
2.18 יח  וְכָלֵב בֶּן-חֶצְרוֹן, הוֹלִיד אֶת-עֲזוּבָה אִשָּׁה--וְאֶת-יְרִיעוֹת; וְאֵלֶּה בָנֶיהָ, יֵשֶׁר וְשׁוֹבָב וְאַרְדּוֹן.    18 And Caleb the son of Hezron begot children of Azubah his wife--and of Jerioth--and these were her sons: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
2.19 יט  וַתָּמָת, עֲזוּבָה; וַיִּקַּח-לוֹ כָלֵב אֶת-אֶפְרָת, וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ אֶת-חוּר.    19 And Azubah died, and Caleb took unto him Ephrath, who bore him Hur.
2.20 כ  וְחוּר הוֹלִיד אֶת-אוּרִי, וְאוּרִי הוֹלִיד אֶת-בְּצַלְאֵל.  {ס}    20 And Hur begot Uri, and Uri begot Bezalel. {S}
2.21 כא  וְאַחַר, בָּא חֶצְרוֹן אֶל-בַּת-מָכִיר אֲבִי גִלְעָד, וְהוּא לְקָחָהּ, וְהוּא בֶּן-שִׁשִּׁים שָׁנָה; וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-שְׂגוּב.    21 And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead; whom he took to wife when he was threescore years old; and she bore him Segub.
2.22 כב  וּשְׂגוּב, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יָאִיר; וַיְהִי-לוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְשָׁלוֹשׁ עָרִים, בְּאֶרֶץ, הַגִּלְעָד.  {ס}    22 And Segub begot Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of Gilead. {S}
2.23 כג  וַיִּקַּח גְּשׁוּר-וַאֲרָם אֶת-חַוֺּת יָאִיר מֵאִתָּם, אֶת-קְנָת וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֶיהָ--שִׁשִּׁים עִיר; כָּל-אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי מָכִיר אֲבִי-גִלְעָד.    23 And Geshur and Aram took Havvoth-jair from them, with Kenath, and the villages thereof, even threescore cities. All these were the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.
2.24 כד  וְאַחַר מוֹת-חֶצְרוֹן, בְּכָלֵב אֶפְרָתָה; וְאֵשֶׁת חֶצְרוֹן, אֲבִיָּה, וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-אַשְׁחוּר אֲבִי תְקוֹעַ.  {ס}    24 And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb-ephrath, then Abiah Hezron's wife bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoa. {S}
2.25 כה  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-יְרַחְמְאֵל בְּכוֹר חֶצְרוֹן, הַבְּכוֹר רָם; וּבוּנָה וָאֹרֶן וָאֹצֶם, אֲחִיָּה.    25 And the sons of Jerahmeel the first-born of Hezron were Ram the first-born, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, Ahijah.
2.26 כו  וַתְּהִי אִשָּׁה אַחֶרֶת לִירַחְמְאֵל, וּשְׁמָהּ עֲטָרָה; הִיא, אֵם אוֹנָם.  {ס}    26 And Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam. {S}
2.27 כז  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-רָם, בְּכוֹר יְרַחְמְאֵל--מַעַץ וְיָמִין, וָעֵקֶר.    27 And the sons of Ram the first-born of Jerahmeel were Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.
2.28 כח  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-אוֹנָם, שַׁמַּי וְיָדָע; וּבְנֵי שַׁמַּי, נָדָב וַאֲבִישׁוּר.    28 And the sons of Onam were Shammai, and Jada; and the sons of Shammai: Nadab, and Abishur.
2.29 כט  וְשֵׁם אֵשֶׁת אֲבִישׁוּר, אֲבִיהָיִל; וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-אַחְבָּן וְאֶת-מוֹלִיד.    29 And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail; and she bore him Ahban, and Molid.
2.30 ל  וּבְנֵי נָדָב, סֶלֶד וְאַפָּיִם; וַיָּמָת סֶלֶד, לֹא בָנִים.    30 And the sons of Nadab: Seled, and Appaim; but Seled died without children.
2.31 לא  וּבְנֵי אַפַּיִם, יִשְׁעִי; וּבְנֵי יִשְׁעִי שֵׁשָׁן, וּבְנֵי שֵׁשָׁן אַחְלָי.    31 And the sons of Appaim: Ishi. And the sons of Ishi: Sheshan. And the sons of Sheshan: Ahlai.
2.32 לב  וּבְנֵי יָדָע אֲחִי שַׁמַּי, יֶתֶר וְיוֹנָתָן; וַיָּמָת יֶתֶר, לֹא בָנִים.  {ס}    32 And the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether, and Jonathan: and Jether died without children. {S}
2.33 לג  וּבְנֵי יוֹנָתָן, פֶּלֶת וְזָזָא; אֵלֶּה הָיוּ, בְּנֵי יְרַחְמְאֵל.    33 And the sons of Jonathan: Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.
2.34 לד  וְלֹא-הָיָה לְשֵׁשָׁן בָּנִים, כִּי אִם-בָּנוֹת; וּלְשֵׁשָׁן עֶבֶד מִצְרִי, וּשְׁמוֹ יַרְחָע.    34 Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.
2.35 לה  וַיִּתֵּן שֵׁשָׁן אֶת-בִּתּוֹ לְיַרְחָע עַבְדּוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה; וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-עַתָּי.    35 So Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife; and she bore him Attai.
2.36 לו  וְעַתַּי הֹלִיד אֶת-נָתָן, וְנָתָן הוֹלִיד אֶת-זָבָד.    36 And Attai begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabad;
2.37 לז  וְזָבָד הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֶפְלָל, וְאֶפְלָל הוֹלִיד אֶת-עוֹבֵד.    37 and Zabad begot Ephlal, and Ephlal begot Obed;
2.38 לח  וְעוֹבֵד הוֹלִיד אֶת-יֵהוּא, וְיֵהוּא הֹלִיד אֶת-עֲזַרְיָה.    38 and Obed begot Jehu, and Jehu begot Azariah;
2.39 לט  וַעֲזַרְיָה הֹלִיד אֶת-חָלֶץ, וְחֶלֶץ הֹלִיד אֶת-אֶלְעָשָׂה.    39 and Azariah begot Helez, and Helez begot Eleasah;
2.40 מ  וְאֶלְעָשָׂה הֹלִיד אֶת-סִסְמָי, וְסִסְמַי הֹלִיד אֶת-שַׁלּוּם.    40 and Eleasah begot Sisamai, and Sisamai begot Shallum;
2.41 מא  וְשַׁלּוּם הוֹלִיד אֶת-יְקַמְיָה, וִיקַמְיָה הֹלִיד אֶת-אֱלִישָׁמָע.  {ס}    41 and Shallum begot Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begot Elishama. {S}
2.42 מב  וּבְנֵי כָלֵב אֲחִי יְרַחְמְאֵל, מֵישָׁע בְּכֹרוֹ הוּא אֲבִי-זִיף, וּבְנֵי מָרֵשָׁה, אֲבִי חֶבְרוֹן.    42 And the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his first-born, who was the father of Ziph, and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.
2.43 מג  וּבְנֵי, חֶבְרוֹן--קֹרַח וְתַפֻּחַ, וְרֶקֶם וָשָׁמַע.    43 And the sons of Hebron: Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.
2.44 מד  וְשֶׁמַע הוֹלִיד, אֶת-רַחַם אֲבִי יָרְקְעָם; וְרֶקֶם, הוֹלִיד אֶת-שַׁמָּי.    44 And Shema begot Raham, the father of Jorkeam; and Rekem begot Shammai.
2.45 מה  וּבֶן-שַׁמַּי, מָעוֹן; וּמָעוֹן, אֲבִי בֵית-צוּר.    45 And the son of Shammai was Maon; and Maon was the father of Beth-zur.
2.46 מו  וְעֵיפָה פִּילֶגֶשׁ כָּלֵב, יָלְדָה אֶת-חָרָן וְאֶת-מוֹצָא וְאֶת-גָּזֵז; וְחָרָן, הֹלִיד אֶת-גָּזֵז.  {ס}    46 And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bore Haran, and Moza, and Gazez; and Haran begot Gazez. {S}
2.47 מז  וּבְנֵי, יָהְדָּי--רֶגֶם וְיוֹתָם וְגֵישָׁן וָפֶלֶט, וְעֵיפָה וָשָׁעַף.    47 And the sons of Jahdai: Regem, and Jotham, and Geshan, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
2.48 מח  פִּילֶגֶשׁ כָּלֵב מַעֲכָה, יָלַד שֶׁבֶר וְאֶת-תִּרְחֲנָה.    48 Maacah, Caleb's concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
2.49 מט  וַתֵּלֶד, שַׁעַף אֲבִי מַדְמַנָּה, אֶת-שְׁוָא אֲבִי מַכְבֵּנָה, וַאֲבִי גִבְעָא; וּבַת-כָּלֵב, עַכְסָה.  {ס}    49 And [the wife of] Shaaph the father of Madmannah bore Sheva the father of Machbenah and the father of Gibea. And the daughter of Caleb was Achsah. {S}
2.50 נ  אֵלֶּה הָיוּ בְּנֵי כָלֵב, בֶּן-חוּר בְּכוֹר אֶפְרָתָה--שׁוֹבָל, אֲבִי קִרְיַת יְעָרִים.    50 These were the sons of Caleb. The sons of Hur the first-born of Ephrath: Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim;
2.51 נא  שַׂלְמָא אֲבִי בֵית-לָחֶם, חָרֵף אֲבִי בֵית-גָּדֵר.    51 Salma the father of Beth-lehem, Hareph the father of Beth-gader.
2.52 נב  וַיִּהְיוּ בָנִים לְשׁוֹבָל, אֲבִי קִרְיַת יְעָרִים, הָרֹאֶה, חֲצִי הַמְּנֻחוֹת.    52 And Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim had sons: Haroeh, and half of the Menuhoth.
2.53 נג  וּמִשְׁפְּחוֹת, קִרְיַת יְעָרִים--הַיִּתְרִי וְהַפּוּתִי, וְהַשֻּׁמָתִי וְהַמִּשְׁרָעִי; מֵאֵלֶּה, יָצְאוּ הַצָּרְעָתִי--וְהָאֶשְׁתָּאֻלִי.  {ס}    53 And the families of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, and the Puthites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zorathites, and the Eshtaolites. {S}
2.54 נד  בְּנֵי שַׂלְמָא, בֵּית לֶחֶם וּנְטוֹפָתִי, עַטְרוֹת, בֵּית יוֹאָב; וַחֲצִי הַמָּנַחְתִּי, הַצָּרְעִי.    54 The sons of Salma: Beth-lehem, and the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab, and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.
2.55 נה  וּמִשְׁפְּחוֹת סֹפְרִים ישבו (יֹשְׁבֵי) יַעְבֵּץ, תִּרְעָתִים שִׁמְעָתִים שׂוּכָתִים; הֵמָּה הַקִּינִים הַבָּאִים, מֵחַמַּת אֲבִי בֵית-רֵכָב.  {ס}    55 And the families of scribes that dwelt at Jabez: the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab. {S}
3.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה הָיוּ בְּנֵי דָוִיד, אֲשֶׁר נוֹלַד-לוֹ בְּחֶבְרוֹן:  הַבְּכוֹר אַמְנֹן, לַאֲחִינֹעַם הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִית, שֵׁנִי דָּנִיֵּאל, לַאֲבִיגַיִל הַכַּרְמְלִית.    1 Now these were the sons of David, that were born unto him in Hebron: the first-born, Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess;
3.2 ב  הַשְּׁלִשִׁי לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם בֶּן-מַעֲכָה, בַּת-תַּלְמַי מֶלֶךְ גְּשׁוּר; הָרְבִיעִי, אֲדֹנִיָּה בֶן-חַגִּית.    2 the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;
3.3 ג  הַחֲמִישִׁי שְׁפַטְיָה, לַאֲבִיטָל; הַשִּׁשִּׁי יִתְרְעָם, לְעֶגְלָה אִשְׁתּוֹ.    3 the fifth, Shephatiah of Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife.
3.4 ד  שִׁשָּׁה, נוֹלַד-לוֹ בְחֶבְרוֹן, וַיִּמְלָךְ-שָׁם, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים וְשִׁשָּׁה חֳדָשִׁים; וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וְשָׁלוֹשׁ שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    4 Six were born unto him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years. {S}
3.5 ה  וְאֵלֶּה נוּלְּדוּ-לוֹ, בִּירוּשָׁלָיִם:  שִׁמְעָא וְשׁוֹבָב וְנָתָן וּשְׁלֹמֹה, אַרְבָּעָה, לְבַת-שׁוּעַ, בַּת-עַמִּיאֵל.    5 And these were born unto him in Jerusalem: Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath-shua the daughter of Ammiel;
3.6 ו  וְיִבְחָר וֶאֱלִישָׁמָע, וֶאֱלִיפָלֶט.    6 and Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet;
3.7 ז  וְנֹגַהּ וְנֶפֶג, וְיָפִיעַ.    7 and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia;
3.8 ח  וֶאֱלִישָׁמָע וְאֶלְיָדָע וֶאֱלִיפֶלֶט, תִּשְׁעָה.    8 and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.
3.9 ט  כֹּל, בְּנֵי דָוִיד--מִלְּבַד בְּנֵי-פִילַגְשִׁים, וְתָמָר אֲחוֹתָם.  {פ}    9 All these were the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines; and Tamar was their sister. {P}
3.10 י  וּבֶן-שְׁלֹמֹה, רְחַבְעָם; אֲבִיָּה בְנוֹ אָסָא בְנוֹ, יְהוֹשָׁפָט בְּנוֹ.    10 And Solomon's son was Rehoboam; Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son;
3.11 יא  יוֹרָם בְּנוֹ אֲחַזְיָהוּ בְנוֹ, יוֹאָשׁ בְּנוֹ.    11 Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son;
3.12 יב  אֲמַצְיָהוּ בְנוֹ עֲזַרְיָה בְנוֹ, יוֹתָם בְּנוֹ.    12 Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son;
3.13 יג  אָחָז בְּנוֹ חִזְקִיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, מְנַשֶּׁה בְנוֹ.    13 Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son;
3.14 יד  אָמוֹן בְּנוֹ, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בְנוֹ.    14 Amon his son, Josiah his son.
3.15 טו  וּבְנֵי, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ--הַבְּכוֹר יוֹחָנָן, הַשֵּׁנִי יְהוֹיָקִים; הַשְּׁלִשִׁי, צִדְקִיָּהוּ, הָרְבִיעִי, שַׁלּוּם.    15 And the sons of Josiah: the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.
3.16 טז  וּבְנֵי, יְהוֹיָקִים--יְכָנְיָה בְנוֹ, צִדְקִיָּה בְנוֹ.    16 And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.
3.17 יז  וּבְנֵי יְכָנְיָה אַסִּר, שְׁאַלְתִּיאֵל בְּנוֹ.    17 And the sons of Jeconiah--the same is Assir--Shealtiel his son;
3.18 יח  וּמַלְכִירָם וּפְדָיָה, וְשֶׁנְאַצַּר, יְקַמְיָה הוֹשָׁמָע, וּנְדַבְיָה.    18 and Malchiram, and Pedaiah, and Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
3.19 יט  וּבְנֵי פְדָיָה, זְרֻבָּבֶל וְשִׁמְעִי; וּבֶן-זְרֻבָּבֶל מְשֻׁלָּם וַחֲנַנְיָה, וּשְׁלֹמִית אֲחוֹתָם.    19 And the sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel, and Shimei. And the sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam, and Hananiah; and Shelomith was their sister;
3.20 כ  וַחֲשֻׁבָה וָאֹהֶל וּבֶרֶכְיָה וַחֲסַדְיָה, יוּשַׁב חֶסֶד--חָמֵשׁ.    20 and Hashubah and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed, five.
3.21 כא  וּבֶן-חֲנַנְיָה, פְּלַטְיָה וִישַׁעְיָה; בְּנֵי רְפָיָה בְּנֵי אַרְנָן, בְּנֵי עֹבַדְיָה בְּנֵי שְׁכַנְיָה.    21 And the sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah, and Jeshaiah; the sons of [Jeshaiah]: Rephaiah; the sons of [Rephaiah]: Arnan; the sons of [Arnan]: Obadiah; the sons of [Obadiah]: Shecaniah.
3.22 כב  וּבְנֵי שְׁכַנְיָה, שְׁמַעְיָה; וּבְנֵי שְׁמַעְיָה, חַטּוּשׁ וְיִגְאָל וּבָרִיחַ וּנְעַרְיָה וְשָׁפָט--שִׁשָּׁה.    22 And the sons of Shecaniah: Shemaiah; and the sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, and Igal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
3.23 כג  וּבֶן-נְעַרְיָה, אֶלְיוֹעֵינַי וְחִזְקִיָּה וְעַזְרִיקָם--שְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    23 And the sons of Neariah: Elioenai, and Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three. {S}
3.24 כד  וּבְנֵי אֶלְיוֹעֵינַי, הודיוהו (הוֹדַוְיָהוּ) וְאֶלְיָשִׁיב וּפְלָיָה וְעַקּוּב וְיוֹחָנָן וּדְלָיָה וַעֲנָנִי--שִׁבְעָה.  {ס}    24 And the sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, seven. {S}
4.1 א  בְּנֵי, יְהוּדָה:  פֶּרֶץ חֶצְרוֹן וְכַרְמִי, וְחוּר וְשׁוֹבָל.    1 The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.
4.2 ב  וּרְאָיָה בֶן-שׁוֹבָל, הֹלִיד אֶת-יַחַת, וְיַחַת הֹלִיד, אֶת-אֲחוּמַי וְאֶת-לָהַד; אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחוֹת הַצָּרְעָתִי.  {ס}    2 And Reaiah the son of Shobal begot Jahath; and Jahath begot Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites. {S}
4.3 ג  וְאֵלֶּה אֲבִי עֵיטָם, יִזְרְעֶאל וְיִשְׁמָא וְיִדְבָּשׁ; וְשֵׁם אֲחוֹתָם, הַצְלֶלְפּוֹנִי.    3 And these were [the sons of] the father of Etam: Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash; and the name of their sister was Hazlelponi;
4.4 ד  וּפְנוּאֵל אֲבִי גְדֹר, וְעֵזֶר אֲבִי חוּשָׁה; אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-חוּר בְּכוֹר אֶפְרָתָה, אֲבִי בֵּית לָחֶם.    4 and Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur the first-born of Ephrath, the father of Beth-lehem.
4.5 ה  וּלְאַשְׁחוּר אֲבִי תְקוֹעַ, הָיוּ שְׁתֵּי נָשִׁים:  חֶלְאָה, וְנַעֲרָה.    5 And Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
4.6 ו  וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ נַעֲרָה אֶת-אֲחֻזָּם וְאֶת-חֵפֶר, וְאֶת-תֵּימְנִי וְאֶת-הָאֲחַשְׁתָּרִי; אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי נַעֲרָה.    6 And Naarah bore him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Timeni, and Ahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
4.7 ז  וּבְנֵי, חֶלְאָה--צֶרֶת יצחר (וְצֹחַר), וְאֶתְנָן.    7 And the sons of Helah were Zereth, and Zohar, and Ethnan.
4.8 ח  וְקוֹץ הוֹלִיד, אֶת-עָנוּב וְאֶת-הַצֹּבֵבָה, וּמִשְׁפְּחֹת אֲחַרְחֵל, בֶּן-הָרוּם.    8 And Koz begot Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
4.9 ט  וַיְהִי יַעְבֵּץ, נִכְבָּד מֵאֶחָיו; וְאִמּוֹ, קָרְאָה שְׁמוֹ יַעְבֵּץ לֵאמֹר, כִּי יָלַדְתִּי, בְּעֹצֶב.    9 And Jabez was more honourable than his brethren; and his mother called his name Jabez, saying: 'Because I bore him with pain.'
4.10 י  וַיִּקְרָא יַעְבֵּץ לֵאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר, אִם-בָּרֵךְ תְּבָרְכֵנִי וְהִרְבִּיתָ אֶת-גְּבוּלִי וְהָיְתָה יָדְךָ עִמִּי, וְעָשִׂיתָ מֵּרָעָה, לְבִלְתִּי עָצְבִּי--וַיָּבֵא אֱלֹהִים, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-שָׁאָל.  {ס}    10 And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying: 'Oh that Thou wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my border, and that Thy hand might be with me, and that Thou wouldest work deliverance from evil, that it may not pain me!' And God granted him that which he requested. {S}
4.11 יא  וּכְלוּב אֲחִי-שׁוּחָה, הוֹלִיד אֶת-מְחִיר:  הוּא, אֲבִי אֶשְׁתּוֹן.    11 And Chelub the brother of Shuhah begot Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
4.12 יב  וְאֶשְׁתּוֹן, הוֹלִיד אֶת-בֵּית רָפָא וְאֶת-פָּסֵחַ, וְאֶת-תְּחִנָּה, אֲבִי עִיר נָחָשׁ; אֵלֶּה, אַנְשֵׁי רֵכָה.  {ס}    12 And Eshton begot Beth-rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah. {S}
4.13 יג  וּבְנֵי קְנַז, עָתְנִיאֵל וּשְׂרָיָה; וּבְנֵי עָתְנִיאֵל, חֲתַת.    13 And the sons of Kenaz: Othniel, and Seraiah; and the sons of Othniel: Hathath.
4.14 יד  וּמְעוֹנֹתַי, הוֹלִיד אֶת-עָפְרָה; וּשְׂרָיָה, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יוֹאָב אֲבִי גֵּיא חֲרָשִׁים--כִּי חֲרָשִׁים, הָיוּ.  {פ}    14 And Meonothai begot Ophrah; and Seraiah begot Joab the father of Ge-harashim; for they were craftsmen. {P}
4.15 טו  וּבְנֵי כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, עִירוּ אֵלָה וָנָעַם; וּבְנֵי אֵלָה, וּקְנַז.    15 And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam; and the sons of Elah: Kenaz.
4.16 טז  וּבְנֵי, יְהַלֶּלְאֵל--זִיף וְזִיפָה, תִּירְיָא וַאֲשַׂרְאֵל.    16 And the sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.
4.17 יז  וּבֶן-עֶזְרָה--יֶתֶר וּמֶרֶד, וְעֵפֶר וְיָלוֹן; וַתַּהַר אֶת-מִרְיָם וְאֶת-שַׁמַּי, וְאֶת-יִשְׁבָּח אֲבִי אֶשְׁתְּמֹעַ.    17 And the sons of Ezrah: Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon. And she bore Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa--
4.18 יח  וְאִשְׁתּוֹ הַיְהֻדִיָּה, יָלְדָה אֶת-יֶרֶד אֲבִי גְדוֹר וְאֶת-חֶבֶר אֲבִי שׂוֹכוֹ, וְאֶת-יְקוּתִיאֵל, אֲבִי זָנוֹחַ; וְאֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי בִּתְיָה בַת-פַּרְעֹה, אֲשֶׁר לָקַח, מָרֶד.  {ס}    18 and his wife Hajehudijah bore Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah--and these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh whom Mered took. {S}
4.19 יט  וּבְנֵי, אֵשֶׁת הוֹדִיָּה--אֲחוֹת נַחַם, אֲבִי קְעִילָה הַגַּרְמִי; וְאֶשְׁתְּמֹעַ, הַמַּעֲכָתִי.    19 And the sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
4.20 כ  וּבְנֵי שִׁימוֹן--אַמְנוֹן וְרִנָּה, בֶּן-חָנָן ותולון (וְתִילוֹן); וּבְנֵי יִשְׁעִי, זוֹחֵת וּבֶן-זוֹחֵת.    20 And the sons of Shimon: Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi: Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth.
4.21 כא  בְּנֵי, שֵׁלָה בֶן-יְהוּדָה--עֵר אֲבִי לֵכָה, וְלַעְדָּה אֲבִי מָרֵשָׁה; וּמִשְׁפְּחוֹת בֵּית-עֲבֹדַת הַבֻּץ, לְבֵית אַשְׁבֵּעַ.    21 The sons of Shelah the son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, and Ladah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea;
4.22 כב  וְיוֹקִים וְאַנְשֵׁי כֹזֵבָא, וְיוֹאָשׁ וְשָׂרָף אֲשֶׁר-בָּעֲלוּ לְמוֹאָב--וְיָשֻׁבִי לָחֶם; וְהַדְּבָרִים, עַתִּיקִים.    22 and Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had dominion in Moab, and Jashubi-lehem. And the records are ancient.
4.23 כג  הֵמָּה, הַיּוֹצְרִים, וְיֹשְׁבֵי נְטָעִים, וּגְדֵרָה; עִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ בִּמְלַאכְתּוֹ, יָשְׁבוּ שָׁם.  {ס}    23 These were the potters, and those that dwelt among plantations and hedges; there they dwelt occupied in the king's work. {S}
4.24 כד  בְּנֵי, שִׁמְעוֹן:  נְמוּאֵל וְיָמִין, יָרִיב זֶרַח שָׁאוּל.    24 The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, and Jamim, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;
4.25 כה  שַׁלֻּם בְּנוֹ מִבְשָׂם בְּנוֹ, מִשְׁמָע בְּנוֹ.    25 Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.
4.26 כו  וּבְנֵי, מִשְׁמָע--חַמּוּאֵל בְּנוֹ זַכּוּר בְּנוֹ, שִׁמְעִי בְנוֹ.    26 And the sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son.
4.27 כז  וּלְשִׁמְעִי בָּנִים שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר, וּבָנוֹת שֵׁשׁ, וּלְאֶחָיו, אֵין בָּנִים רַבִּים; וְכֹל, מִשְׁפַּחְתָּם, לֹא הִרְבּוּ, עַד-בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה.  {ס}    27 And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brethren had not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to the children of Judah. {S}
4.28 כח  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בִּבְאֵר-שֶׁבַע וּמוֹלָדָה, וַחֲצַר שׁוּעָל.    28 And they dwelt at Beer-sheba, and Moladah, and Hazar-shual;
4.29 כט  וּבְבִלְהָה וּבְעֶצֶם, וּבְתוֹלָד.    29 and at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad;
4.30 ל  וּבִבְתוּאֵל וּבְחָרְמָה, וּבְצִיקְלָג.    30 and at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag;
4.31 לא  וּבְבֵית מַרְכָּבוֹת וּבַחֲצַר סוּסִים, וּבְבֵית בִּרְאִי וּבְשַׁעֲרָיִם; אֵלֶּה עָרֵיהֶם, עַד-מְלֹךְ דָּוִיד.    31 and at Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susim, and at Beth-biri, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities unto the reign of David.
4.32 לב  וְחַצְרֵיהֶם עֵיטָם וָעַיִן, רִמּוֹן וְתֹכֶן וְעָשָׁן; עָרִים, חָמֵשׁ.    32 And their villages were Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities;
4.33 לג  וְכָל-חַצְרֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹת הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה--עַד-בָּעַל;  {ס}  זֹאת, מוֹשְׁבֹתָם, וְהִתְיַחְשָׂם, לָהֶם.    33 and all their villages that were round about the same cities, unto Baal. {S} These were their habitations, and they have their genealogy.
4.34 לד  וּמְשׁוֹבָב וְיַמְלֵךְ, וְיוֹשָׁה בֶּן-אֲמַצְיָה.    34 And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah;
4.35 לה  וְיוֹאֵל; וְיֵהוּא, בֶּן-יוֹשִׁבְיָה, בֶּן-שְׂרָיָה, בֶּן-עֲשִׂיאֵל.    35 and Joel, and Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel;
4.36 לו  וְאֶלְיוֹעֵינַי וְיַעֲקֹבָה וִישׁוֹחָיָה וַעֲשָׂיָה וַעֲדִיאֵל, וִישִׂימִאֵל--וּבְנָיָה.    36 and Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshoaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah;
4.37 לז  וְזִיזָא בֶן-שִׁפְעִי בֶן-אַלּוֹן בֶּן-יְדָיָה בֶן-שִׁמְרִי, בֶּן-שְׁמַעְיָה.    37 and Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah;
4.38 לח  אֵלֶּה הַבָּאִים בְּשֵׁמוֹת, נְשִׂיאִים בְּמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם; וּבֵית, אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, פָּרְצוּ, לָרוֹב.    38 these mentioned by name were princes in their families; and their fathers' houses increased greatly.
4.39 לט  וַיֵּלְכוּ לִמְבוֹא גְדֹר, עַד לְמִזְרַח הַגָּיְא, לְבַקֵּשׁ מִרְעֶה, לְצֹאנָם.    39 And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even unto the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.
4.40 מ  וַיִּמְצְאוּ מִרְעֶה, שָׁמֵן וָטוֹב, וְהָאָרֶץ רַחֲבַת יָדַיִם, וְשֹׁקֶטֶת וּשְׁלֵוָה:  כִּי מִן-חָם, הַיֹּשְׁבִים שָׁם לְפָנִים.    40 And they found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and quiet, and peaceable; for they that dwelt there aforetime were of Ham.
4.41 מא  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֵלֶּה הַכְּתוּבִים בְּשֵׁמוֹת בִּימֵי יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-אָהֳלֵיהֶם וְאֶת-המעינים (הַמְּעוּנִים) אֲשֶׁר נִמְצְאוּ-שָׁמָּה וַיַּחֲרִימֻם עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, תַּחְתֵּיהֶם:  כִּי-מִרְעֶה לְצֹאנָם, שָׁם.    41 And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote their tents, and the Meunim that were found there, and destroyed them utterly, unto this day, and dwelt in their stead; because there was pasture there for their flocks.
4.42 מב  וּמֵהֶם מִן-בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, הָלְכוּ לְהַר שֵׂעִיר, אֲנָשִׁים, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת; וּפְלַטְיָה וּנְעַרְיָה וּרְפָיָה וְעֻזִּיאֵל, בְּנֵי יִשְׁעִי--בְּרֹאשָׁם.    42 And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.
4.43 מג  וַיַּכּוּ, אֶת-שְׁאֵרִית הַפְּלֵטָה לַעֲמָלֵק; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׁם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    43 And they smote the remnant of the Amalekites that escaped, and dwelt there unto this day. {P}
5.1 א  וּבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן בְּכוֹר-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי הוּא הַבְּכוֹר--וּבְחַלְּלוֹ יְצוּעֵי אָבִיו, נִתְּנָה בְּכֹרָתוֹ לִבְנֵי יוֹסֵף בֶּן-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא לְהִתְיַחֵשׂ, לַבְּכֹרָה.    1 And the sons of Reuben the first-born of Israel--for he was the first-born; but, forasmuch as he defiled his father's couch, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, yet not so that he was to be reckoned in the genealogy as first-born.
5.2 ב  כִּי יְהוּדָה גָּבַר בְּאֶחָיו, וּלְנָגִיד מִמֶּנּוּ; וְהַבְּכֹרָה, לְיוֹסֵף.  {ס}    2 For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came he that is the prince; but the birthright was Joseph's-- {S}
5.3 ג  בְּנֵי רְאוּבֵן, בְּכוֹר יִשְׂרָאֵל:  חֲנוֹךְ וּפַלּוּא, חֶצְרוֹן וְכַרְמִי.    3 the sons of Reuben the first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
5.4 ד  בְּנֵי, יוֹאֵל--שְׁמַעְיָה בְנוֹ גּוֹג בְּנוֹ, שִׁמְעִי בְנוֹ.    4 The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son;
5.5 ה  מִיכָה בְנוֹ רְאָיָה בְנוֹ, בַּעַל בְּנוֹ.    5 Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son;
5.6 ו  בְּאֵרָה בְנוֹ--אֲשֶׁר הֶגְלָה, תִּלְּגַת פִּלְנְאֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ אַשֻּׁר; הוּא נָשִׂיא, לָראוּבֵנִי.    6 Beerah his son, whom Tillegath-pilneser king of Assyria carried away captive; he was prince of the Reubenites.
5.7 ז  וְאֶחָיו, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָיו, בְּהִתְיַחֵשׂ, לְתֹלְדוֹתָם--הָרֹאשׁ יְעִיאֵל, וּזְכַרְיָהוּ.    7 And his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned: the chief Jeiel, and Zechariah,
5.8 ח  וּבֶלַע, בֶּן-עָזָז, בֶּן-שֶׁמַע, בֶּן-יוֹאֵל; הוּא יוֹשֵׁב בַּעֲרֹעֵר, וְעַד-נְבוֹ וּבַעַל מְעוֹן.    8 and Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baal-meon;
5.9 ט  וְלַמִּזְרָח, יָשַׁב עַד-לְבוֹא מִדְבָּרָה, לְמִן-הַנָּהָר, פְּרָת:  כִּי מִקְנֵיהֶם רָבוּ, בְּאֶרֶץ גִּלְעָד.    9 and eastward he dwelt even unto the entrance of the wilderness from the river Euphrates; because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.
5.10 י  וּבִימֵי שָׁאוּל, עָשׂוּ מִלְחָמָה עִם-הַהַגְרִאִים, וַיִּפְּלוּ, בְּיָדָם; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, בְּאָהֳלֵיהֶם, עַל-כָּל-פְּנֵי, מִזְרָח לַגִּלְעָד.  {ס}    10 And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagrites, who fell by their hand; and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the land east of Gilead. {S}
5.11 יא  וּבְנֵי-גָד לְנֶגְדָּם, יָשְׁבוּ בְּאֶרֶץ הַבָּשָׁן--עַד-סַלְכָה.    11 And the sons of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of Bashan unto Salcah:
5.12 יב  יוֹאֵל הָרֹאשׁ, וְשָׁפָם הַמִּשְׁנֶה; וְיַעְנַי וְשָׁפָט, בַּבָּשָׁן.    12 Joel the chief, and Shapham the second, and Janai, and Shaphat in Bashan;
5.13 יג  וַאֲחֵיהֶם לְבֵית אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, מִיכָאֵל וּמְשֻׁלָּם וְשֶׁבַע וְיוֹרַי וְיַעְכָּן וְזִיעַ וָעֵבֶר--שִׁבְעָה.  {ס}    13 and their brethren of their fathers' houses: Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jacan, and Zia, and Eber, seven. {S}
5.14 יד  אֵלֶּה בְּנֵי אֲבִיחַיִל, בֶּן-חוּרִי בֶּן-יָרוֹחַ בֶּן-גִּלְעָד בֶּן-מִיכָאֵל בֶּן-יְשִׁישַׁי בֶּן-יַחְדּוֹ--בֶּן-בּוּז.    14 These were the sons of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jehishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;
5.15 טו  אֲחִי בֶּן-עַבְדִּיאֵל בֶּן-גּוּנִי, רֹאשׁ לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם.    15 Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of their fathers' houses.
5.16 טז  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בַּגִּלְעָד בַּבָּשָׁן, וּבִבְנֹתֶיהָ, וּבְכָל-מִגְרְשֵׁי שָׁרוֹן, עַל-תּוֹצְאוֹתָם.    16 And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in the towns thereof, and in all the open lands of the plain, upon their borders.
5.17 יז  כֻּלָּם, הִתְיַחְשׂוּ, בִּימֵי, יוֹתָם מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה--וּבִימֵי, יָרָבְעָם מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    17 All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel. {P}
5.18 יח  בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וְגָדִי וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט-מְנַשֶּׁה, מִן-בְּנֵי-חַיִל, אֲנָשִׁים נֹשְׂאֵי מָגֵן וְחֶרֶב וְדֹרְכֵי קֶשֶׁת, וּלְמוּדֵי מִלְחָמָה--אַרְבָּעִים וְאַרְבָּעָה אֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע-מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים, יֹצְאֵי צָבָא.    18 The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, as many as were valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with bow, and skilful in war, were forty and four thousand seven hundred and threescore, that were able to go forth to war.
5.19 יט  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ מִלְחָמָה, עִם-הַהַגְרִיאִים, וִיטוּר וְנָפִישׁ, וְנוֹדָב.    19 And they made war with the Hagrites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and Nodab.
5.20 כ  וַיֵּעָזְרוּ עֲלֵיהֶם--וַיִּנָּתְנוּ בְיָדָם הַהַגְרִיאִים, וְכֹל שֶׁעִמָּהֶם:  כִּי לֵאלֹהִים זָעֲקוּ, בַּמִּלְחָמָה, וְנַעְתּוֹר לָהֶם, כִּי-בָטְחוּ בוֹ.    20 And they were helped against them, and the Hagrites were delivered into their hand, and all that were with them; for they cried to God in the battle, and He was entreated of them, because they put their trust in Him.
5.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁבּוּ מִקְנֵיהֶם, גְּמַלֵּיהֶם חֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף וְצֹאן מָאתַיִם וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמוֹרִים, אַלְפָּיִם; וְנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם, מֵאָה אָלֶף.    21 And they took away their cattle: of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand; and of souls of men a hundred thousand.
5.22 כב  כִּי-חֲלָלִים רַבִּים נָפָלוּ, כִּי מֵהָאֱלֹהִים הַמִּלְחָמָה; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ תַחְתֵּיהֶם, עַד-הַגֹּלָה.  {פ}    22 For there fell many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their stead until the captivity. {P}
5.23 כג  וּבְנֵי, חֲצִי שֵׁבֶט מְנַשֶּׁה, יָשְׁבוּ, בָּאָרֶץ; מִבָּשָׁן עַד-בַּעַל חֶרְמוֹן, וּשְׂנִיר וְהַר-חֶרְמוֹן--הֵמָּה רָבוּ.    23 And the children of the half-tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land, from Bashan unto Baal-hermon and Senir and mount Hermon, where they increased.
5.24 כד  וְאֵלֶּה, רָאשֵׁי בֵית-אֲבוֹתָם:  וְעֵפֶר וְיִשְׁעִי וֶאֱלִיאֵל וְעַזְרִיאֵל וְיִרְמְיָה וְהוֹדַוְיָה וְיַחְדִּיאֵל, אֲנָשִׁים גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל--אַנְשֵׁי שֵׁמוֹת, רָאשִׁים לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם.    24 And these were the heads of their fathers' houses: Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, heads of their fathers' houses.
5.25 כה  וַיִּמְעֲלוּ, בֵּאלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיהֶם; וַיִּזְנוּ, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהֵי עַמֵּי-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-הִשְׁמִיד אֱלֹהִים, מִפְּנֵיהֶם.    25 And they broke faith with the God of their fathers, and went astray after the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God destroyed before them.
5.26 כו  וַיָּעַר אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-רוּחַ פּוּל מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, וְאֶת-רוּחַ תִּלְּגַת פִּלְנֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וַיַּגְלֵם לָראוּבֵנִי וְלַגָּדִי, וְלַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט מְנַשֶּׁה; וַיְבִיאֵם לַחְלַח וְחָבוֹר וְהָרָא, וּנְהַר גּוֹזָן, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    26 And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tillegath-pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river of Gozan, unto this day. {P}
6.1 א  בְּנֵי, לֵוִי:  גֵּרְשׁוֹן, קְהָת וּמְרָרִי.    27 The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
6.2 ב  וּבְנֵי, קְהָת--עַמְרָם יִצְהָר, וְחֶבְרוֹן וְעֻזִּיאֵל.  {ס}    28 And the sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. {S}
6.3 ג  וּבְנֵי עַמְרָם, אַהֲרֹן וּמֹשֶׁה וּמִרְיָם;  {ס}  וּבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן--נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא, אֶלְעָזָר וְאִיתָמָר.    29 And the children of Amram: Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. {S} And the sons of Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
6.4 ד  אֶלְעָזָר הוֹלִיד אֶת-פִּינְחָס, פִּינְחָס הֹלִיד אֶת-אֲבִישׁוּעַ.    30 Eleazar begot Phinehas, Phinehas begot Abishua;
6.5 ה  וַאֲבִישׁוּעַ הוֹלִיד אֶת-בֻּקִּי, וּבֻקִּי הוֹלִיד אֶת-עֻזִּי.    31 and Abishua begot Bukki, and Bukki begot Uzzi;
6.6 ו  וְעֻזִּי הוֹלִיד אֶת-זְרַחְיָה, וּזְרַחְיָה הוֹלִיד אֶת-מְרָיוֹת.    32 and Uzzi begot Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begot Meraioth;
6.7 ז  מְרָיוֹת הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֲמַרְיָה, וַאֲמַרְיָה הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֲחִיטוּב.    33 Meraioth begot Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub;
6.8 ח  וַאֲחִיטוּב הוֹלִיד אֶת-צָדוֹק, וְצָדוֹק הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֲחִימָעַץ.    34 and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok begot Ahimaaz;
6.9 ט  וַאֲחִימַעַץ הוֹלִיד אֶת-עֲזַרְיָה, וַעֲזַרְיָה הוֹלִיד אֶת-יוֹחָנָן.    35 and Ahimaaz begot Azariah, and Azariah begot Johanan;
6.10 י  וְיוֹחָנָן, הוֹלִיד אֶת-עֲזַרְיָה; הוּא, אֲשֶׁר כִּהֵן, בַּבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר-בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    36 and Johanan begot Azariah--he it is that executed the priest's office in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem--
6.11 יא  וַיּוֹלֶד עֲזַרְיָה, אֶת-אֲמַרְיָה; וַאֲמַרְיָה, הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֲחִיטוּב.    37 and Azariah begot Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub;
6.12 יב  וַאֲחִיטוּב הוֹלִיד אֶת-צָדוֹק, וְצָדוֹק הוֹלִיד אֶת-שַׁלּוּם.    38 and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok begot Shallum;
6.13 יג  וְשַׁלּוּם הוֹלִיד אֶת-חִלְקִיָּה, וְחִלְקִיָּה הוֹלִיד אֶת-עֲזַרְיָה.    39 and Shallum begot Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begot Azariah;
6.14 יד  וַעֲזַרְיָה הוֹלִיד אֶת-שְׂרָיָה, וּשְׂרָיָה הוֹלִיד אֶת-יְהוֹצָדָק.    40 and Azariah begot Seraiah, and Seraiah begot Jehozadak;
6.15 טו  וִיהוֹצָדָק הָלַךְ--בְּהַגְלוֹת יְהוָה, אֶת-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם:  בְּיַד, נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר.  {פ}    41 and Jehozadak went into captivity, when the LORD carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar. {P}
6.16 טז  בְּנֵי, לֵוִי:  גֵּרְשֹׁם, קְהָת וּמְרָרִי.    1 The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath and Merari.
6.17 יז  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי-גֵרְשׁוֹם, לִבְנִי וְשִׁמְעִי.    2 And these are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni, and Shimei.
6.18 יח  וּבְנֵי, קְהָת--עַמְרָם וְיִצְהָר, וְחֶבְרוֹן וְעֻזִּיאֵל.  {ס}    3 And the sons of Kohath were Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. {S}
6.19 יט  בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, מַחְלִי וּמֻשִׁי; וְאֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחוֹת הַלֵּוִי, לַאֲבֹתֵיהֶם.    4 The sons of Merari: Mahli, and Mushi. And these are the families of the Levites according to their fathers' houses.
6.20 כ  לְגֵרְשׁוֹם--לִבְנִי בְנוֹ יַחַת בְּנוֹ, זִמָּה בְנוֹ.    5 Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son;
6.21 כא  יוֹאָח בְּנוֹ עִדּוֹ בְנוֹ, זֶרַח בְּנוֹ יְאָתְרַי בְּנוֹ.    6 Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son.
6.22 כב  בְּנֵי, קְהָת--עַמִּינָדָב בְּנוֹ, קֹרַח בְּנוֹ אַסִּיר בְּנוֹ.    7 The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son;
6.23 כג  אֶלְקָנָה בְנוֹ וְאֶבְיָסָף בְּנוֹ, וְאַסִּיר בְּנוֹ.    8 Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son;
6.24 כד  תַּחַת בְּנוֹ אוּרִיאֵל בְּנוֹ, עֻזִּיָּה בְנוֹ וְשָׁאוּל בְּנוֹ.    9 Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.
6.25 כה  וּבְנֵי, אֶלְקָנָה--עֲמָשַׂי, וַאֲחִימוֹת.    10 And the sons of Elkanah: Amasai, and Ahimoth.
6.26 כו  אֶלְקָנָה--בנו (בְּנֵי), אֶלְקָנָה, צוֹפַי בְּנוֹ, וְנַחַת בְּנוֹ.    11 As for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah: Zophai his son, and Nahath his son;
6.27 כז  אֱלִיאָב בְּנוֹ יְרֹחָם בְּנוֹ, אֶלְקָנָה בְנוֹ.    12 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.
6.28 כח  וּבְנֵי שְׁמוּאֵל הַבְּכֹר וַשְׁנִי, וַאֲבִיָּה.  {ס}    13 And the sons of Samuel: the first-born Vashni; then Abiah. {S}
6.29 כט  בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, מַחְלִי; לִבְנִי בְנוֹ שִׁמְעִי בְנוֹ, עֻזָּה בְנוֹ.    14 The sons of Merari: Mahli; Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son;
6.30 ל  שִׁמְעָא בְנוֹ חַגִּיָּה בְנוֹ, עֲשָׂיָה בְנוֹ.  {פ}    15 Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son. {P}
6.31 לא  וְאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱמִיד דָּוִיד עַל-יְדֵי-שִׁיר--בֵּית יְהוָה:  מִמְּנוֹחַ, הָאָרוֹן.    16 And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the house of the LORD, after that the ark had rest.
6.32 לב  וַיִּהְיוּ מְשָׁרְתִים לִפְנֵי מִשְׁכַּן אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד, בַּשִּׁיר, עַד-בְּנוֹת שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּעַמְדוּ כְמִשְׁפָּטָם, עַל-עֲבוֹדָתָם.    17 And they ministered with song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, until Solomon had built the house of the LORD in Jerusalem; and they took their station at their service according to their order.
6.33 לג  וְאֵלֶּה הָעֹמְדִים, וּבְנֵיהֶם:  מִבְּנֵי, הַקְּהָתִי--הֵימָן הַמְשׁוֹרֵר, בֶּן-יוֹאֵל בֶּן-שְׁמוּאֵל.    18 And these are they that took their station, and their sons. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel;
6.34 לד  בֶּן-אֶלְקָנָה, בֶּן-יְרֹחָם, בֶּן-אֱלִיאֵל, בֶּן-תּוֹחַ.    19 the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah;
6.35 לה  בֶּן-ציף (צוּף), בֶּן-אֶלְקָנָה, בֶּן-מַחַת, בֶּן-עֲמָשָׂי.    20 the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai;
6.36 לו  בֶּן-אֶלְקָנָה, בֶּן-יוֹאֵל, בֶּן-עֲזַרְיָה, בֶּן-צְפַנְיָה.    21 the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah;
6.37 לז  בֶּן-תַּחַת, בֶּן-אַסִּיר, בֶּן-אֶבְיָסָף, בֶּן-קֹרַח.    22 the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah;
6.38 לח  בֶּן-יִצְהָר, בֶּן-קְהָת, בֶּן-לֵוִי, בֶּן-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    23 the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel. {S}
6.39 לט  וְאָחִיו אָסָף, הָעֹמֵד עַל-יְמִינוֹ--אָסָף בֶּן-בֶּרֶכְיָהוּ, בֶּן-שִׁמְעָא.    24 And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand; even Asaph the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea;
6.40 מ  בֶּן-מִיכָאֵל בֶּן-בַּעֲשֵׂיָה, בֶּן-מַלְכִּיָּה.    25 the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah;
6.41 מא  בֶּן-אֶתְנִי בֶן-זֶרַח, בֶּן-עֲדָיָה.    26 the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah;
6.42 מב  בֶּן-אֵיתָן בֶּן-זִמָּה, בֶּן-שִׁמְעִי.    27 the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei;
6.43 מג  בֶּן-יַחַת בֶּן-גֵּרְשֹׁם, בֶּן-לֵוִי.  {ס}    28 the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi. {S}
6.44 מד  וּבְנֵי מְרָרִי אֲחֵיהֶם, עַל-הַשְּׂמֹאול--אֵיתָן, בֶּן-קִישִׁי, בֶּן-עַבְדִּי, בֶּן-מַלּוּךְ.    29 And on the left hand their brethren the sons of Merari: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch;
6.45 מה  בֶּן-חֲשַׁבְיָה בֶן-אֲמַצְיָה, בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּה.    30 the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah;
6.46 מו  בֶּן-אַמְצִי בֶן-בָּנִי, בֶּן-שָׁמֶר.    31 the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer;
6.47 מז  בֶּן-מַחְלִי, בֶּן-מוּשִׁי, בֶּן-מְרָרִי, בֶּן-לֵוִי.  {ס}    32 the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi. {S}
6.48 מח  וַאֲחֵיהֶם, הַלְוִיִּם:  נְתוּנִים--לְכָל-עֲבוֹדַת, מִשְׁכַּן בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.    33 And their brethren the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
6.49 מט  וְאַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו מַקְטִירִים עַל-מִזְבַּח הָעוֹלָה, וְעַל-מִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת, לְכֹל, מְלֶאכֶת קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים; וּלְכַפֵּר, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה, מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד הָאֱלֹהִים.  {פ}    34 But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of burnt-offering, and upon the altar of incense, for all the work of the most holy place, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded. {P}
6.50 נ  וְאֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן--אֶלְעָזָר בְּנוֹ פִּינְחָס בְּנוֹ, אֲבִישׁוּעַ בְּנוֹ.    35 And these are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son;
6.51 נא  בֻּקִּי בְנוֹ עֻזִּי בְנוֹ, זְרַחְיָה בְנוֹ.    36 Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son;
6.52 נב  מְרָיוֹת בְּנוֹ אֲמַרְיָה בְנוֹ, אֲחִיטוּב בְּנוֹ.    37 Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son;
6.53 נג  צָדוֹק בְּנוֹ, אֲחִימַעַץ בְּנוֹ.  {ס}    38 Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son. {S}
6.54 נד  וְאֵלֶּה, מוֹשְׁבוֹתָם, לְטִירוֹתָם, בִּגְבוּלָם--לִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן לְמִשְׁפַּחַת הַקְּהָתִי, כִּי לָהֶם הָיָה הַגּוֹרָל.    39 Now these are their dwelling-places according to their encampments in their borders: to the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites, for theirs was the [first] lot,
6.55 נה  וַיִּתְּנוּ לָהֶם אֶת-חֶבְרוֹן, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, סְבִיבֹתֶיהָ.    40 to them they gave Hebron in the land of Judah, and the open land round about it;
6.56 נו  וְאֶת-שְׂדֵה הָעִיר, וְאֶת-חֲצֵרֶיהָ--נָתְנוּ, לְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה.  {ס}    41 but the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh. {S}
6.57 נז  וְלִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן, נָתְנוּ אֶת-עָרֵי הַמִּקְלָט--אֶת-חֶבְרוֹן וְאֶת-לִבְנָה, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; וְאֶת-יַתִּר וְאֶת-אֶשְׁתְּמֹעַ, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    42 And to the sons of Aaron they gave the city of refuge, Hebron; Libnah also with the open land about it, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa with the open land about it;
6.58 נח  וְאֶת-חִילֵז, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, אֶת-דְּבִיר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    43 and Hilen with the open land about it, Debir with the open land about it;
6.59 נט  וְאֶת-עָשָׁן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-בֵּית שֶׁמֶשׁ, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.  {ס}    44 and Ashan with the open land about it, and Beth-shemesh with the open land about it; {S}
6.60 ס  וּמִמַּטֵּה בִנְיָמִן, אֶת-גֶּבַע וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ וְאֶת-עָלֶמֶת וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-עֲנָתוֹת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; כָּל-עָרֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה עִיר, בְּמִשְׁפְּחוֹתֵיהֶם.  {ס}    45 and out of the tribe of Benjamin: Geba with the open land about it, and Alemeth with the open land about it, and Anathoth with the open land about it. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities. {S}
6.61 סא  וְלִבְנֵי קְהָת הַנּוֹתָרִים, מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת הַמַּטֶּה מִמַּחֲצִית מַטֵּה חֲצִי מְנַשֶּׁה בַּגּוֹרָל--עָרִים עָשֶׂר.  {פ}    46 And unto the rest of the sons of Kohath were given by lot, out of the family of the tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities. {P}
6.62 סב  וְלִבְנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹם לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם, מִמַּטֵּה יִשָּׂשכָר וּמִמַּטֵּה אָשֵׁר וּמִמַּטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי וּמִמַּטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה בַּבָּשָׁן--עָרִים, שְׁלֹשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה.  {ס}    47 And to the sons of Gershom, according to their families, out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities. {S}
6.63 סג  לִבְנֵי מְרָרִי לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם, מִמַּטֵּה רְאוּבֵן וּמִמַּטֵּה-גָד וּמִמַּטֵּה זְבֻלוּן בַּגּוֹרָל--עָרִים, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה.  {ס}    48 Unto the sons of Merari were given by lot, according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities. {S}
6.64 סד  וַיִּתְּנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַלְוִיִּם, אֶת-הֶעָרִים, וְאֶת-מִגְרְשֵׁיהֶם.    49 So the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities with the open land about them.
6.65 סה  וַיִּתְּנוּ בַגּוֹרָל, מִמַּטֵּה בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה וּמִמַּטֵּה בְנֵי-שִׁמְעוֹן, וּמִמַּטֵּה, בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן--אֵת הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרְאוּ אֶתְהֶם בְּשֵׁמוֹת.  {ס}    50 And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities which are mentioned by name. {S}
6.66 סו  וּמִמִּשְׁפְּחוֹת, בְּנֵי קְהָת--וַיְהִי עָרֵי גְבוּלָם, מִמַּטֵּה אֶפְרָיִם.    51 And some of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their borders out of the tribe of Ephraim.
6.67 סז  וַיִּתְּנוּ לָהֶם אֶת-עָרֵי הַמִּקְלָט, אֶת-שְׁכֶם וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ--בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וְאֶת-גֶּזֶר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    52 And they gave unto them the city of refuge, Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim with the open land about it; Gezer also with the open land about it;
6.68 סח  וְאֶת-יָקְמְעָם, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-בֵּית חוֹרוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    53 and Jokmeam with the open land about it, and Bethhoron with the open land about it;
6.69 סט  וְאֶת-אַיָּלוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-גַּת-רִמּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    54 and Aijalon with the open land about it, and Gath-rimmon with the open land about it;
6.70 ע  וּמִמַּחֲצִית, מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה, אֶת-עָנֵר וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-בִּלְעָם וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ--לְמִשְׁפַּחַת לִבְנֵי-קְהָת, הַנּוֹתָרִים.  {פ}    55 and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Aner with the open land about it, and Bileam with the open land about it, for the rest of the family of the sons of Kohath. {P}
6.71 עא  לִבְנֵי, גֵּרְשׁוֹם--מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת חֲצִי מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה, אֶת-גּוֹלָן בַּבָּשָׁן וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; וְאֶת-עַשְׁתָּרוֹת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    56 Unto the sons of Gershom were given, out of the family of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with the open land about it, and Ashtaroth with the open land about it;
6.72 עב  וּמִמַּטֵּה יִשָּׂשכָר, אֶת-קֶדֶשׁ וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, אֶת-דָּבְרַת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    57 and out of the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh with the open land about it, Dobrath with the open land about it;
6.73 עג  וְאֶת-רָאמוֹת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-עָנֵם, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.  {ס}    58 and Ramoth with the open land about it, and Anem with the open land about it; {S}
6.74 עד  וּמִמַּטֵּה אָשֵׁר, אֶת-מָשָׁל וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-עַבְדּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    59 and out of the tribe of Asher: Mashal with the open land about it, and Abdon with the open land about it;
6.75 עה  וְאֶת-חוּקֹק, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-רְחֹב, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.  {ס}    60 and Hukok with the open land about it; and Rehob with the open land about it; {S}
6.76 עו  וּמִמַּטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי, אֶת-קֶדֶשׁ בַּגָּלִיל וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-חַמּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; וְאֶת-קִרְיָתַיִם, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.  {ס}    61 and out of the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee with the open land about it, and Hammon with the open land about it, and Kiriathaim with the open land about it. {S}
6.77 עז  לִבְנֵי מְרָרִי, הַנּוֹתָרִים--מִמַּטֵּה זְבֻלוּן, אֶת-רִמּוֹנוֹ וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; אֶת-תָּבוֹר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    62 Unto the rest [of the Levites], the sons of Merari, were given, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with the open land about it, Tabor with the open land about it;
6.78 עח  וּמֵעֵבֶר לְיַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ, לְמִזְרַח הַיַּרְדֵּן--מִמַּטֵּה רְאוּבֵן, אֶת-בֶּצֶר בַּמִּדְבָּר וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; וְאֶת-יַהְצָה, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    63 and beyond the Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, were given them, out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with the open land about it, and Jahaz with the open land about it,
6.79 עט  וְאֶת-קְדֵמוֹת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-מֵיפַעַת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    64 and Kedemoth with the open land about it, and Mephaath with the open land about it;
6.80  וּמִמַּטֵּה-גָד--אֶת-רָאמוֹת בַּגִּלְעָד, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ; וְאֶת-מַחֲנַיִם, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.    65 and out of the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with the open land about it, and Mahanaim with the open land about it,
6.81  וְאֶת-חֶשְׁבּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ, וְאֶת-יַעְזֵיר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁיהָ.  {ס}    66 and Heshbon with the open land about it, and Jazer with the open land about it. {S}
7.1 א  וְלִבְנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר, תּוֹלָע וּפוּאָה ישיב (יָשׁוּב) וְשִׁמְרוֹן--אַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    1 And of the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four. {S}
7.2 ב  וּבְנֵי תוֹלָע, עֻזִּי וּרְפָיָה וִירִיאֵל וְיַחְמַי וְיִבְשָׂם וּשְׁמוּאֵל רָאשִׁים לְבֵית-אֲבוֹתָם לְתוֹלָע, גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל, לְתֹלְדוֹתָם--מִסְפָּרָם בִּימֵי דָוִיד, עֶשְׂרִים-וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}    2 And the sons of Tola: Uzzi and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valour according to their generations, even of Tola; their number in the days of David was two and twenty thousand and six hundred. {S}
7.3 ג  וּבְנֵי עֻזִּי, יִזְרַחְיָה; וּבְנֵי יִזְרַחְיָה, מִיכָאֵל וְעֹבַדְיָה וְיוֹאֵל יִשִּׁיָּה חֲמִשָּׁה--רָאשִׁים כֻּלָּם.    3 And the sons of Uzzi: Izrahiah; and the sons of Izrahiah: Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Isshiah, five; all of them chief men.
7.4 ד  וַעֲלֵיהֶם לְתֹלְדוֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם, גְּדוּדֵי צְבָא מִלְחָמָה, שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה, אָלֶף:  כִּי-הִרְבּוּ נָשִׁים, וּבָנִים.    4 And with them, by their generations, after their fathers' houses, were bands of the host for war, six and thirty thousand; for they had many wives and sons.
7.5 ה  וַאֲחֵיהֶם, לְכֹל מִשְׁפְּחוֹת יִשָּׂשכָר, גִּבּוֹרֵי, חֲיָלִים; שְׁמוֹנִים וְשִׁבְעָה אֶלֶף, הִתְיַחְשָׂם לַכֹּל.  {ס}    5 And their brethren among all the families of Issachar, mighty men of valour, reckoned in all by genealogy, were fourscore and seven thousand. {S}
7.6 ו  בִּנְיָמִן, בֶּלַע וָבֶכֶר וִידִיעֲאֵל--שְׁלֹשָׁה.    6 [The sons of] Benjamin: Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.
7.7 ז  וּבְנֵי בֶלַע, אֶצְבּוֹן וְעֻזִּי וְעֻזִּיאֵל וִירִימוֹת וְעִירִי חֲמִשָּׁה רָאשֵׁי בֵּית אָבוֹת, גִּבּוֹרֵי, חֲיָלִים; וְהִתְיַחְשָׂם, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים, וְאַרְבָּעָה.    7 And the sons of Bela: Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of fathers' houses, mighty men of valour; and they were reckoned by genealogy twenty and two thousand and thirty and four.
7.8 ח  וּבְנֵי בֶכֶר, זְמִירָה וְיוֹעָשׁ וֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר וְאֶלְיוֹעֵינַי וְעָמְרִי וִירֵמוֹת וַאֲבִיָּה, וַעֲנָתוֹת, וְעָלָמֶת; כָּל-אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי-בָכֶר.    8 And the sons of Becher: Zemirah, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jeremoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.
7.9 ט  וְהִתְיַחְשָׂם לְתֹלְדוֹתָם, רָאשֵׁי בֵּית אֲבוֹתָם, גִּבּוֹרֵי, חָיִל--עֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וּמָאתָיִם.    9 And they were reckoned by genealogy, after their generations, heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valour, twenty thousand and two hundred.
7.10 י  וּבְנֵי יְדִיעֲאֵל, בִּלְהָן; וּבְנֵי בִלְהָן, יעיש (יְעוּשׁ) וּבִנְיָמִן וְאֵהוּד וּכְנַעֲנָה וְזֵיתָן, וְתַרְשִׁישׁ, וַאֲחִישָׁחַר.    10 And the sons of Jediael: Bilhan; and the sons of Bilhan: Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tarshish, and Ahishahar.
7.11 יא  כָּל-אֵלֶּה בְּנֵי יְדִיעֲאֵל, לְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, גִּבּוֹרֵי, חֲיָלִים--שִׁבְעָה-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף וּמָאתַיִם, יֹצְאֵי צָבָא לַמִּלְחָמָה.    11 All these were sons of Jediael, even heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valour, seventeen thousand and two hundred, that were able to go forth in the host for war.
7.12 יב  וְשֻׁפִּם וְחֻפִּם בְּנֵי עִיר, חֻשִׁם בְּנֵי אַחֵר.    12 Shuppim also, and Huppim, the sons of Ir, Hushim, the son of another.
7.13 יג  בְּנֵי נַפְתָּלִי, יַחֲצִיאֵל וְגוּנִי וְיֵצֶר וְשַׁלּוּם--בְּנֵי בִלְהָה.  {פ}    13 The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah. {P}
7.14 יד  בְּנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, אַשְׂרִיאֵל אֲשֶׁר יָלָדָה; פִּילַגְשׁוֹ, הָאֲרַמִּיָּה, יָלְדָה, אֶת-מָכִיר אֲבִי גִלְעָד.    14 The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his wife bore--his concubine the Aramitess bore Machir the father of Gilead;
7.15 טו  וּמָכִיר לָקַח אִשָּׁה, לְחֻפִּים וּלְשֻׁפִּים, וְשֵׁם אֲחֹתוֹ מַעֲכָה, וְשֵׁם הַשֵּׁנִי צְלָפְחָד; וַתִּהְיֶנָה לִצְלָפְחָד, בָּנוֹת.    15 and Machir took a wife of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister's name was Maacah--and the name of the second was Zelophehad; and Zelophehad had daughters.
7.16 טז  וַתֵּלֶד מַעֲכָה אֵשֶׁת-מָכִיר, בֵּן, וַתִּקְרָא שְׁמוֹ פֶּרֶשׁ, וְשֵׁם אָחִיו שָׁרֶשׁ; וּבָנָיו, אוּלָם וָרָקֶם.    16 And Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rekem.
7.17 יז  וּבְנֵי אוּלָם, בְּדָן; אֵלֶּה בְּנֵי גִלְעָד, בֶּן-מָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה.    17 And the sons of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.
7.18 יח  וַאֲחֹתוֹ, הַמֹּלֶכֶת--יָלְדָה, אֶת-אִישְׁהוֹד, וְאֶת-אֲבִיעֶזֶר, וְאֶת-מַחְלָה.    18 And his sister Hammolecheth bore Ish-hod, and Abiezer, and Mahlah.
7.19 יט  וַיִּהְיוּ, בְּנֵי שְׁמִידָע--אַחְיָן וָשֶׁכֶם, וְלִקְחִי וַאֲנִיעָם.  {פ}    19 And the sons of Shemida were Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam. {P}
7.20 כ  וּבְנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, שׁוּתָלַח; וּבֶרֶד בְּנוֹ וְתַחַת בְּנוֹ, וְאֶלְעָדָה בְנוֹ וְתַחַת בְּנוֹ.    20 And the sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah--and Bered was his son, and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his son, and Tahath his son,
7.21 כא  וְזָבָד בְּנוֹ וְשׁוּתֶלַח בְּנוֹ, וְעֵזֶר וְאֶלְעָד; וַהֲרָגוּם, אַנְשֵׁי-גַת הַנּוֹלָדִים בָּאָרֶץ, כִּי יָרְדוּ, לָקַחַת אֶת-מִקְנֵיהֶם.    21 and Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son--and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath that were born in the land slew, because they came down to take away their cattle.
7.22 כב  וַיִּתְאַבֵּל אֶפְרַיִם אֲבִיהֶם, יָמִים רַבִּים; וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶחָיו, לְנַחֲמוֹ.    22 And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him.
7.23 כג  וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-אִשְׁתּוֹ, וַתַּהַר, וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן; וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ בְּרִיעָה, כִּי בְרָעָה הָיְתָה בְּבֵיתוֹ.    23 And he went in to his wife, and she conceived, and bore a son, and he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house.
7.24 כד  וּבִתּוֹ שֶׁאֱרָה, וַתִּבֶן אֶת-בֵּית-חוֹרוֹן הַתַּחְתּוֹן וְאֶת-הָעֶלְיוֹן, וְאֵת, אֻזֵּן שֶׁאֱרָה.    24 And his daughter was Sheerah, who built Beth-horon the nether and the upper, and Uzzen-sheerah.
7.25 כה  וְרֶפַח בְּנוֹ, וְרֶשֶׁף וְתֶלַח בְּנוֹ--וְתַחַן בְּנוֹ.    25 And Rephah was his son, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son;
7.26 כו  לַעְדָּן בְּנוֹ עַמִּיהוּד בְּנוֹ, אֱלִישָׁמָע בְּנוֹ.    26 Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son;
7.27 כז  נוֹן בְּנוֹ, יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בְּנוֹ.    27 Nun his son, Joshua his son.
7.28 כח  וַאֲחֻזָּתָם, וּמֹשְׁבוֹתָם--בֵּית-אֵל, וּבְנֹתֶיהָ; וְלַמִּזְרָח נַעֲרָן--וְלַמַּעֲרָב גֶּזֶר וּבְנֹתֶיהָ וּשְׁכֶם וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, עַד-עַיָּה וּבְנֹתֶיהָ.    28 And their possessions and habitations were Beth-el and the towns thereof, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Aiah and the towns thereof;
7.29 כט  וְעַל-יְדֵי בְנֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה, בֵּית-שְׁאָן וּבְנֹתֶיהָ תַּעְנַךְ וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, מְגִדּוֹ וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, דּוֹר וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ; בְּאֵלֶּה, יָשְׁבוּ, בְּנֵי יוֹסֵף, בֶּן-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    29 and by the borders of the children of Manasseh, Beth-shean and the towns thereof, Taanach and the towns thereof, Megiddo and the towns thereof, Dor and the towns thereof. In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of Israel. {P}
7.30 ל  בְּנֵי אָשֵׁר, יִמְנָה וְיִשְׁוָה וְיִשְׁוִי וּבְרִיעָה--וְשֶׂרַח אֲחוֹתָם.    30 The sons of Asher: Imnah, and Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.
7.31 לא  וּבְנֵי בְרִיעָה, חֶבֶר וּמַלְכִּיאֵל; הוּא, אֲבִי ברזות (בִרְזָיִת).    31 And the sons of Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith.
7.32 לב  וְחֶבֶר הוֹלִיד אֶת-יַפְלֵט, וְאֶת-שׁוֹמֵר וְאֶת-חוֹתָם, וְאֵת, שׁוּעָא אֲחוֹתָם.    32 And Heber begot Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.
7.33 לג  וּבְנֵי יַפְלֵט, פָּסַךְ וּבִמְהָל וְעַשְׁוָת; אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי יַפְלֵט.    33 And the sons of Japhlet: Pasach, and Bimhal, and Asvath. These are the children of Japhlet.
7.34 לד  וּבְנֵי, שָׁמֶר--אֲחִי ורוהגה (וְרָהְגָּה), יחבה (וְחֻבָּה) וַאֲרָם.    34 And the sons of Shemer: Ahi, and Rohgah, and Hubbah, and Aram.
7.35 לה  וּבֶן-הֵלֶם, אָחִיו; צוֹפַח וְיִמְנָע, וְשֵׁלֶשׁ וְעָמָל.    35 And the sons of Helem his brother: Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
7.36 לו  בְּנֵי, צוֹפָח--סוּחַ וְחַרְנֶפֶר וְשׁוּעָל, וּבֵרִי וְיִמְרָה.    36 The sons of Zophah: Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah;
7.37 לז  בֶּצֶר וָהוֹד, וְשַׁמָּא וְשִׁלְשָׁה וְיִתְרָן--וּבְאֵרָא.    37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilsha, and Ithran, and Beera.
7.38 לח  וּבְנֵי, יֶתֶר--יְפֻנֶּה וּפִסְפָּה, וַאְרָא.    38 And the sons of Jether: Jephunneh, and Pispa, and Ara.
7.39 לט  וּבְנֵי, עֻלָּא--אָרַח וְחַנִּיאֵל, וְרִצְיָא.    39 And the sons of Ulla: Arah, and Hanniel, and Rizia.
7.40 מ  כָּל-אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-אָשֵׁר רָאשֵׁי בֵית-הָאָבוֹת בְּרוּרִים, גִּבּוֹרֵי חֲיָלִים, רָאשֵׁי, הַנְּשִׂיאִים; וְהִתְיַחְשָׂם בַּצָּבָא, בַּמִּלְחָמָה, מִסְפָּרָם אֲנָשִׁים, עֶשְׂרִים וְשִׁשָּׁה אָלֶף.  {ס}    40 All these were the children of Asher, heads of the fathers' houses, choice and mighty men of valour, chief of the princes. And the number of them reckoned by genealogy for service in war was twenty and six thousand men. {S}
8.1 א  וּבִנְיָמִן--הוֹלִיד, אֶת-בֶּלַע בְּכֹרוֹ; אַשְׁבֵּל, הַשֵּׁנִי, וְאַחְרַח, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי.    1 And Benjamin begot Bela his first-born, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third;
8.2 ב  נוֹחָה, הָרְבִיעִי, וְרָפָא, הַחֲמִישִׁי.    2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
8.3 ג  וַיִּהְיוּ בָנִים, לְבָלַע--אַדָּר וְגֵרָא, וַאֲבִיהוּד.    3 And Bela had sons, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud;
8.4 ד  וַאֲבִישׁוּעַ וְנַעֲמָן, וַאֲחוֹחַ.    4 and Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah;
8.5 ה  וְגֵרָא וּשְׁפוּפָן, וְחוּרָם.    5 and Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.
8.6 ו  וְאֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי אֵחוּד; אֵלֶּה הֵם רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת, לְיוֹשְׁבֵי גֶבַע, וַיַּגְלוּם, אֶל-מָנָחַת.    6 And these are the sons of Ehud--these are the heads of fathers' houses of the inhabitants of Geba, and they were carried captive to Manahath;
8.7 ז  וְנַעֲמָן וַאֲחִיָּה וְגֵרָא, הוּא הֶגְלָם; וְהוֹלִיד אֶת-עֻזָּא, וְאֶת-אֲחִיחֻד.    7 and Naaman, and Ahijah, and Gera, were they that carried them captive--and he begot Uzza, and Ahihud.
8.8 ח  וְשַׁחֲרַיִם, הוֹלִיד בִּשְׂדֵה מוֹאָב, מִן-שִׁלְחוֹ, אֹתָם--חוּשִׁים וְאֶת-בַּעֲרָא, נָשָׁיו.    8 And Shaharaim begot children in the field of Moab, after he had sent them away, to wit, Hushim and Baara his wives;
8.9 ט  וַיּוֹלֶד, מִן-חֹדֶשׁ אִשְׁתּוֹ--אֶת-יוֹבָב, וְאֶת-צִבְיָא, וְאֶת-מֵישָׁא, וְאֶת-מַלְכָּם.    9 he begot of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcam;
8.10 י  וְאֶת-יְעוּץ וְאֶת-שָׂכְיָה, וְאֶת-מִרְמָה; אֵלֶּה בָנָיו, רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת.    10 and Jeuz, and Sachiah, and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of fathers' houses.
8.11 יא  וּמֵחֻשִׁים הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֲבִיטוּב, וְאֶת-אֶלְפָּעַל.    11 and of Hushim he begot Abitub, and Elpaal.
8.12 יב  וּבְנֵי אֶלְפַּעַל, עֵבֶר וּמִשְׁעָם וָשָׁמֶד; הוּא בָּנָה אֶת-אוֹנוֹ, וְאֶת-לֹד וּבְנֹתֶיהָ.    12 And the sons of Elpaal: Eber, and Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono, and Lod, with the towns thereof;
8.13 יג  וּבְרִעָה וָשֶׁמַע--הֵמָּה רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לְיוֹשְׁבֵי אַיָּלוֹן; הֵמָּה הִבְרִיחוּ, אֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי גַת.    13 and Beriah, and Shema, who were heads of fathers' houses of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who put to flight the inhabitants of Gath.
8.14 יד  וְאַחְיוֹ שָׁשָׁק, וִירֵמוֹת.    14 And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth;
8.15 טו  וּזְבַדְיָה וַעֲרָד, וָעָדֶר.    15 and Zebadiah, and Arad, and Eder;
8.16 טז  וּמִיכָאֵל וְיִשְׁפָּה וְיוֹחָא, בְּנֵי בְרִיעָה.    16 and Michael, and Ishpah, and Joha, were the sons of Beriah.
8.17 יז  וּזְבַדְיָה וּמְשֻׁלָּם, וְחִזְקִי וָחָבֶר.    17 And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hizki, and Heber;
8.18 יח  וְיִשְׁמְרַי וְיִזְלִיאָה וְיוֹבָב, בְּנֵי אֶלְפָּעַל.    18 and Ishmerai, and Izliah, and Jobab, were the sons of Elpaal.
8.19 יט  וְיָקִים וְזִכְרִי, וְזַבְדִּי.    19 And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi;
8.20 כ  וֶאֱלִיעֵינַי וְצִלְּתַי, וֶאֱלִיאֵל.    20 and Elienai, and Zillethai, and Eliel;
8.21 כא  וַעֲדָיָה וּבְרָאיָה וְשִׁמְרָת, בְּנֵי שִׁמְעִי.    21 and Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, were the sons of Shimei.
8.22 כב  וְיִשְׁפָּן וָעֵבֶר, וֶאֱלִיאֵל.    22 And Ishpan, and Ebed, and Eliel;
8.23 כג  וְעַבְדּוֹן וְזִכְרִי, וְחָנָן.    23 and Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan;
8.24 כד  וַחֲנַנְיָה וְעֵילָם, וְעַנְתֹתִיָּה.    24 and Hananiah, and Elam, and Anthothiah;
8.25 כה  וְיִפְדְיָה ופניאל (וּפְנוּאֵל), בְּנֵי שָׁשָׁק.    25 and Iphdeiah, and Penuel, were the sons of Shashak.
8.26 כו  וְשַׁמְשְׁרַי וּשְׁחַרְיָה, וַעֲתַלְיָה.    26 And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah;
8.27 כז  וְיַעֲרֶשְׁיָה וְאֵלִיָּה וְזִכְרִי, בְּנֵי יְרֹחָם.    27 and Jaareshiah, and Elijah, and Zichri, were the sons of Jeroham.
8.28 כח  אֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת לְתֹלְדוֹתָם, רָאשִׁים; אֵלֶּה, יָשְׁבוּ בִירוּשָׁלִָם.    28 These were heads of fathers' houses throughout their generations, chief men; these dwelt in Jerusalem.
8.29 כט  וּבְגִבְעוֹן יָשְׁבוּ, אֲבִי גִבְעוֹן; וְשֵׁם אִשְׁתּוֹ, מַעֲכָה.    29 And in Gibeon there dwelt the father of Gibeon, [Jeiel,] whose wife's name was Maacah;
8.30 ל  וּבְנוֹ הַבְּכוֹר, עַבְדּוֹן; וְצוּר וְקִישׁ, וּבַעַל וְנָדָב.    30 and his first-born son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab;
8.31 לא  וּגְדוֹר וְאַחְיוֹ, וָזָכֶר.    31 and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecher.
8.32 לב  וּמִקְלוֹת, הוֹלִיד אֶת-שִׁמְאָה; וְאַף-הֵמָּה, נֶגֶד אֲחֵיהֶם יָשְׁבוּ בִירוּשָׁלִַם--עִם-אֲחֵיהֶם.  {ס}    32 And Mikloth begot Shimeah. And they also dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, over against their brethren. {S}
8.33 לג  וְנֵר הוֹלִיד אֶת-קִישׁ, וְקִישׁ הוֹלִיד אֶת-שָׁאוּל; וְשָׁאוּל, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יְהוֹנָתָן וְאֶת-מַלְכִּישׁוּעַ, וְאֶת-אֲבִינָדָב, וְאֶת-אֶשְׁבָּעַל.    33 And Ner begot Kish; and Kish begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
8.34 לד  וּבֶן-יְהוֹנָתָן, מְרִיב בָּעַל; וּמְרִיב בַּעַל, הוֹלִיד אֶת-מִיכָה.    34 And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begot Micah.
8.35 לה  וּבְנֵי, מִיכָה--פִּיתוֹן וָמֶלֶךְ, וְתַאְרֵעַ וְאָחָז.    35 And the sons of Micah; Pithon, and Melech, and Taarea, and Ahaz.
8.36 לו  וְאָחָז, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יְהוֹעַדָּה, וִיהוֹעַדָּה הוֹלִיד אֶת-עָלֶמֶת וְאֶת-עַזְמָוֶת, וְאֶת-זִמְרִי; וְזִמְרִי, הוֹלִיד אֶת-מוֹצָא.    36 And Ahaz begot Jehoaddah; and Jehoaddah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza;
8.37 לז  וּמוֹצָא, הוֹלִיד אֶת-בִּנְעָא; רָפָה בְנוֹ אֶלְעָשָׂה בְנוֹ, אָצֵל בְּנוֹ.    37 and Moza begot Binea; Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
8.38 לח  וּלְאָצֵל, שִׁשָּׁה בָנִים--וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹתָם עַזְרִיקָם בֹּכְרוּ וְיִשְׁמָעֵאל וּשְׁעַרְיָה, וְעֹבַדְיָה וְחָנָן; כָּל-אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי אָצַל.    38 And Azel had six sons, whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
8.39 לט  וּבְנֵי, עֵשֶׁק אָחִיו:  אוּלָם בְּכֹרוֹ--יְעוּשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, וֶאֱלִיפֶלֶט הַשְּׁלִשִׁי.    39 And the sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
8.40 מ  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-אוּלָם אֲנָשִׁים גִּבּוֹרֵי-חַיִל דֹּרְכֵי קֶשֶׁת, וּמַרְבִּים בָּנִים וּבְנֵי בָנִים--מֵאָה, וַחֲמִשִּׁים; כָּל-אֵלֶּה, מִבְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן.  {פ}    40 And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers; and had many sons, and sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin. {P}
9.1 א  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִתְיַחְשׂוּ, וְהִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וִיהוּדָה הָגְלוּ לְבָבֶל, בְּמַעֲלָם.  {ס}    1 So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel; and Judah was carried away captive to Babylon because of their transgression. {S}
9.2 ב  וְהַיּוֹשְׁבִים, הָרִאשֹׁנִים, אֲשֶׁר בַּאֲחֻזָּתָם, בְּעָרֵיהֶם:  יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַכֹּהֲנִים, הַלְוִיִּם, וְהַנְּתִינִים.    2 Now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their possessions in their cities were, Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim.
9.3 ג  וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם, יָשְׁבוּ, מִן-בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, וּמִן-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן--וּמִן-בְּנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, וּמְנַשֶּׁה.    3 And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim and Manasseh:
9.4 ד  עוּתַי בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד בֶּן-עָמְרִי בֶּן-אִמְרִי בֶן-בנימן- (בָּנִי, מִן-) בְּנֵי-פֶרֶץ בֶּן-יְהוּדָה.  {ס}    4 Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Perez the son of Judah. {S}
9.5 ה  וּמִן-הַשִּׁילוֹנִי, עֲשָׂיָה הַבְּכוֹר וּבָנָיו.    5 And of the Shilonites: Asaiah the first-born and his sons.
9.6 ו  וּמִן-בְּנֵי-זֶרַח, יְעוּאֵל; וַאֲחֵיהֶם, שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת וְתִשְׁעִים.    6 And of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety.
9.7 ז  וּמִן-בְּנֵי, בִּנְיָמִן--סַלּוּא, בֶּן-מְשֻׁלָּם, בֶּן-הוֹדַוְיָה, בֶּן-הַסְּנֻאָה.    7 And of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah,
9.8 ח  וְיִבְנְיָה, בֶּן-יְרֹחָם, וְאֵלָה בֶן-עֻזִּי, בֶּן-מִכְרִי; וּמְשֻׁלָּם, בֶּן-שְׁפַטְיָה, בֶּן-רְעוּאֵל, בֶּן-יִבְנִיָּה.    8 and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibneiah;
9.9 ט  וַאֲחֵיהֶם, לְתֹלְדוֹתָם, תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת, וַחֲמִשִּׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה; כָּל-אֵלֶּה אֲנָשִׁים, רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת לְבֵית אֲבֹתֵיהֶם.  {ס}    9 and their brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty and six. All these men were heads of fathers' houses by their fathers' houses. {S}
9.10 י  וּמִן-הַכֹּהֲנִים:  יְדַעְיָה וִיהוֹיָרִיב, וְיָכִין.    10 And of the priests: Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin;
9.11 יא  וַעֲזַרְיָה בֶן-חִלְקִיָּה בֶּן-מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן-צָדוֹק, בֶּן-מְרָיוֹת בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב, נְגִיד, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.  {ס}    11 and Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God; {S}
9.12 יב  וַעֲדָיָה, בֶּן-יְרֹחָם, בֶּן-פַּשְׁחוּר, בֶּן-מַלְכִּיָּה; וּמַעְשַׂי בֶּן-עֲדִיאֵל בֶּן-יַחְזֵרָה בֶּן-מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן-מְשִׁלֵּמִית, בֶּן-אִמֵּר.    12 and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;
9.13 יג  וַאֲחֵיהֶם, רָאשִׁים לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם, אֶלֶף, וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים--גִּבּוֹרֵי חֵיל, מְלֶאכֶת עֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים.    13 and their brethren, heads of their fathers' houses, a thousand and seven hundred and threescore; very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.
9.14 יד  וּמִן-הַלְוִיִּם:  שְׁמַעְיָה בֶן-חַשּׁוּב בֶּן-עַזְרִיקָם בֶּן-חֲשַׁבְיָה, מִן-בְּנֵי מְרָרִי.    14 And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;
9.15 טו  וּבַקְבַּקַּר חֶרֶשׁ, וְגָלָל; וּמַתַּנְיָה, בֶּן-מִיכָא, בֶּן-זִכְרִי, בֶּן-אָסָף.    15 and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;
9.16 טז  וְעֹבַדְיָה, בֶּן-שְׁמַעְיָה, בֶּן-גָּלָל, בֶּן-יְדוּתוּן; וּבֶרֶכְיָה בֶן-אָסָא בֶּן-אֶלְקָנָה, הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּחַצְרֵי נְטוֹפָתִי.    16 and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
9.17 יז  וְהַשֹּׁעֲרִים שַׁלּוּם וְעַקּוּב, וְטַלְמֹן וַאֲחִימָן; וַאֲחִיהֶם שַׁלּוּם, הָרֹאשׁ.    17 And the porters: Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brother Shallum the chief;
9.18 יח  וְעַד-הֵנָּה, בְּשַׁעַר הַמֶּלֶךְ מִזְרָחָה; הֵמָּה, הַשֹּׁעֲרִים, לְמַחֲנוֹת, בְּנֵי לֵוִי.    18 who hitherto waited in the king's gate eastward; they were the porters for the camp of the children of Levi.
9.19 יט  וְשַׁלּוּם בֶּן-קוֹרֵא בֶּן-אֶבְיָסָף בֶּן-קֹרַח וְאֶחָיו לְבֵית-אָבִיו הַקָּרְחִים, עַל מְלֶאכֶת הָעֲבוֹדָה, שֹׁמְרֵי הַסִּפִּים, לָאֹהֶל; וַאֲבֹתֵיהֶם עַל-מַחֲנֵה יְהוָה, שֹׁמְרֵי הַמָּבוֹא.    19 And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brethren, of his father's house, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the gates of the Tent; and their fathers had been over the camp of the LORD, keepers of the entry;
9.20 כ  וּפִינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר, נָגִיד הָיָה עֲלֵיהֶם לְפָנִים--יְהוָה עִמּוֹ.    20 and Phinehas the son of Eleazar was ruler over them in time past, the LORD being with him.
9.21 כא  זְכַרְיָה בֶּן מְשֶׁלֶמְיָה, שֹׁעֵר פֶּתַח לְאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    21 Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of the tent of meeting.
9.22 כב  כֻּלָּם הַבְּרוּרִים לְשֹׁעֲרִים בַּסִּפִּים, מָאתַיִם וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר; הֵמָּה בְחַצְרֵיהֶם הִתְיַחְשָׂם, הֵמָּה יִסַּד דָּוִיד וּשְׁמוּאֵל הָרֹאֶה בֶּאֱמוּנָתָם.    22 All these that were chosen to be porters in the gates were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their set office.
9.23 כג  וְהֵם וּבְנֵיהֶם עַל-הַשְּׁעָרִים לְבֵית-יְהוָה, לְבֵית הָאֹהֶל--לְמִשְׁמָרוֹת.    23 So they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the house of the LORD, even the house of the Tent, by wards.
9.24 כד  לְאַרְבַּע רוּחוֹת, יִהְיוּ הַשֹּׁעֲרִים:  מִזְרָח יָמָּה, צָפוֹנָה וָנֶגְבָּה.    24 On the four sides were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and south.
9.25 כה  וַאֲחֵיהֶם בְּחַצְרֵיהֶם לָבוֹא לְשִׁבְעַת הַיָּמִים, מֵעֵת אֶל-עֵת--עִם-אֵלֶּה.    25 And their brethren, in their villages, were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them;
9.26 כו  כִּי בֶאֱמוּנָה הֵמָּה, אַרְבַּעַת גִּבֹּרֵי הַשֹּׁעֲרִים--הֵם, הַלְוִיִּם; וְהָיוּ, עַל-הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, וְעַל הָאֹצְרוֹת, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.    26 for the four chief porters were in a set office. These were the Levites. They were also over the chambers and over the treasuries in the house of God.
9.27 כז  וּסְבִיבוֹת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים, יָלִינוּ:  כִּי-עֲלֵיהֶם מִשְׁמֶרֶת, וְהֵם עַל-הַמַּפְתֵּחַ וְלַבֹּקֶר לַבֹּקֶר.    27 And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge thereof was upon them, and to them pertained the opening thereof morning by morning.
9.28 כח  וּמֵהֶם, עַל-כְּלֵי הָעֲבוֹדָה:  כִּי-בְמִסְפָּר יְבִיאוּם, וּבְמִסְפָּר יוֹצִיאוּם.    28 And certain of them had charge of the vessels of service; for by tale were they brought in and by tale were they taken out.
9.29 כט  וּמֵהֶם, מְמֻנִּים עַל-הַכֵּלִים, וְעַל, כָּל-כְּלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וְעַל-הַסֹּלֶת וְהַיַּיִן וְהַשֶּׁמֶן, וְהַלְּבוֹנָה וְהַבְּשָׂמִים.    29 Some of them also were appointed over the furniture, and over all the holy vessels, and over the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.
9.30 ל  וּמִן-בְּנֵי, הַכֹּהֲנִים, רֹקְחֵי הַמִּרְקַחַת, לַבְּשָׂמִים.    30 And some of the sons of the priests prepared the confection of the spices.
9.31 לא  וּמַתִּתְיָה, מִן-הַלְוִיִּם, הוּא הַבְּכוֹר, לְשַׁלֻּם הַקָּרְחִי--בֶּאֱמוּנָה, עַל מַעֲשֵׂה הַחֲבִתִּים.    31 And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the set office over the things that were baked on griddles.
9.32 לב  וּמִן-בְּנֵי הַקְּהָתִי מִן-אֲחֵיהֶם, עַל-לֶחֶם הַמַּעֲרָכֶת, לְהָכִין, שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּת.    32 And some of their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the showbread, to prepare it every sabbath.
9.33 לג  וְאֵלֶּה הַמְשֹׁרְרִים רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת לַלְוִיִּם, בַּלְּשָׁכֹת--פטירים (פְּטוּרִים):  כִּי-יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה עֲלֵיהֶם, בַּמְּלָאכָה.    33 And these are the singers, heads of fathers' houses of the Levites, who dwelt in the chambers and were free from other service; for they were employed in their work day and night.
9.34 לד  אֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לַלְוִיִּם לְתֹלְדוֹתָם, רָאשִׁים; אֵלֶּה, יָשְׁבוּ בִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    34 These were heads of fathers' houses of the Levites, by their generations, chief men; these dwelt at Jerusalem. {S}
9.35 לה  וּבְגִבְעוֹן יָשְׁבוּ אֲבִי-גִבְעוֹן, יעואל (יְעִיאֵל); וְשֵׁם אִשְׁתּוֹ, מַעֲכָה.    35 And in Gibeon there dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah;
9.36 לו  וּבְנוֹ הַבְּכוֹר, עַבְדּוֹן; וְצוּר וְקִישׁ, וּבַעַל וְנֵר וְנָדָב.    36 and his first-born son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab;
9.37 לז  וּגְדוֹר וְאַחְיוֹ, וּזְכַרְיָה וּמִקְלוֹת.    37 and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.
9.38 לח  וּמִקְלוֹת, הוֹלִיד אֶת-שִׁמְאָם; וְאַף-הֵם, נֶגֶד אֲחֵיהֶם יָשְׁבוּ בִירוּשָׁלִַם--עִם-אֲחֵיהֶם.  {ס}    38 And Mikloth begot Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, over against their brethren. {S}
9.39 לט  וְנֵר הוֹלִיד אֶת-קִישׁ, וְקִישׁ הוֹלִיד אֶת-שָׁאוּל; וְשָׁאוּל, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יְהוֹנָתָן וְאֶת-מַלְכִּישׁוּעַ, וְאֶת-אֲבִינָדָב, וְאֶת-אֶשְׁבָּעַל.    39 And Ner begot Kish; and Kish begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
9.40 מ  וּבֶן-יְהוֹנָתָן, מְרִיב בָּעַל; וּמְרִי-בַעַל, הוֹלִיד אֶת-מִיכָה.    40 And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begot Micah.
9.41 מא  וּבְנֵי, מִיכָה--פִּיתֹן וָמֶלֶךְ, וְתַחְרֵעַ.    41 And the sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Taharea [and Ahaz].
9.42 מב  וְאָחָז, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יַעְרָה, וְיַעְרָה הוֹלִיד אֶת-עָלֶמֶת וְאֶת-עַזְמָוֶת, וְאֶת-זִמְרִי; וְזִמְרִי, הוֹלִיד אֶת-מוֹצָא.    42 And Ahaz begot Jarah; and Jarah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza.
9.43 מג  וּמוֹצָא, הוֹלִיד אֶת-בִּנְעָא; וּרְפָיָה בְנוֹ אֶלְעָשָׂה בְנוֹ, אָצֵל בְּנוֹ.    43 And Moza begot Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
9.44 מד  וּלְאָצֵל, שִׁשָּׁה בָנִים, וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹתָם עַזְרִיקָם בֹּכְרוּ וְיִשְׁמָעֵאל וּשְׁעַרְיָה, וְעֹבַדְיָה וְחָנָן; אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי אָצַל.  {פ}    44 And Azel had six sons, whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan; these were the sons of Azel. {P}
10.1 א  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, נִלְחֲמוּ בְיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּנָס אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִפְּנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּפְּלוּ חֲלָלִים בְּהַר גִּלְבֹּעַ.    1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
10.2 ב  וַיַּדְבְּקוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, אַחֲרֵי שָׁאוּל וְאַחֲרֵי בָנָיו; וַיַּכּוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, אֶת-יוֹנָתָן וְאֶת-אֲבִינָדָב וְאֶת-מַלְכִּישׁוּעַ--בְּנֵי שָׁאוּל.    2 And the Philistines followed hard after Saul and after his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.
10.3 ג  וַתִּכְבַּד הַמִּלְחָמָה עַל-שָׁאוּל, וַיִּמְצָאֻהוּ הַמּוֹרִים בַּקָּשֶׁת; וַיָּחֶל, מִן-הַיּוֹרִים.    3 And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers overtook him; and he was in anguish by reason of the archers.
10.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו שְׁלֹף חַרְבְּךָ וְדָקְרֵנִי בָהּ, פֶּן-יָבֹאוּ הָעֲרֵלִים הָאֵלֶּה וְהִתְעַלְּלוּ-בִי, וְלֹא אָבָה נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, כִּי יָרֵא מְאֹד;  {ס}  וַיִּקַּח שָׁאוּל אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, וַיִּפֹּל עָלֶיהָ.    4 Then said Saul unto his armour-bearer: 'Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and make a mock of me.' But his armour-bearer would not; for he was sore afraid. {S} Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell upon it.
10.5 ה  וַיַּרְא נֹשֵׂא-כֵלָיו, כִּי מֵת שָׁאוּל; וַיִּפֹּל גַּם-הוּא עַל-הַחֶרֶב, וַיָּמֹת.  {ס}    5 And when his armour-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword, and died. {S}
10.6 ו  וַיָּמָת שָׁאוּל וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת בָּנָיו, וְכָל-בֵּיתוֹ יַחְדָּו מֵתוּ.    6 So Saul died, and his three sons; and all his house died together.
10.7 ז  וַיִּרְאוּ כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר-בָּעֵמֶק, כִּי נָסוּ, וְכִי-מֵתוּ, שָׁאוּל וּבָנָיו; וַיַּעַזְבוּ עָרֵיהֶם, וַיָּנֻסוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָּהֶם.  {ס}    7 And when all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw that [Israel] fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook their cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them. {S}
10.8 ח  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיָּבֹאוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, לְפַשֵּׁט אֶת-הַחֲלָלִים; וַיִּמְצְאוּ אֶת-שָׁאוּל וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, נֹפְלִים בְּהַר גִּלְבֹּעַ.    8 And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
10.9 ט  וַיַּפְשִׁיטֻהוּ--וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְאֶת-כֵּלָיו; וַיְשַׁלְּחוּ בְאֶרֶץ-פְּלִשְׁתִּים סָבִיב, לְבַשֵּׂר אֶת-עֲצַבֵּיהֶם--וְאֶת-הָעָם.    9 And they stripped him, and took his head, and his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to carry the tidings unto their idols, and to the people.
10.10 י  וַיָּשִׂימוּ, אֶת-כֵּלָיו, בֵּית, אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וְאֶת-גֻּלְגָּלְתּוֹ תָקְעוּ, בֵּית דָּגוֹן.  {ס}    10 And they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the house of Dagon. {S}
10.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, כֹּל יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, לְשָׁאוּל.    11 And when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul,
10.12 יב  וַיָּקוּמוּ, כָּל-אִישׁ חַיִל, וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-גּוּפַת שָׁאוּל וְאֵת גּוּפֹת בָּנָיו, וַיְבִיאוּם יָבֵישָׁה; וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֶת-עַצְמוֹתֵיהֶם תַּחַת הָאֵלָה, בְּיָבֵשׁ, וַיָּצוּמוּ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    12 all the valiant men arose, and took away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the terebinth in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
10.13 יג  וַיָּמָת שָׁאוּל, בְּמַעֲלוֹ אֲשֶׁר מָעַל בַּיהוָה, עַל-דְּבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמָר; וְגַם-לִשְׁאוֹל בָּאוֹב, לִדְרוֹשׁ.    13 So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the LORD, because of the word of the LORD, which he kept not; and also for that he asked counsel of a ghost, to inquire thereby,
10.14 יד  וְלֹא-דָרַשׁ בַּיהוָה, וַיְמִיתֵהוּ; וַיַּסֵּב, אֶת-הַמְּלוּכָה, לְדָוִיד, בֶּן-יִשָׁי.  {פ}    14 and inquired not of the LORD; therefore He slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse. {P}
11.1 א  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-דָּוִיד, חֶבְרוֹנָה לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה עַצְמְךָ וּבְשָׂרְךָ, אֲנָחְנוּ.    1 Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying: 'Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
11.2 ב  גַּם-תְּמוֹל גַּם-שִׁלְשׁוֹם, גַּם בִּהְיוֹת שָׁאוּל מֶלֶךְ--אַתָּה הַמּוֹצִיא וְהַמֵּבִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ לְךָ, אַתָּה תִרְעֶה אֶת-עַמִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאַתָּה תִּהְיֶה נָגִיד, עַל עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 In times past, even when Saul was king, it was thou that didst lead out and bring in Israel; and the LORD thy God said unto thee: Thou shalt feed My people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over My people Israel.'
11.3 ג  וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, חֶבְרוֹנָה, וַיִּכְרֹת לָהֶם דָּוִיד בְּרִית בְּחֶבְרוֹן, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּמְשְׁחוּ אֶת-דָּוִיד לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה בְּיַד-שְׁמוּאֵל.  {ס}    3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the LORD; and they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Samuel. {S}
11.4 ד  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִיד וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל יְרוּשָׁלִַם, הִיא יְבוּס; וְשָׁם, הַיְבוּסִי, יֹשְׁבֵי, הָאָרֶץ.    4 And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem--the same is Jebus--and the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, were there.
11.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ יֹשְׁבֵי יְבוּס, לְדָוִיד, לֹא תָבוֹא, הֵנָּה; וַיִּלְכֹּד דָּוִיד אֶת-מְצֻדַת צִיּוֹן, הִיא עִיר דָּוִיד.    5 And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David: 'Thou shalt not come in hither.' Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.
11.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד--כָּל-מַכֵּה יְבוּסִי בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה, יִהְיֶה לְרֹאשׁ וּלְשָׂר; וַיַּעַל בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, וַיְהִי לְרֹאשׁ.    6 And David said: 'Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain.' And Joab the son of Zeruiah went up first, and was made chief.
11.7 ז  וַיֵּשֶׁב דָּוִיד, בַּמְצָד; עַל-כֵּן קָרְאוּ-לוֹ, עִיר דָּוִיד.    7 And David dwelt in the stronghold; therefore they called it the city of David.
11.8 ח  וַיִּבֶן הָעִיר מִסָּבִיב, מִן-הַמִּלּוֹא וְעַד-הַסָּבִיב; וְיוֹאָב, יְחַיֶּה אֶת-שְׁאָר הָעִיר.    8 And he built the city round about, from Millo even round about; and Joab repaired the rest of the city.
11.9 ט  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִיד, הָלוֹךְ וְגָדוֹל; וַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עִמּוֹ.  {פ}    9 And David waxed greater and greater; for the LORD of hosts was with him. {P}
11.10 י  וְאֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי הַגִּבֹּרִים אֲשֶׁר לְדָוִיד, הַמִּתְחַזְּקִים עִמּוֹ בְמַלְכוּתוֹ עִם-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְהַמְלִיכוֹ--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    10 Now these are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who held strongly with him in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of the LORD concerning Israel. {S}
11.11 יא  וְאֵלֶּה מִסְפַּר הַגִּבֹּרִים, אֲשֶׁר לְדָוִיד:  יָשָׁבְעָם בֶּן-חַכְמוֹנִי, רֹאשׁ השלושים (הַשָּׁלִישִׁים)--הוּא-עוֹרֵר אֶת-חֲנִיתוֹ עַל-שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת חָלָל, בְּפַעַם אֶחָת.    11 And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had: Jashobeam, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the captains; he lifted up his spear against three hundred and slew them at one time.
11.12 יב  וְאַחֲרָיו אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-דּוֹדוֹ, הָאֲחוֹחִי; הוּא, בִּשְׁלוֹשָׁה הַגִּבֹּרִים.    12 And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighty men.
11.13 יג  הוּא-הָיָה עִם-דָּוִיד בַּפַּס דַּמִּים, וְהַפְּלִשְׁתִּים נֶאֶסְפוּ-שָׁם לַמִּלְחָמָה, וַתְּהִי חֶלְקַת הַשָּׂדֶה, מְלֵאָה שְׂעוֹרִים; וְהָעָם נָסוּ, מִפְּנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים.    13 He was with David at Pas-dammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a plot of ground full of barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.
11.14 יד  וַיִּתְיַצְּבוּ בְתוֹךְ-הַחֶלְקָה וַיַּצִּילוּהָ, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה, תְּשׁוּעָה גְדוֹלָה.    14 But they stood in the midst of the plot, and defended it, and slew the Philistines; and the LORD saved them by a great victory.
11.15 טו  וַיֵּרְדוּ שְׁלוֹשָׁה מִן-הַשְּׁלוֹשִׁים רֹאשׁ עַל-הַצֻּר, אֶל-דָּוִיד--אֶל-מְעָרַת, עֲדֻלָּם; וּמַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, חֹנָה בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים.    15 And three of the thirty chiefs went down to the rock to David, unto the cave of Adullam; and the host of the Philistines were encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
11.16 טז  וְדָוִיד, אָז בַּמְּצוּדָה; וּנְצִיב פְּלִשְׁתִּים, אָז בְּבֵית לָחֶם.    16 And David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Beth-lehem.
11.17 יז  וַיִּתְאָו דָּוִיד, וַיֹּאמַר:  מִי יַשְׁקֵנִי מַיִם, מִבּוֹר בֵּית-לֶחֶם אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׁעַר.    17 And David longed, and said: 'Oh that one would give me water to drink of the well of Beth-lehem, which is by the gate!'
11.18 יח  וַיִּבְקְעוּ הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה בְּמַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּשְׁאֲבוּ-מַיִם מִבּוֹר בֵּית-לֶחֶם אֲשֶׁר בַּשַּׁעַר, וַיִּשְׂאוּ, וַיָּבִאוּ אֶל-דָּוִיד; וְלֹא-אָבָה דָוִיד לִשְׁתּוֹתָם, וַיְנַסֵּךְ אֹתָם לַיהוָה.    18 And the three broke through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David; but David would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD,
11.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר חָלִילָה לִּי מֵאֱלֹהַי מֵעֲשׂוֹת זֹאת, הֲדַם הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה אֶשְׁתֶּה בְנַפְשׁוֹתָם כִּי בְנַפְשׁוֹתָם הֱבִיאוּם, וְלֹא אָבָה, לִשְׁתּוֹתָם; אֵלֶּה עָשׂוּ, שְׁלֹשֶׁת הַגִּבּוֹרִים.    19 and said: 'My God forbid it me, that I should do this; shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it.' Therefore he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men.
11.20 כ  וְאַבְשַׁי אֲחִי-יוֹאָב, הוּא הָיָה רֹאשׁ הַשְּׁלוֹשָׁה, וְהוּא עוֹרֵר אֶת-חֲנִיתוֹ, עַל-שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת חָלָל; ולא- (וְלוֹ-) שֵׁם, בַּשְּׁלוֹשָׁה.    20 And Abishai, the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three; for he lifted up his spear against three hundred and slew them, and had a name among the three.
11.21 כא  מִן-הַשְּׁלוֹשָׁה בַשְּׁנַיִם נִכְבָּד, וַיְהִי לָהֶם לְשָׂר; וְעַד-הַשְּׁלוֹשָׁה, לֹא-בָא.  {ס}    21 Of the three in the second rank he was the most honourable, and was made their captain; howbeit he attained not to the first three. {S}
11.22 כב  בְּנָיָה בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע בֶּן-אִישׁ-חַיִל רַב-פְּעָלִים, מִן-קַבְצְאֵל; הוּא הִכָּה, אֵת שְׁנֵי אֲרִיאֵל מוֹאָב, וְהוּא יָרַד וְהִכָּה אֶת-הָאֲרִי בְּתוֹךְ הַבּוֹר, בְּיוֹם הַשָּׁלֶג.    22 Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he smote the two altar-hearths of Moab; he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.
11.23 כג  וְהוּא-הִכָּה אֶת-הָאִישׁ הַמִּצְרִי אִישׁ מִדָּה חָמֵשׁ בָּאַמָּה, וּבְיַד הַמִּצְרִי חֲנִית כִּמְנוֹר אֹרְגִים, וַיֵּרֶד אֵלָיו, בַּשָּׁבֶט; וַיִּגְזֹל אֶת-הַחֲנִית מִיַּד הַמִּצְרִי, וַיַּהַרְגֵהוּ בַּחֲנִיתוֹ.    23 And he slew an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high; and in the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam; and he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.
11.24 כד  אֵלֶּה עָשָׂה, בְּנָיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע; וְלוֹ-שֵׁם, בִּשְׁלוֹשָׁה הַגִּבֹּרִים.    24 These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had a name among the three mighty men.
11.25 כה  מִן-הַשְּׁלוֹשִׁים, הִנּוֹ נִכְבָּד הוּא, וְאֶל-הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה, לֹא-בָא; וַיְשִׂימֵהוּ דָוִיד, עַל-מִשְׁמַעְתּוֹ.  {ס}    25 Behold, he was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the first three; and David set him over his guard. {S}
11.26 כו  וְגִבּוֹרֵי, הַחֲיָלִים:  עֲשָׂהאֵל  {ר}  אֲחִי יוֹאָב,  {ס}  אֶלְחָנָן בֶּן-דּוֹדוֹ מִבֵּית לָחֶם.  {ס}    26 Also the mighty men of valour: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem;
11.27 כז  שַׁמּוֹת,  {ר}  הַהֲרוֹרִי,  {ס}  חֶלֶץ, הַפְּלוֹנִי.  {ס}    27 Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite;
11.28 כח  עִירָא בֶן-עִקֵּשׁ  {ר}  הַתְּקוֹעִי,  {ס}  אֲבִיעֶזֶר הָעַנְּתוֹתִי.  {ס}    28 Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite;
11.29 כט  סִבְּכַי,  {ר}  הַחֻשָׁתִי,  {ס}  עִילַי, הָאֲחוֹחִי.  {ס}    29 Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite;
11.30 ל  מַהְרַי,  {ר}  הַנְּטֹפָתִי,  {ס}  חֵלֶד בֶּן-בַּעֲנָה, הַנְּטוֹפָתִי.  {ס}    30 Mahrai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite;
11.31 לא  אִיתַי  {ר}  בֶּן-רִיבַי, מִגִּבְעַת בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן,  {ס}  בְּנָיָה, הַפִּרְעָתֹנִי.  {ס}    31 Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite;
11.32 לב  חוּרַי  {ר}  מִנַּחֲלֵי גָעַשׁ,  {ס}  אֲבִיאֵל הָעַרְבָתִי.  {ס}    32 Hurai of Nahale-gaash, Abiel the Arbathite;
11.33 לג  עַזְמָוֶת,  {ר}  הַבַּחֲרוּמִי,  {ס}  אֶלְיַחְבָּא, הַשַּׁעַלְבֹנִי.  {ס}    33 Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite;
11.34 לד  בְּנֵי, הָשֵׁם  {ר}  הַגִּזוֹנִי,  {ס}  יוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שָׁגֵה, הַהֲרָרִי.  {ס}    34 the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shageh the Hararite;
11.35 לה  אֲחִיאָם  {ר}  בֶּן-שָׂכָר הַהֲרָרִי,  {ס}  אֱלִיפַל בֶּן-אוּר.  {ס}    35 Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur;
11.36 לו  חֵפֶר, הַמְּכֵרָתִי,  {ר}  אֲחִיָּה, הַפְּלֹנִי.  {ס}    36 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite;
11.37 לז  חֶצְרוֹ, הַכַּרְמְלִי,  {ס}  נַעֲרַי,  {ר}  בֶּן-אֶזְבָּי.  {ס}    37 Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai;
11.38 לח  יוֹאֵל אֲחִי נָתָן,  {ס}  מִבְחָר בֶּן-  {ר}  הַגְרִי.  {ס}    38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri;
11.39 לט  צֶלֶק, הָעַמּוֹנִי; נַחְרַי, הַבֵּרֹתִי, נֹשֵׂא, כְּלֵי יוֹאָב בֶּן-  {ר}  צְרוּיָה.  {ס}    39 Zelek the Ammonite, Nahrai the Berothite, the armour-bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah;
11.40 מ  עִירָא, הַיִּתְרִי,  {ס}  גָּרֵב, הַיִּתְרִי.  {ס}    40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite;
11.41 מא  אוּרִיָּה,  {ר}  הַחִתִּי,  {ס}  זָבָד, בֶּן-אַחְלָי.  {ס}    41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai;
11.42 מב  עֲדִינָא בֶן-שִׁיזָא הָראוּבֵנִי,  {ר}  רֹאשׁ לָראוּבֵנִי--וְעָלָיו שְׁלֹשִׁים.  {ס}    42 Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty with him;
11.43 מג  חָנָן, בֶּן-מַעֲכָה, וְיוֹשָׁפָט,  {ר}  הַמִּתְנִי.  {ס}    43 Hanan the son of Maacah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite;
11.44 מד  עֻזִּיָּא, הָעַשְׁתְּרָתִי;  {ס}  שָׁמָע, ויעואל (וִיעִיאֵל),  {ר}  בְּנֵי, חוֹתָם הָעֲרֹעֵרִי.  {ס}    44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite;
11.45 מה  יְדִיעֲאֵל, בֶּן-שִׁמְרִי, וְיֹחָא אָחִיו,  {ר}  הַתִּיצִי.  {ס}    45 Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite;
11.46 מו  אֱלִיאֵל, הַמַּחֲוִים, וִירִיבַי וְיוֹשַׁוְיָה, בְּנֵי אֶלְנָעַם;  {ס}  וְיִתְמָה,  {ר}  הַמּוֹאָבִי.    46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite;
11.47 מז  אֱלִיאֵל וְעוֹבֵד,  {ס}  וְיַעֲשִׂיאֵל הַמְּצֹבָיָה.  {פ}    47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite. {P}
12.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה, הַבָּאִים אֶל-דָּוִיד לְצִיקְלַג, עוֹד עָצוּר, מִפְּנֵי שָׁאוּל בֶּן-קִישׁ; וְהֵמָּה, בַּגִּבּוֹרִים, עֹזְרֵי, הַמִּלְחָמָה.    1 Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he was yet shut up because of Saul the son of Kish; and they were among the mighty men, his helpers in war.
12.2 ב  נֹשְׁקֵי קֶשֶׁת, מַיְמִינִים וּמַשְׂמִאלִים בָּאֲבָנִים, וּבַחִצִּים, בַּקָּשֶׁת--מֵאֲחֵי שָׁאוּל, מִבִּנְיָמִן.    2 They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in slinging stones and in shooting arrows from the bow; they were of Saul's brethren of Benjamin.
12.3 ג  הָרֹאשׁ אֲחִיעֶזֶר וְיוֹאָשׁ, בְּנֵי הַשְּׁמָעָה הַגִּבְעָתִי, ויזואל (וִיזִיאֵל) וָפֶלֶט, בְּנֵי עַזְמָוֶת; וּבְרָכָה, וְיֵהוּא הָעַנְּתֹתִי.    3 The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Beracah, and Jehu the Anathothite;
12.4 ד  וְיִשְׁמַעְיָה הַגִּבְעוֹנִי גִּבּוֹר בַּשְּׁלֹשִׁים, וְעַל-הַשְּׁלֹשִׁים. וְיִרְמְיָה וְיַחֲזִיאֵל וְיוֹחָנָן, וְיוֹזָבָד הַגְּדֵרָתִי.  {ס}    4 and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite; {S}
12.5 ה  אֶלְעוּזַי וִירִימוֹת וּבְעַלְיָה וּשְׁמַרְיָהוּ, וּשְׁפַטְיָהוּ החריפי (הַחֲרוּפִי).    5 Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Hariphite; 
12.6 ו  אֶלְקָנָה וְיִשִּׁיָּהוּ וַעֲזַרְאֵל וְיוֹעֶזֶר, וְיָשָׁבְעָם--הַקָּרְחִים.    6 Elkanah, and Isshiah, and Azarel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites;
12.7 ז  וְיוֹעֵאלָה וּזְבַדְיָה בְּנֵי יְרֹחָם, מִן-הַגְּדוֹר.    7 and Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of the troop.
12.8 ח  וּמִן-הַגָּדִי נִבְדְּלוּ אֶל-דָּוִיד לַמְצַד מִדְבָּרָה גִּבֹּרֵי הַחַיִל, אַנְשֵׁי צָבָא לַמִּלְחָמָה--עֹרְכֵי צִנָּה, וָרֹמַח; וּפְנֵי אַרְיֵה פְּנֵיהֶם, וְכִצְבָאיִם עַל-הֶהָרִים לְמַהֵר.    8 And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David to the stronghold in the wilderness, mighty men of valour, men trained for war, that could handle shield and spear; whose faces were like the faces of lions, and they were as swift as the roes upon the mountains;
12.9 ט  עֵזֶר, הָרֹאשׁ; עֹבַדְיָה, הַשֵּׁנִי, אֱלִיאָב, הַשְּׁלִשִׁי.    9 Ezer the chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third;
12.10 י  מִשְׁמַנָּה, הָרְבִיעִי, יִרְמְיָה, הַחֲמִשִׁי.    10 Mashmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth;
12.11 יא  עַתַּי, הַשִּׁשִּׁי, אֱלִיאֵל, הַשְּׁבִעִי.    11 Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh;
12.12 יב  יוֹחָנָן, הַשְּׁמִינִי, אֶלְזָבָד, הַתְּשִׁיעִי.    12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth;
12.13 יג  יִרְמְיָהוּ, הָעֲשִׂירִי, מַכְבַּנַּי, עַשְׁתֵּי עָשָׂר.  {ס}    13 Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh. {S}
12.14 יד  אֵלֶּה מִבְּנֵי-גָד, רָאשֵׁי הַצָּבָא; אֶחָד לְמֵאָה הַקָּטָן, וְהַגָּדוֹל לְאָלֶף.    14 These of the sons of Gad were captains of the host; he that was least was equal to a hundred, and the greatest to a thousand.
12.15 טו  אֵלֶּה הֵם, אֲשֶׁר עָבְרוּ אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, וְהוּא מְמַלֵּא, עַל-כָּל-גדיתיו (גְּדוֹתָיו); וַיַּבְרִיחוּ, אֶת-כָּל-הָעֲמָקִים, לַמִּזְרָח, וְלַמַּעֲרָב.  {פ}    15 These are they that went over the Jordan in the first month, when it had overflown all its banks; and they put to flight all them of the valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west. {P}
12.16 טז  וַיָּבֹאוּ, מִן-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן וִיהוּדָה, עַד-לַמְצָד, לְדָוִיד.    16 And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold unto David.
12.17 יז  וַיֵּצֵא דָוִיד, לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַיַּעַן וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, אִם-לְשָׁלוֹם בָּאתֶם אֵלַי לְעָזְרֵנִי יִהְיֶה-לִּי עֲלֵיכֶם לֵבָב לְיָחַד; וְאִם-לְרַמּוֹתַנִי לְצָרַי, בְּלֹא חָמָס בְּכַפַּי, יֵרֶא אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, וְיוֹכַח.  {ס}    17 And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them: 'If ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, my heart shall be knit unto you; but if ye be come to betray me to mine adversaries, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and give judgment.' {S}
12.18 יח  וְרוּחַ לָבְשָׁה, אֶת-עֲמָשַׂי רֹאשׁ השלושים (הַשָּׁלִישִׁים), לְךָ דָוִיד וְעִמְּךָ בֶן-יִשַׁי, שָׁלוֹם שָׁלוֹם לְךָ וְשָׁלוֹם לְעֹזְרֶךָ כִּי עֲזָרְךָ אֱלֹהֶיךָ; וַיְקַבְּלֵם דָּוִיד, וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּרָאשֵׁי הַגְּדוּד.  {פ}    18 Then the spirit clothed Amasai, who was chief of the captains: Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse; peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thy helpers; for thy God helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them captains of the band. {P}
12.19 יט  וּמִמְּנַשֶּׁה נָפְלוּ עַל-דָּוִיד, בְּבֹאוֹ עִם-פְּלִשְׁתִּים עַל-שָׁאוּל לַמִּלְחָמָה--וְלֹא עֲזָרֻם:  כִּי בְעֵצָה, שִׁלְּחֻהוּ סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים לֵאמֹר, בְּרָאשֵׁינוּ, יִפּוֹל אֶל-אֲדֹנָיו שָׁאוּל.    19 Of Manasseh also there fell away some to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle, but they helped them not; for the lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying: 'He will fall away to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.'
12.20 כ  בְּלֶכְתּוֹ אֶל-צִיקְלַג, נָפְלוּ עָלָיו מִמְּנַשֶּׁה עַדְנַח וְיוֹזָבָד וִידִיעֲאֵל וּמִיכָאֵל וְיוֹזָבָד, וֶאֱלִיהוּא, וְצִלְּתָי:  רָאשֵׁי הָאֲלָפִים, אֲשֶׁר לִמְנַשֶּׁה.    20 As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zillethai, captains of thousands that were of Manasseh.
12.21 כא  וְהֵמָּה, עָזְרוּ עִם-דָּוִיד עַל-הַגְּדוּד, כִּי-גִבּוֹרֵי חַיִל, כֻּלָּם; וַיִּהְיוּ שָׂרִים, בַּצָּבָא.    21 And they helped David against the troop, for they were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.
12.22 כב  כִּי לְעֶת-יוֹם בְּיוֹם, יָבֹאוּ עַל-דָּוִיד לְעָזְרוֹ--עַד-לְמַחֲנֶה גָדוֹל, כְּמַחֲנֵה אֱלֹהִים.  {פ}    22 For from day to day men came to David to help him, until there was a great host, like the host of God. {P}
12.23 כג  וְאֵלֶּה מִסְפְּרֵי רָאשֵׁי הֶחָלוּץ, לַצָּבָא, בָּאוּ עַל-דָּוִיד, חֶבְרוֹנָה:  לְהָסֵב מַלְכוּת שָׁאוּל, אֵלָיו--כְּפִי יְהוָה.  {ס}    23 And these are the numbers of the heads of them that were armed for war, who came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of the LORD. {S}
12.24 כד  בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, נֹשְׂאֵי צִנָּה וָרֹמַח--שֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים וּשְׁמוֹנֶה מֵאוֹת, חֲלוּצֵי צָבָא.  {ס}    24 The children of Judah that bore shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, armed for war. {S}
12.25 כה  מִן-בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל לַצָּבָא--שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים, וּמֵאָה.  {ס}    25 Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for the war, seven thousand and one hundred. {S}
12.26 כו  מִן-בְּנֵי, הַלֵּוִי--אַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}    26 Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred. {S}
12.27 כז  וִיהוֹיָדָע, הַנָּגִיד לְאַהֲרֹן; וְעִמּוֹ, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת.  {ס}    27 And Jehoiada was the leader of the house of Aaron, and with him were three thousand and seven hundred; {S}
12.28 כח  וְצָדוֹק נַעַר, גִּבּוֹר חָיִל; וּבֵית-אָבִיו שָׂרִים, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    28 and Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, and of his father's house twenty and two captains. {S}
12.29 כט  וּמִן-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן אֲחֵי שָׁאוּל, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים; וְעַד-הֵנָּה, מַרְבִּיתָם, שֹׁמְרִים, מִשְׁמֶרֶת בֵּית שָׁאוּל.  {ס}    29 And of the children of Benjamin, the brethren of Saul, three thousand; for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul. {S}
12.30 ל  וּמִן-בְּנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, עֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף וּשְׁמוֹנֶה מֵאוֹת--גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל, אַנְשֵׁי שֵׁמוֹת לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם.  {ס}    30 And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valour, famous men in their fathers' houses. {S}
12.31 לא  וּמֵחֲצִי מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה, שְׁמוֹנָה עָשָׂר אָלֶף, אֲשֶׁר נִקְּבוּ בְּשֵׁמוֹת, לָבוֹא לְהַמְלִיךְ אֶת-דָּוִיד.  {ס}    31 And of the half-tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, who were mentioned by name, to come and make David king. {S}
12.32 לב  וּמִבְּנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר, יוֹדְעֵי בִינָה לַעִתִּים, לָדַעַת, מַה-יַּעֲשֶׂה יִשְׂרָאֵל--רָאשֵׁיהֶם מָאתַיִם, וְכָל-אֲחֵיהֶם עַל-פִּיהֶם.  {ס}    32 And of the children of Issachar, men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their commandment. {S}
12.33 לג  מִזְּבֻלוּן יוֹצְאֵי צָבָא, עֹרְכֵי מִלְחָמָה בְּכָל-כְּלֵי מִלְחָמָה--חֲמִשִּׁים אָלֶף:  וְלַעֲדֹר, בְּלֹא-לֵב וָלֵב.  {ס}    33 Of Zebulun, such as were able to go out in the host, that could set the battle in array, with all manner of instruments of war, fifty thousand; and that could order the battle array, and were not of double heart. {S}
12.34 לד  וּמִנַּפְתָּלִי, שָׂרִים אָלֶף; וְעִמָּהֶם בְּצִנָּה וַחֲנִית, שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁבְעָה אָלֶף.  {ס}    34 And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield and spear thirty and seven thousand. {S}
12.35 לה  וּמִן-הַדָּנִי עֹרְכֵי מִלְחָמָה, עֶשְׂרִים-וּשְׁמוֹנָה אֶלֶף וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}    35 And of the Danites that could set the battle in array, twenty and eight thousand and six hundred. {S}
12.36 לו  וּמֵאָשֵׁר, יוֹצְאֵי צָבָא לַעֲרֹךְ מִלְחָמָה--אַרְבָּעִים אָלֶף.  {ס}    36 And of Asher, such as were able to go out in the host, that could set the battle in array, forty thousand. {S}
12.37 לז  וּמֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן מִן-הָראוּבֵנִי וְהַגָּדִי וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט מְנַשֶּׁה, בְּכֹל כְּלֵי צְבָא מִלְחָמָה--מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים, אָלֶף.  {ס}    37 And on the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of war for the battle, a hundred and twenty thousand. {S}
12.38 לח  כָּל-אֵלֶּה אַנְשֵׁי מִלְחָמָה, עֹדְרֵי מַעֲרָכָה, בְּלֵבָב שָׁלֵם בָּאוּ חֶבְרוֹנָה, לְהַמְלִיךְ אֶת-דָּוִיד עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְגַם כָּל-שֵׁרִית יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵב אֶחָד--לְהַמְלִיךְ אֶת-דָּוִיד.    38 All these, being men of war, that could order the battle array, came with a whole heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel; and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.
12.39 לט  וַיִּהְיוּ-שָׁם עִם-דָּוִיד יָמִים שְׁלוֹשָׁה, אֹכְלִים וְשׁוֹתִים:  כִּי-הֵכִינוּ לָהֶם, אֲחֵיהֶם.    39 And they were there with David three days, eating and drinking; for their brethren had made preparation for them.
12.40 מ  וְגַם הַקְּרוֹבִים-אֲלֵיהֶם עַד-יִשָּׂשכָר וּזְבֻלוּן וְנַפְתָּלִי, מְבִיאִים לֶחֶם בַּחֲמוֹרִים וּבַגְּמַלִּים וּבַפְּרָדִים וּבַבָּקָר מַאֲכָל קֶמַח דְּבֵלִים וְצִמּוּקִים וְיַיִן-וְשֶׁמֶן וּבָקָר וְצֹאן--לָרֹב:  כִּי שִׂמְחָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    40 Moreover they that were nigh unto them, even as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, victual of meal, cakes of figs, and clusters of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep in abundance; for there was joy in Israel. {P}
13.1 א  וַיִּוָּעַץ דָּוִיד, עִם-שָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וְהַמֵּאוֹת--לְכָל-נָגִיד.    1 And David consulted with the captains of thousands and of hundreds, even with every leader.
13.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד לְכֹל קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-עֲלֵיכֶם טוֹב וּמִן-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ נִפְרְצָה נִשְׁלְחָה עַל-אַחֵינוּ הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בְּכֹל אַרְצוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְעִמָּהֶם הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, בְּעָרֵי מִגְרְשֵׁיהֶם; וְיִקָּבְצוּ, אֵלֵינוּ.    2 And David said unto all the assembly of Israel: 'If it seem good unto you, and if it be of the LORD our God, let us send abroad everywhere unto our brethren that are left in all the land of Israel, and with them to the priests and Levites that are in their cities that have open land about them, that they may gather themselves unto us;
13.3 ג  וְנָסֵבָּה אֶת-אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵינוּ, אֵלֵינוּ:  כִּי-לֹא דְרַשְׁנֻהוּ, בִּימֵי שָׁאוּל.    3 and let us bring back the ark of our God to us; for we sought not unto it in the days of Saul.'
13.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הַקָּהָל, לַעֲשׂוֹת כֵּן:  כִּי-יָשַׁר הַדָּבָר, בְּעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם.    4 And all the assembly said that they would do so; for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
13.5 ה  וַיַּקְהֵל דָּוִיד אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִן-שִׁיחוֹר מִצְרַיִם וְעַד-לְבוֹא חֲמָת, לְהָבִיא אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, מִקִּרְיַת יְעָרִים.    5 So David assembled all Israel together, from Shihor the brook of Egypt even unto the entrance of Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim.
13.6 ו  וַיַּעַל דָּוִיד וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּעֲלָתָה, אֶל-קִרְיַת יְעָרִים אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה:  לְהַעֲלוֹת מִשָּׁם, אֵת אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים יְהוָה יוֹשֵׁב הַכְּרוּבִים--אֲשֶׁר-נִקְרָא שֵׁם.    6 And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, the LORD that sitteth upon the cherubim, whereon is called the Name.
13.7 ז  וַיַּרְכִּיבוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, עַל-עֲגָלָה חֲדָשָׁה, מִבֵּית, אֲבִינָדָב; וְעֻזָּא וְאַחְיוֹ, נֹהֲגִים בָּעֲגָלָה.    7 And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, [and brought it] out of the house of Abinadab; and Uzza and Ahio drove the cart.
13.8 ח  וְדָוִיד וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מְשַׂחֲקִים לִפְנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים--בְּכָל-עֹז; וּבְשִׁירִים וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת וּבִנְבָלִים וּבְתֻפִּים, וּבִמְצִלְתַּיִם וּבַחֲצֹצְרוֹת.    8 And David and all Israel played before God with all their might; even with songs, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.
13.9 ט  וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-גֹּרֶן כִּידֹן; וַיִּשְׁלַח עֻזָּא אֶת-יָדוֹ, לֶאֱחֹז אֶת-הָאָרוֹן--כִּי שָׁמְטוּ, הַבָּקָר.    9 And when they came unto the threshing-floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.
13.10 י  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּעֻזָּא, וַיַּכֵּהוּ, עַל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח יָדוֹ עַל-הָאָרוֹן; וַיָּמָת שָׁם, לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהִים.    10 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzza, and He smote him, because he put forth his hand to the ark; and there he died before God.
13.11 יא  וַיִּחַר לְדָוִיד, כִּי-פָרַץ יְהוָה פֶּרֶץ בְּעֻזָּא; וַיִּקְרָא לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, פֶּרֶץ עֻזָּא, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    11 And David was displeased, because the LORD had broken forth upon Uzza; and that place was called Perez-uzza unto this day.
13.12 יב  וַיִּירָא דָוִיד אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר:  הֵיךְ אָבִיא אֵלַי, אֵת אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים.    12 And David was afraid of God that day, saying: 'How shall I bring the ark of God home to me?'
13.13 יג  וְלֹא-הֵסִיר דָּוִיד אֶת-הָאָרוֹן אֵלָיו, אֶל-עִיר דָּוִיד; וַיַּטֵּהוּ, אֶל-בֵּית עֹבֵד-אֱדֹם הַגִּתִּי.    13 So David removed not the ark unto him into the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
14.14 יד  וַיֵּשֶׁב אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים עִם-בֵּית עֹבֵד אֱדֹם, בְּבֵיתוֹ--שְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים; וַיְבָרֶךְ יְהוָה אֶת-בֵּית עֹבֵד-אֱדֹם, וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ.  {ס}    14 And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months; and the LORD blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that he had. {S}
14.1 א  וַיִּשְׁלַח חירם (חוּרָם) מֶלֶךְ-צֹר מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-דָּוִיד, וַעֲצֵי אֲרָזִים, וְחָרָשֵׁי קִיר וְחָרָשֵׁי עֵצִים--לִבְנוֹת לוֹ, בָּיִת.    1 And Huram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar-trees, and masons, and carpenters, to build him a house.
14.2 ב  וַיֵּדַע דָּוִיד, כִּי-הֱכִינוֹ יְהוָה לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי-נִשֵּׂאת לְמַעְלָה מַלְכוּתוֹ, בַּעֲבוּר עַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    2 And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, for his kingdom was exalted exceedingly, for His people Israel's sake. {S}
14.3 ג  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִיד עוֹד נָשִׁים, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיּוֹלֶד דָּוִיד עוֹד, בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת.    3 And David took more wives at Jerusalem; and David begot more sons and daughters.
14.4 ד  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת הַיְלוּדִים, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ-לוֹ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  שַׁמּוּעַ וְשׁוֹבָב, נָתָן וּשְׁלֹמֹה.    4 And these are the names of the children whom he had in Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon;
14.5 ה  וְיִבְחָר וֶאֱלִישׁוּעַ, וְאֶלְפָּלֶט.    5 and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpelet;
14.6 ו  וְנֹגַהּ וְנֶפֶג, וְיָפִיעַ.    6 and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia;
14.7 ז  וֶאֱלִישָׁמָע וּבְעֶלְיָדָע, וֶאֱלִיפָלֶט.  {פ}    7 and Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphelet. {P}
14.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, כִּי-נִמְשַׁח דָּוִיד לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעֲלוּ כָל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-דָּוִיד; וַיִּשְׁמַע דָּוִיד, וַיֵּצֵא לִפְנֵיהֶם.    8 And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went out to meet them.
14.9 ט  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, בָּאוּ; וַיִּפְשְׁטוּ, בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים.    9 Now the Philistines had come and made a raid in the valley of Rephaim.
14.10 י  וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִיד בֵּאלֹהִים, לֵאמֹר--הַאֶעֱלֶה עַל-פלשתיים (פְּלִשְׁתִּים), וּנְתַתָּם בְּיָדִי; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ יְהוָה עֲלֵה, וּנְתַתִּים בְּיָדֶךָ.    10 And David inquired of God, saying: 'Shall I go up against the Philistines? and wilt Thou deliver them into my hand?' And the LORD said unto him: 'Go up; for I will deliver them into thy hand.'
14.11 יא  וַיַּעֲלוּ בְּבַעַל-פְּרָצִים, וַיַּכֵּם שָׁם דָּוִיד, וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, פָּרַץ הָאֱלֹהִים אֶת-אוֹיְבַי בְּיָדִי כְּפֶרֶץ מָיִם; עַל-כֵּן, קָרְאוּ שֵׁם-הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא--בַּעַל פְּרָצִים.    11 So they came up to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there; and David said: 'God hath broken mine enemies by my hand, like the breach of waters.' Therefore they called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
14.12 יב  וַיַּעַזְבוּ שָׁם, אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, וַיִּשָּׂרְפוּ בָּאֵשׁ.  {פ}    12 And they left their gods there; and David gave commandment, and they were burned with fire. {P}
14.13 יג  וַיֹּסִיפוּ עוֹד פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּפְשְׁטוּ בָּעֵמֶק.    13 And the Philistines yet again made a raid in the valley.
14.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁאַל עוֹד דָּוִיד, בֵּאלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הָאֱלֹהִים, לֹא תַעֲלֶה אַחֲרֵיהֶם:  הָסֵב, מֵעֲלֵיהֶם, וּבָאתָ לָהֶם, מִמּוּל הַבְּכָאִים.    14 And David inquired again of God; and God said unto him: 'Thou shalt not go up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over against the mulberry-trees.
14.15 טו  וִיהִי כְּשָׁמְעֲךָ אֶת-קוֹל הַצְּעָדָה, בְּרָאשֵׁי הַבְּכָאִים--אָז, תֵּצֵא בַמִּלְחָמָה:  כִּי-יָצָא הָאֱלֹהִים לְפָנֶיךָ, לְהַכּוֹת אֶת-מַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים.    15 And it shall be, when thou hearest the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry-trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle; for God is gone out before thee to smite the host of the Philistines.'
14.16 טז  וַיַּעַשׂ דָּוִיד, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּהוּ הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-מַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, מִגִּבְעוֹן וְעַד-גָּזְרָה.    16 And David did as God commanded him; and they smote the host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gezer.
15.17 יז  וַיֵּצֵא שֵׁם-דָּוִיד, בְּכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת; וַיהוָה נָתַן אֶת-פַּחְדּוֹ, עַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם.    17 And the fame of David went out into all lands; and the LORD brought the fear of him upon all nations.
15.1 א  וַיַּעַשׂ-לוֹ בָתִּים, בְּעִיר דָּוִיד; וַיָּכֶן מָקוֹם לַאֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֶּט-לוֹ אֹהֶל.    1 And [David] made him houses in the city of David; and he prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.
15.2 ב  אָז, אָמַר דָּוִיד, לֹא לָשֵׂאת אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, כִּי אִם-הַלְוִיִּם:  כִּי-בָם בָּחַר יְהוָה, לָשֵׂאת אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה וּלְשָׁרְתוֹ--עַד-עוֹלָם.  {פ}    2 Then David said: 'None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites; for them hath the LORD chosen to carry the ark of the LORD, and to minister unto Him for ever.' {P}
15.3 ג  וַיַּקְהֵל דָּוִיד אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם, לְהַעֲלוֹת אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, אֶל-מְקוֹמוֹ אֲשֶׁר-הֵכִין לוֹ.    3 And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the LORD unto its place, which he had prepared for it.
15.4 ד  וַיֶּאֱסֹף דָּוִיד אֶת-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, וְאֶת-הַלְוִיִּם.  {ס}    4 And David gathered together the sons of Aaron, and the Levites; {S}
15.5 ה  לִבְנֵי, קְהָת--אוּרִיאֵל הַשָּׂר, וְאֶחָיו מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    5 of the sons of Kohath: Uriel the chief, and his brethren a hundred and twenty; {S}
15.6 ו  לִבְנֵי, מְרָרִי--עֲשָׂיָה הַשָּׂר, וְאֶחָיו מָאתַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    6 of the sons of Merari: Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred and twenty; {S}
15.7 ז  לִבְנֵי, גֵּרְשׁוֹם--יוֹאֵל הַשָּׂר, וְאֶחָיו מֵאָה וּשְׁלֹשִׁים.  {ס}    7 of the sons of Gershom: Joel the chief, and his brethren a hundred and thirty; {S}
15.8 ח  לִבְנֵי, אֱלִיצָפָן--שְׁמַעְיָה הַשָּׂר, וְאֶחָיו מָאתָיִם.  {ס}    8 of the sons of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred; {S}
15.9 ט  לִבְנֵי, חֶבְרוֹן--אֱלִיאֵל הַשָּׂר, וְאֶחָיו שְׁמוֹנִים.  {ס}    9 of the sons of Hebron: Eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore; {S}
15.10 י  לִבְנֵי, עֻזִּיאֵל:  עַמִּינָדָב הַשָּׂר--וְאֶחָיו, מֵאָה וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {פ}    10 of the sons of Uzziel: Amminadab the chief, and his brethren a hundred and twelve. {P}
15.11 יא  וַיִּקְרָא דָוִיד, לְצָדוֹק וּלְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֲנִים; וְלַלְוִיִּם, לְאוּרִיאֵל עֲשָׂיָה וְיוֹאֵל שְׁמַעְיָה, וֶאֱלִיאֵל, וְעַמִּינָדָב.  {ס}    11 And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab, {S}
15.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, אַתֶּם רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לַלְוִיִּם; הִתְקַדְּשׁוּ, אַתֶּם וַאֲחֵיכֶם, וְהַעֲלִיתֶם אֵת אֲרוֹן יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-הֲכִינוֹתִי לוֹ.    12 and said unto them: 'Ye are the heads of the fathers' houses of the Levites; sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, unto the place that I have prepared for it.
15.13 יג  כִּי לְמַבָּרִאשׁוֹנָה, לֹא אַתֶּם--פָּרַץ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ בָּנוּ, כִּי-לֹא דְרַשְׁנֻהוּ כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.    13 For because ye [bore it] not at the first, the LORD our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought Him not according to the ordinance.'
15.14 יד  וַיִּתְקַדְּשׁוּ, הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, לְהַעֲלוֹת, אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    14 So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel.
15.15 טו  וַיִּשְׂאוּ בְנֵי-הַלְוִיִּם, אֵת אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה--בִּכְתֵפָם בַּמֹּטוֹת, עֲלֵיהֶם.  {פ}    15 And the children of the Levites bore the ark of God upon their shoulders with the bars thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of the LORD. {P}
15.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, לְשָׂרֵי הַלְוִיִּם, לְהַעֲמִיד אֶת-אֲחֵיהֶם הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, בִּכְלֵי-שִׁיר נְבָלִים וְכִנֹּרוֹת וּמְצִלְתָּיִם--מַשְׁמִיעִים לְהָרִים-בְּקוֹל, לְשִׂמְחָה.  {פ}    16 And David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren the singers, with instruments of music, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding aloud and lifting up the voice with joy. {P}
15.17 יז  וַיַּעֲמִידוּ הַלְוִיִּם, אֵת הֵימָן בֶּן-יוֹאֵל, וּמִן-אֶחָיו, אָסָף בֶּן-בֶּרֶכְיָהוּ;  {ס}  וּמִן-בְּנֵי מְרָרִי אֲחֵיהֶם, אֵיתָן בֶּן-קוּשָׁיָהוּ.    17 So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; {S} and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah;
15.18 יח  וְעִמָּהֶם, אֲחֵיהֶם הַמִּשְׁנִים:  זְכַרְיָהוּ בֵּן וְיַעֲזִיאֵל וּשְׁמִירָמוֹת וִיחִיאֵל וְעֻנִּי אֱלִיאָב וּבְנָיָהוּ וּמַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ וּמַתִּתְיָהוּ וֶאֱלִיפְלֵהוּ וּמִקְנֵיָהוּ וְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם, וִיעִיאֵל--הַשֹּׁעֲרִים.    18 and with them their brethren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Eliphalehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers.
15.19 יט  וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים, הֵימָן אָסָף וְאֵיתָן--בִּמְצִלְתַּיִם נְחֹשֶׁת, לְהַשְׁמִיעַ.    19 So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, [were appointed,] with cymbals of brass to sound aloud;
15.20 כ  וּזְכַרְיָה וַעֲזִיאֵל וּשְׁמִירָמוֹת וִיחִיאֵל, וְעֻנִּי וֶאֱלִיאָב, וּמַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ, וּבְנָיָהוּ--בִּנְבָלִים, עַל-עֲלָמוֹת.    20 and Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries set to Alamoth;
15.21 כא  וּמַתִּתְיָהוּ וֶאֱלִיפְלֵהוּ, וּמִקְנֵיָהוּ וְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם, וִיעִיאֵל, וַעֲזַזְיָהוּ--בְּכִנֹּרוֹת עַל-הַשְּׁמִינִית, לְנַצֵּחַ.    21 and Mattithiah, and Eliphalehu, and Mikneiahu, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith, to lead.
15.22 כב  וּכְנַנְיָהוּ שַׂר-הַלְוִיִּם, בְּמַשָּׂא--יָסֹר, בַּמַּשָּׂא, כִּי מֵבִין, הוּא.    22 And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was over the song; he was master in the song, because he was skilful.
15.23 כג  וּבֶרֶכְיָה, וְאֶלְקָנָה, שֹׁעֲרִים, לָאָרוֹן.    23 And Berechiah and Elkanah were door-keepers for the ark.
15.24 כד  וּשְׁבַנְיָהוּ וְיוֹשָׁפָט וּנְתַנְאֵל וַעֲמָשַׂי וּזְכַרְיָהוּ וּבְנָיָהוּ וֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר, הַכֹּהֲנִים, מחצצרים (מַחְצְרִים) בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים; וְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם וִיחִיָּה, שֹׁעֲרִים לָאָרוֹן.    24 And Shebaniah, and Joshaphat, and Nethanel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the trumpets before the ark of God; and Obed-edom and Jehiah were doorkeepers for the ark.
15.25 כה  וַיְהִי דָוִיד וְזִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְשָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים:  הַהֹלְכִים, לְהַעֲלוֹת אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה מִן-בֵּית עֹבֵד-אֱדֹם--בְּשִׂמְחָה.  {פ}    25 So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the house of Obed-edom with joy. {P}
15.26 כו  וַיְהִי, בֶּעְזֹר הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה; וַיִּזְבְּחוּ שִׁבְעָה-פָרִים, וְשִׁבְעָה אֵילִים.    26 And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD, that they sacrificed seven bullocks and seven rams.
15.27 כז  וְדָוִיד מְכֻרְבָּל בִּמְעִיל בּוּץ, וְכָל-הַלְוִיִּם הַנֹּשְׂאִים אֶת-הָאָרוֹן, וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים, וּכְנַנְיָה הַשַּׂר הַמַּשָּׂא הַמְשֹׁרְרִים; וְעַל-דָּוִיד, אֵפוֹד בָּד.    27 And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites that bore the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the singers in the song; and David had upon him an ephod of linen.
15.28 כח  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מַעֲלִים אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, בִּתְרוּעָה וּבְקוֹל שׁוֹפָר, וּבַחֲצֹצְרוֹת וּבִמְצִלְתָּיִם; מַשְׁמִעִים, בִּנְבָלִים וְכִנֹּרוֹת.    28 Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouting, and with sound of the horn, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding aloud with psalteries and harps.
16.29 כט  וַיְהִי, אֲרוֹן בְּרִית יְהוָה, בָּא, עַד-עִיר דָּוִיד; וּמִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל נִשְׁקְפָה בְּעַד הַחַלּוֹן, וַתֵּרֶא אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד מְרַקֵּד וּמְשַׂחֵק, וַתִּבֶז לוֹ, בְּלִבָּהּ.  {פ}    29 And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window, and saw king David dancing and making merry; and she despised him in her heart. {P}
16.1 א  וַיָּבִיאוּ, אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיַּצִּיגוּ אֹתוֹ, בְּתוֹךְ הָאֹהֶל אֲשֶׁר נָטָה-לוֹ דָּוִיד; וַיַּקְרִיבוּ עֹלוֹת וּשְׁלָמִים, לִפְנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים.    1 And they brought in the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it, and they offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before God.
16.2 ב  וַיְכַל דָּוִיד, מֵהַעֲלוֹת הָעֹלָה וְהַשְּׁלָמִים; וַיְבָרֶךְ אֶת-הָעָם, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה.    2 And when David had made an end of offering the burnt-offering and the peace-offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD.
16.3 ג  וַיְחַלֵּק לְכָל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאִישׁ וְעַד-אִשָּׁה--לְאִישׁ, כִּכַּר-לֶחֶם, וְאֶשְׁפָּר, וַאֲשִׁישָׁה.    3 And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a cake made in a pan, and a sweet cake.
16.4 ד  וַיִּתֵּן לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, מִן-הַלְוִיִּם--מְשָׁרְתִים; וּלְהַזְכִּיר וּלְהוֹדוֹת וּלְהַלֵּל, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    4 And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD, and to celebrate and to thank and praise the LORD, the God of Israel: {S}
16.5 ה  אָסָף הָרֹאשׁ, וּמִשְׁנֵהוּ זְכַרְיָה; יְעִיאֵל וּשְׁמִירָמוֹת וִיחִיאֵל וּמַתִּתְיָה וֶאֱלִיאָב וּבְנָיָהוּ וְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם וִיעִיאֵל, בִּכְלֵי נְבָלִים וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת, וְאָסָף, בַּמְצִלְתַּיִם מַשְׁמִיעַ.    5 Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps; and Asaph with cymbals, sounding aloud;
16.6 ו  וּבְנָיָהוּ וְיַחֲזִיאֵל, הַכֹּהֲנִים--בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת תָּמִיד, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-הָאֱלֹהִים.    6 and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the covenant of God.
16.7 ז  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אָז נָתַן דָּוִיד בָּרֹאשׁ, לְהֹדוֹת, לַיהוָה--בְּיַד-אָסָף, וְאֶחָיו.  {ש}    7 Then on that day did David first ordain to give thanks unto the LORD, by the hand of Asaph and his brethren. {P}
16.8 ח  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה, קִרְאוּ בִשְׁמוֹ--  {ס}  הוֹדִיעוּ בָעַמִּים, עֲלִילֹתָיו.  {ר}    8 O give thanks unto the LORD, call upon His name; make known His doings among the peoples.
16.9 ט  שִׁירוּ לוֹ, זַמְּרוּ-לוֹ--  {ס}  שִׂיחוּ, בְּכָל-נִפְלְאֹתָיו.  {ר}    9 Sing unto Him, sing praises unto Him; speak ye of all His marvellous works.
16.10 י  הִתְהַלְלוּ, בְּשֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ--  {ס}  יִשְׂמַח, לֵב מְבַקְשֵׁי יְהוָה.  {ר}    10 Glory ye in His holy name; let the heart of them rejoice that seek the LORD.
16.11 יא  דִּרְשׁוּ יְהוָה, וְעֻזּוֹ--  {ס}  בַּקְּשׁוּ פָנָיו, תָּמִיד.  {ר}    11 Seek ye the LORD and His strength; seek His face continually.
16.12 יב  זִכְרוּ, נִפְלְאֹתָיו אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה--  {ס}  מֹפְתָיו, וּמִשְׁפְּטֵי-פִיהוּ.  {ר}    12 Remember His marvellous works that He hath done, His wonders, and the judgments of His mouth;
16.13 יג  זֶרַע, יִשְׂרָאֵל עַבְדּוֹ--  {ס}  בְּנֵי יַעֲקֹב, בְּחִירָיו.  {ר}    13 O ye seed of Israel His servant, ye children of Jacob, His chosen ones.
16.14 יד  הוּא, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--  {ס}  בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ, מִשְׁפָּטָיו.  {ר}    14 He is the LORD our God; His judgments are in all the earth.
16.15 טו  זִכְרוּ לְעוֹלָם, בְּרִיתוֹ--  {ס}  דָּבָר צִוָּה, לְאֶלֶף דּוֹר.  {ר}    15 Remember His covenant for ever, the word which He commanded to a thousand generations;
16.16 טז  אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת, אֶת-אַבְרָהָם--  {ס}  וּשְׁבוּעָתוֹ, לְיִצְחָק.  {ר}    16 [The covenant] which He made with Abraham, and His oath unto Isaac;
16.17 יז  וַיַּעֲמִידֶהָ לְיַעֲקֹב, לְחֹק--  {ס}  לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּרִית עוֹלָם.  {ר}    17 And He established it unto Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant;
16.18 יח  לֵאמֹר, לְךָ אֶתֵּן אֶרֶץ-כְּנָעַן--  {ס}  חֶבֶל, נַחֲלַתְכֶם.  {ר}    18 Saying: 'Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance.'
16.19 יט  בִּהְיוֹתְכֶם, מְתֵי מִסְפָּר--  {ס}  כִּמְעַט, וְגָרִים בָּהּ.  {ר}    19 When ye were but a few men in number, yea, very few, and sojourners in it,
16.20 כ  וַיִּתְהַלְּכוּ, מִגּוֹי אֶל-גּוֹי--  {ס}  וּמִמַּמְלָכָה, אֶל-עַם אַחֵר.  {ר}    20 And when they went about from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people,
16.21 כא  לֹא-הִנִּיחַ לְאִישׁ, לְעָשְׁקָם--  {ס}  וַיּוֹכַח עֲלֵיהֶם, מְלָכִים.  {ר}    21 He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, for their sake He reproved kings:
16.22 כב  אַל-תִּגְּעוּ, בִּמְשִׁיחָי--  {ס}  וּבִנְבִיאַי, אַל-תָּרֵעוּ.  {ר}  {ש}    22 'Touch not Mine anointed ones, and do My prophets no harm.' {P}
16.23 כג  שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ--  {ס}  בַּשְּׂרוּ מִיּוֹם-אֶל-יוֹם, יְשׁוּעָתוֹ.  {ר}    23 Sing unto the LORD, all the earth; proclaim His salvation from day to day.
16.24 כד  סַפְּרוּ בַגּוֹיִם, אֶת-כְּבוֹדוֹ--  {ס}  בְּכָל-הָעַמִּים, נִפְלְאֹתָיו.  {ר}    24 Declare His glory among the nations, His marvellous works among all the peoples.
16.25 כה  כִּי גָדוֹל יְהוָה וּמְהֻלָּל, מְאֹד--  {ס}  וְנוֹרָא הוּא, עַל-כָּל-אֱלֹהִים.  {ר}    25 For great is the LORD, and highly to be praised; He also is to be feared above all gods.
16.26 כו  כִּי כָּל-אֱלֹהֵי הָעַמִּים, אֱלִילִים--  {ס}  וַיהוָה, שָׁמַיִם עָשָׂה.  {ר}    26 For all the gods of the peoples are things of nought; but the LORD made the heavens.
16.27 כז  הוֹד וְהָדָר, לְפָנָיו--  {ס}  עֹז וְחֶדְוָה, בִּמְקֹמוֹ.  {ר}    27 Honour and majesty are before Him; strength and gladness are in His place.
16.28 כח  הָבוּ לַיהוָה, מִשְׁפְּחוֹת עַמִּים--  {ס}  הָבוּ לַיהוָה, כָּבוֹד וָעֹז.  {ר}    28 Ascribe unto the LORD, ye kindreds of the peoples, ascribe unto the LORD glory and strength.
16.29 כט  הָבוּ לַיהוָה, כְּבוֹד שְׁמוֹ;  {ס}  שְׂאוּ מִנְחָה, וּבֹאוּ לְפָנָיו--  {ר}  הִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַיהוָה, בְּהַדְרַת-קֹדֶשׁ.  {ס}    29 Ascribe unto the LORD the glory due unto His name; bring an offering, and come before Him; worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness.
16.30 ל  חִילוּ מִלְּפָנָיו, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ--  {ר}  אַף-תִּכּוֹן תֵּבֵל, בַּל-תִּמּוֹט.  {ס}    30 Tremble before Him, all the earth; the world also is established that it cannot be moved.
16.31 לא  יִשְׂמְחוּ הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְתָגֵל הָאָרֶץ--  {ר}  וְיֹאמְרוּ בַגּוֹיִם, יְהוָה מָלָךְ.  {ס}    31 Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice; and let them say among the nations: 'The LORD reigneth.'
16.32 לב  יִרְעַם הַיָּם, וּמְלוֹאוֹ--  {ר}  יַעֲלֹץ הַשָּׂדֶה, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ.  {ס}    32 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; let the field exult, and all that is therein;
16.33 לג  אָז יְרַנְּנוּ, עֲצֵי הַיָּעַר:  {ר}  מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה--כִּי-בָא, לִשְׁפּוֹט אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}    33 Then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy, before the LORD, for He is come to judge the earth.
16.34 לד  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה, כִּי טוֹב--  {ר}  כִּי לְעוֹלָם, חַסְדּוֹ.  {ס}    34 O give thanks unto the LORD; for He is good; for His mercy endureth for ever.
16.35 לה  וְאִמְרוּ--הוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעֵנוּ,  {ר}  וְקַבְּצֵנוּ וְהַצִּילֵנוּ מִן-הַגּוֹיִם:  {ס}  לְהֹדוֹת לְשֵׁם קָדְשֶׁךָ,  {ר}  לְהִשְׁתַּבֵּחַ בִּתְהִלָּתֶךָ.  {ס}    35 And say ye: 'Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together and deliver us from the nations, that we may give thanks unto Thy holy name, that we may triumph in Thy praise.'
16.36 לו  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--  {ר}  מִן-הָעוֹלָם, וְעַד הָעֹלָם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הָעָם, אָמֵן--  {ס}  וְהַלֵּל, לַיהוָה.  {ר}  {ש}    36 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And all the people said: 'Amen,' and praised the LORD. {P}
16.37 לז  וַיַּעֲזָב-שָׁם, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, לְאָסָף, וּלְאֶחָיו:  לְשָׁרֵת לִפְנֵי הָאָרוֹן, תָּמִיד--לִדְבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ.    37 So he left there, before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, Asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as every day's work required;
16.38 לח  וְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם וַאֲחֵיהֶם, שִׁשִּׁים וּשְׁמוֹנָה;  {ס}  וְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם בֶּן-יְדִיתוּן וְחֹסָה, לְשֹׁעֲרִים.    38 and Obed-edom with their brethren, threescore and eight; {S} Obed-edom also the son of Jedithun and Hosah to be door-keepers;
16.39 לט  וְאֵת צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶחָיו הַכֹּהֲנִים, לִפְנֵי, מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה--בַּבָּמָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּגִבְעוֹן.    39 and Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the LORD in the high place that was at Gibeon,
16.40 מ  לְהַעֲלוֹת עֹלוֹת לַיהוָה עַל-מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, תָּמִיד--לַבֹּקֶר וְלָעָרֶב; וּלְכָל-הַכָּתוּב בְּתוֹרַת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    40 to offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD upon the altar of burnt-offering continually morning and evening, even according to all that is written in the Law of the LORD, which He commanded unto Israel;
16.41 מא  וְעִמָּהֶם, הֵימָן וִידוּתוּן, וּשְׁאָר הַבְּרוּרִים, אֲשֶׁר נִקְּבוּ בְּשֵׁמוֹת--לְהֹדוֹת, לַיהוָה, כִּי לְעוֹלָם, חַסְדּוֹ.    41 and with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were mentioned by name, to give thanks to the LORD, because His mercy endureth for ever;
16.42 מב  וְעִמָּהֶם הֵימָן וִידוּתוּן חֲצֹצְרוֹת וּמְצִלְתַּיִם, לְמַשְׁמִיעִים, וּכְלֵי, שִׁיר הָאֱלֹהִים; וּבְנֵי יְדוּתוּן, לַשָּׁעַר.    42 and with them Heman and Jeduthun, to sound aloud with trumpets and cymbals, and with instruments for the songs of God; and the sons of Jeduthun to be at the gate.
16.43 מג  וַיֵּלְכוּ כָל-הָעָם, אִישׁ לְבֵיתוֹ; וַיִּסֹּב דָּוִיד, לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ.  {פ}    43 And all the people departed every man to his house; and David returned to bless his house. {P}
17.1 א  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָשַׁב דָּוִיד בְּבֵיתוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד אֶל-נָתָן הַנָּבִיא, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי יוֹשֵׁב בְּבֵית הָאֲרָזִים, וַאֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, תַּחַת יְרִיעוֹת.    1 And it came to pass, when David dwelt in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet: 'Lo, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the LORD dwelleth under curtains.'
17.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר נָתָן אֶל-דָּוִיד, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר בִּלְבָבְךָ עֲשֵׂה:  כִּי הָאֱלֹהִים, עִמָּךְ.  {ס}    2 And Nathan said unto David: 'Do all that is in thy heart; for God is with thee.' {S}
17.3 ג  וַיְהִי, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא; וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-אֱלֹהִים, אֶל-נָתָן, לֵאמֹר.    3 And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying:
17.4 ד  לֵךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-דָּוִיד עַבְדִּי, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  לֹא אַתָּה תִּבְנֶה-לִּי הַבַּיִת, לָשָׁבֶת.    4 'Go and tell David My servant: Thus saith the LORD: Thou shalt not build Me a house to dwell in;
17.5 ה  כִּי לֹא יָשַׁבְתִּי, בְּבַיִת, מִן-הַיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלֵיתִי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וָאֶהְיֶה מֵאֹהֶל אֶל-אֹהֶל, וּמִמִּשְׁכָּן.    5 for I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up Israel, unto this day; but have [gone] from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle [to another].
17.6 ו  בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-הִתְהַלַּכְתִּי, בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֲדָבָר דִּבַּרְתִּי אֶת-אַחַד שֹׁפְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי לִרְעוֹת אֶת-עַמִּי לֵאמֹר:  לָמָּה לֹא-בְנִיתֶם לִי, בֵּית אֲרָזִים.    6 In all places wherein I have walked among all Israel, spoke I a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed My people, saying: Why have ye not built Me a house of cedar?
17.7 ז  וְעַתָּה כֹּה-תֹאמַר לְעַבְדִּי לְדָוִיד,  {ס}  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֲנִי לְקַחְתִּיךָ מִן-הַנָּוֶה, מִן-אַחֲרֵי הַצֹּאן--לִהְיוֹת נָגִיד, עַל עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    7 Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto My servant David: {S} Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, that thou shouldest be prince over My people Israel;
17.8 ח  וָאֶהְיֶה עִמְּךָ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר הָלַכְתָּ, וָאַכְרִית אֶת-כָּל-אוֹיְבֶיךָ, מִפָּנֶיךָ; וְעָשִׂיתִי לְךָ שֵׁם, כְּשֵׁם הַגְּדוֹלִים אֲשֶׁר בָּאָרֶץ.    8 and I have been with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee; and I will make thee a name, like unto the name of the great ones that are in the earth.
17.9 ט  וְשַׂמְתִּי מָקוֹם לְעַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל וּנְטַעְתִּיהוּ, וְשָׁכַן תַּחְתָּיו, וְלֹא יִרְגַּז, עוֹד; וְלֹא-יוֹסִיפוּ בְנֵי-עַוְלָה לְבַלֹּתוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה.    9 And I will appoint a place for My people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and be disquieted no more; neither shall the children of wickedness waste them any more, as at the first,
17.10 י  וּלְמִיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי שֹׁפְטִים עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהִכְנַעְתִּי, אֶת-כָּל-אוֹיְבֶיךָ; וָאַגִּד לָךְ, וּבַיִת יִבְנֶה-לְּךָ יְהוָה.    10 even from the day that I commanded judges to be over My people Israel; and I will subdue all thine enemies. Moreover I tell thee that the LORD will build thee a house.
17.11 יא  וְהָיָה, כִּי-מָלְאוּ יָמֶיךָ לָלֶכֶת עִם-אֲבֹתֶיךָ, וַהֲקִימוֹתִי אֶת-זַרְעֲךָ אַחֲרֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה מִבָּנֶיךָ; וַהֲכִינוֹתִי, אֶת-מַלְכוּתוֹ.    11 And it shall come to pass, when thy days are fulfilled that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that I will set up thy seed after thee, who shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom.
17.12 יב  הוּא יִבְנֶה-לִּי, בָּיִת; וְכֹנַנְתִּי אֶת-כִּסְאוֹ, עַד-עוֹלָם.    12 He shall build Me a house, and I will establish his throne for ever.
17.13 יג  אֲנִי אֶהְיֶה-לּוֹ לְאָב, וְהוּא יִהְיֶה-לִּי לְבֵן; וְחַסְדִּי, לֹא-אָסִיר מֵעִמּוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר הֲסִירוֹתִי, מֵאֲשֶׁר הָיָה לְפָנֶיךָ.    13 I will be to him for a father, and he shall be to Me for a son; and I will not take My mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was before thee;
17.14 יד  וְהַעֲמַדְתִּיהוּ בְּבֵיתִי וּבְמַלְכוּתִי, עַד-הָעוֹלָם; וְכִסְאוֹ, יִהְיֶה נָכוֹן עַד-עוֹלָם.    14 but I will settle him in My house and in My kingdom for ever; and his throne shall be established for ever.'
17.15 טו  כְּכֹל הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וּכְכֹל הֶחָזוֹן הַזֶּה--כֵּן דִּבֶּר נָתָן, אֶל-דָּוִיד.  {פ}    15 According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. {P}
17.16 טז  וַיָּבֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד, וַיֵּשֶׁב לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי-אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים וּמִי בֵיתִי, כִּי הֲבִיאֹתַנִי, עַד-הֲלֹם.    16 Then David the king went in, and sat before the LORD; and he said: 'Who am I, O LORD God, and what is my house, that Thou hast brought me thus far?
17.17 יז  וַתִּקְטַן זֹאת בְּעֵינֶיךָ אֱלֹהִים, וַתְּדַבֵּר עַל-בֵּית-עַבְדְּךָ לְמֵרָחוֹק; וּרְאִיתַנִי, כְּתוֹר הָאָדָם הַמַּעֲלָה--יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים.    17 And this was a small thing in Thine eyes, O God; but Thou hast spoken of Thy servant's house for a great while to come, and hast regarded me after the manner of a man of high degree, O LORD God.
17.18 יח  מַה-יּוֹסִיף עוֹד דָּוִיד אֵלֶיךָ, לְכָבוֹד אֶת-עַבְדֶּךָ; וְאַתָּה, אֶת-עַבְדְּךָ יָדָעְתָּ.    18 What can David say yet more unto Thee concerning the honour which is done to Thy servant? for Thou knowest Thy servant.
17.19 יט  יְהוָה--בַּעֲבוּר עַבְדְּךָ וּכְלִבְּךָ, עָשִׂיתָ אֵת כָּל-הַגְּדוּלָּה הַזֹּאת:  לְהֹדִיעַ, אֶת-כָּל-הַגְּדֻלּוֹת.    19 O LORD, for Thy servant's sake, and according to Thine own heart, hast Thou wrought all this greatness, to make known all these great things.
17.20 כ  יְהוָה אֵין כָּמוֹךָ, וְאֵין אֱלֹהִים זוּלָתֶךָ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁמַעְנוּ, בְּאָזְנֵינוּ.    20 O LORD, there is none like Thee, neither is there any God beside Thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
17.21 כא  וּמִי כְּעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, גּוֹי אֶחָד בָּאָרֶץ:  אֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים לִפְדּוֹת לוֹ עָם, לָשׂוּם לְךָ שֵׁם גְּדֻלּוֹת וְנֹרָאוֹת--לְגָרֵשׁ מִפְּנֵי עַמְּךָ אֲשֶׁר-פָּדִיתָ מִמִּצְרַיִם, גּוֹיִם.    21 And who is like Thy people Israel, a nation one in the earth, whom God went to redeem unto Himself for a people, to make Thee a name by great and tremendous things, in driving out nations from before Thy people, whom Thou didst redeem out of Egypt.
17.22 כב  וַתִּתֵּן אֶת-עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל לְךָ, לְעָם--עַד-עוֹלָם; וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, הָיִיתָ לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים.    22 For Thy people Israel didst Thou make Thine own people for ever; and Thou, LORD, becamest their God.
17.23 כג  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה--הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ עַל-עַבְדְּךָ וְעַל-בֵּיתוֹ, יֵאָמֵן עַד-עוֹלָם; וַעֲשֵׂה, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ.    23 And now, O LORD, let the word that Thou hast spoken concerning Thy servant, and concerning his house, be established for ever, and do as Thou hast spoken.
17.24 כד  וְיֵאָמֵן וְיִגְדַּל שִׁמְךָ עַד-עוֹלָם, לֵאמֹר--יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֱלֹהִים לְיִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבֵית-דָּוִיד עַבְדְּךָ, נָכוֹן לְפָנֶיךָ.    24 Yea, let it be established, and let Thy name be magnified for ever, that it may be said: The LORD of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel; and the house of David Thy servant shall be established before Thee.
17.25 כה  כִּי אַתָּה אֱלֹהַי, גָּלִיתָ אֶת-אֹזֶן עַבְדְּךָ, לִבְנוֹת לוֹ, בָּיִת; עַל-כֵּן מָצָא עַבְדְּךָ, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל לְפָנֶיךָ.    25 For Thou, O my God, hast revealed to Thy servant that Thou wilt build him a house; therefore hath Thy servant taken heart to pray before Thee.
17.26 כו  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה, אַתָּה-הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים; וַתְּדַבֵּר, עַל-עַבְדְּךָ, הַטּוֹבָה, הַזֹּאת.    26 And now, O LORD, Thou alone art God, and hast promised this good thing unto Thy servant;
17.27 כז  וְעַתָּה, הוֹאַלְתָּ לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-בֵּית עַבְדְּךָ, לִהְיוֹת לְעוֹלָם, לְפָנֶיךָ:  כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה בֵּרַכְתָּ, וּמְבֹרָךְ לְעוֹלָם.  {פ}    27 and now it hath pleased Thee to bless the house of Thy servant, that it may continue for ever before Thee; for Thou, O LORD, hast blessed, and so let [Thy servant] be blessed for ever.' {P}
18.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיַּךְ דָּוִיד אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיַּכְנִיעֵם; וַיִּקַּח אֶת-גַּת וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    1 And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and its towns out of the hand of the Philistines.
18.2 ב  וַיַּךְ, אֶת-מוֹאָב; וַיִּהְיוּ מוֹאָב עֲבָדִים לְדָוִיד, נֹשְׂאֵי מִנְחָה.    2 And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became servants to David, and brought presents.
18.3 ג  וַיַּךְ דָּוִיד אֶת-הֲדַדְעֶזֶר מֶלֶךְ-צוֹבָה, חֲמָתָה, בְּלֶכְתּוֹ, לְהַצִּיב יָדוֹ בִּנְהַר-פְּרָת.    3 And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah by Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion at the river Euphrates.
18.4 ד  וַיִּלְכֹּד דָּוִיד מִמֶּנּוּ אֶלֶף רֶכֶב, וְשִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים פָּרָשִׁים, וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, אִישׁ רַגְלִי; וַיְעַקֵּר דָּוִיד אֶת-כָּל-הָרֶכֶב, וַיּוֹתֵר מִמֶּנּוּ מֵאָה רָכֶב.    4 And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for a hundred chariots.
18.5 ה  וַיָּבֹא, אֲרַם דַּרְמֶשֶׂק, לַעְזוֹר, לַהֲדַדְעֶזֶר מֶלֶךְ צוֹבָה; וַיַּךְ דָּוִיד בַּאֲרָם, עֶשְׂרִים-וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף אִישׁ.    5 And when the Arameans of Damascus came to succour Hadarezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Arameans two and twenty thousand men.
18.6 ו  וַיָּשֶׂם דָּוִיד, בַּאֲרַם דַּרְמֶשֶׂק, וַיְהִי אֲרָם לְדָוִיד, עֲבָדִים נֹשְׂאֵי מִנְחָה; וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה לְדָוִיד, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר הָלָךְ.    6 Then David put [garrisons] in Aram Damascus; and the Arameans became servants to David, and brought presents. And the LORD gave victory to David whithersoever he went.
18.7 ז  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִיד, אֵת שִׁלְטֵי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ, עַל עַבְדֵי הֲדַדְעָזֶר; וַיְבִיאֵם, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.
18.8 ח  וּמִטִּבְחַת וּמִכּוּן עָרֵי הֲדַדְעֶזֶר, לָקַח דָּוִיד נְחֹשֶׁת רַבָּה מְאֹד; בָּהּ עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-יָם הַנְּחֹשֶׁת וְאֶת-הָעַמּוּדִים, וְאֵת, כְּלֵי הַנְּחֹשֶׁת.  {פ}    8 And from Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadarezer, David took very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass. {P}
18.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁמַע, תֹּעוּ מֶלֶךְ חֲמָת:  כִּי הִכָּה דָוִיד, אֶת-כָּל-חֵיל הֲדַדְעֶזֶר מֶלֶךְ-צוֹבָה.    9 And when Tou king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadarezer king of Zobah,
18.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶת-הֲדוֹרָם-בְּנוֹ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ-דָּוִיד לשאול- (לִשְׁאָל-) לוֹ לְשָׁלוֹם וּלְבָרְכוֹ, עַל אֲשֶׁר נִלְחַם בַּהֲדַדְעֶזֶר וַיַּכֵּהוּ--כִּי-אִישׁ מִלְחֲמוֹת תֹּעוּ, הָיָה הֲדַדְעָזֶר; וְכֹל, כְּלֵי זָהָב וָכֶסֶף--וּנְחֹשֶׁת.    10 he sent Hadoram his son to king David, to salute him, and to bless him--because he had fought against Hadarezer and smitten him; for Hadarezer had wars with Tou--and [he had with him] all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.
18.11 יא  גַּם-אֹתָם, הִקְדִּישׁ הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד לַיהוָה, עִם-הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂא מִכָּל-הַגּוֹיִם--מֵאֱדוֹם וּמִמּוֹאָב וּמִבְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וּמִפְּלִשְׁתִּים וּמֵעֲמָלֵק.    11 These also did king David dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver and the gold that he carried away from all the nations; from Edom, and from Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek.
18.12 יב  וְאַבְשַׁי בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, הִכָּה אֶת-אֱדוֹם בְּגֵיא הַמֶּלַח, שְׁמוֹנָה עָשָׂר, אָלֶף.    12 Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah smote of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt eighteen thousand.
18.13 יג  וַיָּשֶׂם בֶּאֱדוֹם נְצִיבִים, וַיִּהְיוּ כָל-אֱדוֹם עֲבָדִים לְדָוִיד; וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה אֶת-דָּוִיד, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר הָלָךְ.    13 And he put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became servants to David. And the LORD gave victory to David whithersoever he went.
18.14 יד  וַיִּמְלֹךְ דָּוִיד, עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְהִי, עֹשֶׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה--לְכָל-עַמּוֹ.    14 And David reigned over all Israel; and he executed justice and righteousness unto all his people.
18.15 טו  וְיוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, עַל-הַצָּבָא; וִיהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-אֲחִילוּד, מַזְכִּיר.    15 And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder.
18.16 טז  וְצָדוֹק בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב וַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֶבְיָתָר, כֹּהֲנִים; וְשַׁוְשָׁא, סוֹפֵר.    16 And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Shavsha was scribe;
18.17 יז  וּבְנָיָהוּ, בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע, עַל-הַכְּרֵתִי, וְהַפְּלֵתִי; וּבְנֵי-דָוִיד הָרִאשֹׁנִים, לְיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {פ}    17 and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David were chief about the king. {P}
19.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיָּמָת, נָחָשׁ מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן; וַיִּמְלֹךְ בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    1 And it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.
19.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד אֶעֱשֶׂה-חֶסֶד עִם-חָנוּן בֶּן-נָחָשׁ, כִּי-עָשָׂה אָבִיו עִמִּי חֶסֶד, וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִיד מַלְאָכִים, לְנַחֲמוֹ עַל-אָבִיו; וַיָּבֹאוּ עַבְדֵי דָוִיד אֶל-אֶרֶץ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן, אֶל-חָנוּן--לְנַחֲמוֹ.    2 And David said: 'l will show kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father showed kindness to me.' So David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.
19.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ שָׂרֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן לְחָנוּן, הַמְכַבֵּד דָּוִיד אֶת-אָבִיךָ בְּעֵינֶיךָ, כִּי-שָׁלַח לְךָ, מְנַחֲמִים; הֲלֹא בַּעֲבוּר לַחְקֹר וְלַהֲפֹךְ וּלְרַגֵּל, הָאָרֶץ, בָּאוּ עֲבָדָיו, אֵלֶיךָ.    3 But the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun: 'Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? are not his servants come unto thee to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land?'
19.4 ד  וַיִּקַּח חָנוּן אֶת-עַבְדֵי דָוִיד, וַיְגַלְּחֵם, וַיִּכְרֹת אֶת-מַדְוֵיהֶם בַּחֵצִי, עַד-הַמִּפְשָׂעָה; וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם.    4 So Hanun took David's servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their hips, and sent them away.
19.5 ה  וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיַּגִּידוּ לְדָוִיד עַל-הָאֲנָשִׁים וַיִּשְׁלַח לִקְרָאתָם, כִּי-הָיוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים נִכְלָמִים מְאֹד; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁבוּ בִירֵחוֹ, עַד אֲשֶׁר-יְצַמַּח זְקַנְכֶם וְשַׁבְתֶּם.  {ס}    5 Then there went certain persons, and told David how the men were served. And he sent to meet them; for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said: 'Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.' {S}
19.6 ו  וַיִּרְאוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, כִּי הִתְבָּאֲשׁוּ עִם-דָּוִיד; וַיִּשְׁלַח חָנוּן וּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן אֶלֶף כִּכַּר-כֶּסֶף, לִשְׂכֹּר לָהֶם מִן-אֲרַם נַהֲרַיִם וּמִן-אֲרַם מַעֲכָה וּמִצּוֹבָה, רֶכֶב, וּפָרָשִׁים.    6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Aram-naharaim, and out of Aram-maacah, and out of Zobah.
19.7 ז  וַיִּשְׂכְּרוּ לָהֶם שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף רֶכֶב, וְאֶת-מֶלֶךְ מַעֲכָה וְאֶת-עַמּוֹ, וַיָּבֹאוּ, וַיַּחֲנוּ לִפְנֵי מֵידְבָא;  {ס}  וּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן, נֶאֶסְפוּ מֵעָרֵיהֶם, וַיָּבֹאוּ, לַמִּלְחָמָה.  {ס}    7 So they hired them thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of Maacah and his people; who came and encamped before Medeba. {S} And the children of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and came to battle. {S}
19.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁמַע, דָּוִיד; וַיִּשְׁלַח, אֶת-יוֹאָב, וְאֵת כָּל-צָבָא, הַגִּבּוֹרִים.    8 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.
19.9 ט  וַיֵּצְאוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וַיַּעַרְכוּ מִלְחָמָה פֶּתַח הָעִיר; וְהַמְּלָכִים אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ, לְבַדָּם בַּשָּׂדֶה.    9 And the children of Ammon came out and put the battle in array at the gate of the city; and the kings that were come were by themselves in the field.
19.10 י  וַיַּרְא יוֹאָב, כִּי-הָיְתָה פְנֵי-הַמִּלְחָמָה אֵלָיו--פָּנִים וְאָחוֹר; וַיִּבְחַר, מִכָּל-בָּחוּר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעֲרֹךְ, לִקְרַאת אֲרָם.    10 Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Arameans.
19.11 יא  וְאֵת, יֶתֶר הָעָם, נָתַן, בְּיַד אַבְשַׁי אָחִיו; וַיַּעַרְכוּ, לִקְרַאת בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.    11 And the rest of the people he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother, and they put themselves in array against the children of Ammon.
19.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר, אִם-תֶּחֱזַק מִמֶּנִּי אֲרָם--וְהָיִיתָ לִּי, לִתְשׁוּעָה;  {ס}  וְאִם-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן יֶחֶזְקוּ מִמְּךָ, וְהוֹשַׁעְתִּיךָ.    12 And he said: 'If the Arameans be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me; {S} but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee.
19.13 יג  חֲזַק וְנִתְחַזְּקָה בְּעַד-עַמֵּנוּ, וּבְעַד עָרֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וַיהוָה, הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינָיו יַעֲשֶׂה.    13 Be of good courage, and let us prove strong for our people, and for the cities of our God; and the LORD do that which seemeth Him good.'
19.14 יד  וַיִּגַּשׁ יוֹאָב וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ, לִפְנֵי אֲרָם--לַמִּלְחָמָה; וַיָּנוּסוּ, מִפָּנָיו.    14 So Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh unto the battle to meet the Arameans; and they fled before him.
19.15 טו  וּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן רָאוּ, כִּי-נָס אֲרָם, וַיָּנוּסוּ גַם-הֵם מִפְּנֵי אַבְשַׁי אָחִיו, וַיָּבֹאוּ הָעִירָה; וַיָּבֹא יוֹאָב, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    15 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Arameans were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem. {S}
19.16 טז  וַיַּרְא אֲרָם, כִּי נִגְּפוּ לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ מַלְאָכִים, וַיּוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-אֲרָם אֲשֶׁר מֵעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר; וְשׁוֹפַךְ שַׂר-צְבָא הֲדַדְעֶזֶר, לִפְנֵיהֶם.    16 And when the Arameans saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers, and brought out the Arameans that were beyond the River, with Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer at their head.
19.17 יז  וַיֻּגַּד לְדָוִיד, וַיֶּאֱסֹף אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיַּעֲבֹר הַיַּרְדֵּן, וַיָּבֹא אֲלֵהֶם, וַיַּעֲרֹךְ אֲלֵהֶם; וַיַּעֲרֹךְ דָּוִיד לִקְרַאת אֲרָם, מִלְחָמָה, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ, עִמּוֹ.    17 And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Arameans, they fought with him.
19.18 יח  וַיָּנָס אֲרָם, מִלִּפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּהֲרֹג דָּוִיד מֵאֲרָם שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים רֶכֶב, וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף אִישׁ רַגְלִי; וְאֵת שׁוֹפַךְ שַׂר-הַצָּבָא, הֵמִית.    18 And the Arameans fled before Israel; and David slew of the Arameans the men of seven thousand chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the host.
19.19 יט  וַיִּרְאוּ עַבְדֵי הֲדַדְעֶזֶר, כִּי נִגְּפוּ לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּשְׁלִימוּ עִם-דָּוִיד, וַיַּעַבְדֻהוּ; וְלֹא-אָבָה אֲרָם, לְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן עוֹד.  {ס}    19 And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and served him; neither would the Arameans help the children of Ammon any more. {S}
20.1 א  וַיְהִי לְעֵת תְּשׁוּבַת הַשָּׁנָה לְעֵת צֵאת הַמְּלָכִים, וַיִּנְהַג יוֹאָב אֶת-חֵיל הַצָּבָא וַיַּשְׁחֵת אֶת-אֶרֶץ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן וַיָּבֹא וַיָּצַר אֶת-רַבָּה, וְדָוִיד, יֹשֵׁב בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּךְ יוֹאָב אֶת-רַבָּה, וַיֶּהֶרְסֶהָ.    1 And it came to pass, at the time of the return of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that Joab led forth the power of the army, and wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and overthrew it.
20.2 ב  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִיד אֶת-עֲטֶרֶת-מַלְכָּם מֵעַל רֹאשׁוֹ וַיִּמְצָאָהּ מִשְׁקַל כִּכַּר-זָהָב, וּבָהּ אֶבֶן יְקָרָה, וַתְּהִי, עַל-רֹאשׁ דָּוִיד; וּשְׁלַל הָעִיר הוֹצִיא, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.    2 And David took the crown of Malcam from off his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it; and it was set upon David's head; and he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceeding much.
20.3 ג  וְאֶת-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ הוֹצִיא, וַיָּשַׂר בַּמְּגֵרָה וּבַחֲרִיצֵי הַבַּרְזֶל וּבַמְּגֵרוֹת, וְכֵן יַעֲשֶׂה דָוִיד, לְכֹל עָרֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן; וַיָּשָׁב דָּוִיד וְכָל-הָעָם, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    3 And he brought forth the people that were therein, and cut them with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. And thus did David unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem. {S}
20.4 ד  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַתַּעֲמֹד מִלְחָמָה בְּגֶזֶר, עִם-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; אָז הִכָּה סִבְּכַי הַחֻשָׁתִי, אֶת-סִפַּי מִילִידֵי הָרְפָאִים--וַיִּכָּנֵעוּ.    4 And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines; then Sibbecai the Hushathite slew Sippai, of the sons of the giants; and they were subdued.
20.5 ה  וַתְּהִי-עוֹד מִלְחָמָה, אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּךְ אֶלְחָנָן בֶּן-יעור (יָעִיר), אֶת-לַחְמִי אֲחִי גָּלְיָת הַגִּתִּי--וְעֵץ חֲנִיתוֹ, כִּמְנוֹר אֹרְגִים.  {ס}    5 And there was again war with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam. {S}
20.6 ו  וַתְּהִי-עוֹד מִלְחָמָה, בְּגַת; וַיְהִי אִישׁ מִדָּה, וְאֶצְבְּעֹתָיו שֵׁשׁ-וָשֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבַּע, וְגַם-הוּא, נוֹלַד לְהָרָפָא.    6 And there was again war at Gath, where was a man of great stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six [on each hand], and six [on each foot]; and he also was born unto the giant.
20.7 ז  וַיְחָרֵף, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּכֵּהוּ, יְהוֹנָתָן, בֶּן-שִׁמְעָא, אֲחִי דָוִיד.    7 And when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother slew him.
20.8 ח  אֵל נוּלְּדוּ לְהָרָפָא, בְּגַת; וַיִּפְּלוּ בְיַד-דָּוִיד, וּבְיַד-עֲבָדָיו.  {פ}    8 These were born unto the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants. {P}
21.1 א  וַיַּעֲמֹד שָׂטָן, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּסֶת, אֶת-דָּוִיד, לִמְנוֹת, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 And Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to number Israel.
21.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד אֶל-יוֹאָב, וְאֶל-שָׂרֵי הָעָם, לְכוּ סִפְרוּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִבְּאֵר שֶׁבַע וְעַד-דָּן; וְהָבִיאוּ אֵלַי, וְאֵדְעָה אֶת-מִסְפָּרָם.    2 And David said to Joab and to the princes of the people: 'Go, number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring me word, that I may know the sum of them.'
21.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב, יוֹסֵף יְהוָה עַל-עַמּוֹ כָּהֵם מֵאָה פְעָמִים--הֲלֹא אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, כֻּלָּם לַאדֹנִי לַעֲבָדִים; לָמָּה יְבַקֵּשׁ זֹאת אֲדֹנִי, לָמָּה יִהְיֶה לְאַשְׁמָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.    3 And Joab said: 'The LORD make His people a hundred times so many more as they are; but, my lord the king, are they not all my lord's servants? why doth my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of guilt unto Israel?'
21.4 ד  וּדְבַר-הַמֶּלֶךְ, חָזַק עַל-יוֹאָב; וַיֵּצֵא יוֹאָב, וַיִּתְהַלֵּךְ בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּבֹא, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    4 Nevertheless the king's word prevailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab departed and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.
21.5 ה  וַיִּתֵּן יוֹאָב אֶת-מִסְפַּר מִפְקַד-הָעָם, אֶל-דָּוִיד; וַיְהִי כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶלֶף אֲלָפִים וּמֵאָה אֶלֶף אִישׁ, שֹׁלֵף חֶרֶב, וִיהוּדָה, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת וְשִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף אִישׁ שֹׁלֵף חָרֶב.    5 And Joab gave up the sum of the numbering of the people unto David. And all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and a hundred thousand men that drew sword; and Judah was four hundred three-score and ten thousand men that drew sword.
21.6 ו  וְלֵוִי, וּבִנְיָמִן, לֹא פָקַד, בְּתוֹכָם:  כִּי-נִתְעַב דְּבַר-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-יוֹאָב.    6 But Levi and Benjamin he did not number among them; for the king's word was abominable to Joab.
21.7 ז  וַיֵּרַע בְּעֵינֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, עַל-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיַּךְ, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    7 And God was displeased with this thing; therefore He smote Israel. {S}
21.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, חָטָאתִי מְאֹד, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וְעַתָּה, הַעֲבֶר-נָא אֶת-עֲווֹן עַבְדְּךָ, כִּי נִסְכַּלְתִּי, מְאֹד.  {פ}    8 And David said unto God: 'I have sinned greatly, in that I have done this thing; but now, put away, I beseech Thee, the iniquity of Thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.' {P}
21.9 ט  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-גָּד, חֹזֵה דָוִיד לֵאמֹר.    9 And the LORD spoke unto Gad, David's seer, saying:
21.10 י  לֵךְ וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֶל-דָּוִיד לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, שָׁלוֹשׁ, אֲנִי נֹטֶה עָלֶיךָ:  בְּחַר-לְךָ אַחַת מֵהֵנָּה, וְאֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ.    10 'Go and speak unto David, saying: Thus saith the LORD: I offer thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.'
21.11 יא  וַיָּבֹא גָד, אֶל-דָּוִיד; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, קַבֶּל-לָךְ.    11 So Gad came to David, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD: Take which thou wilt:
21.12 יב  אִם-שָׁלוֹשׁ שָׁנִים רָעָב, וְאִם-שְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים נִסְפֶּה מִפְּנֵי-צָרֶיךָ וְחֶרֶב אוֹיְבֶיךָ לְמַשֶּׂגֶת, וְאִם-שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים חֶרֶב יְהוָה וְדֶבֶר בָּאָרֶץ, וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה מַשְׁחִית בְּכָל-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל:  וְעַתָּה רְאֵה, מָה-אָשִׁיב אֶת-שֹׁלְחִי דָּבָר.  {ס}    12 either three years of famine; or three months to be swept away before thy foes, while the sword of thine enemies overtaketh thee; or else three days the sword of the LORD, even pestilence in the land, and the angel of the LORD destroying throughout all the borders of Israel. Now therefore consider what answer I shall return to Him that sent me.' {S}
21.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד אֶל-גָּד, צַר-לִי מְאֹד; אֶפְּלָה-נָּא בְיַד-יְהוָה, כִּי-רַבִּים רַחֲמָיו מְאֹד, וּבְיַד-אָדָם, אַל-אֶפֹּל.    13 And David said unto Gad: 'I am in a great strait; let me fall now into the hand of the LORD, for very great are His mercies; and let me not fall into the hand of man.'
21.14 יד  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה דֶּבֶר, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּפֹּל, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, אִישׁ.    14 So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel; and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.
21.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁלַח הָאֱלֹהִים מַלְאָךְ לִירוּשָׁלִַם, לְהַשְׁחִיתָהּ, וּכְהַשְׁחִית רָאָה יְהוָה וַיִּנָּחֶם עַל-הָרָעָה, וַיֹּאמֶר לַמַּלְאָךְ הַמַּשְׁחִית רַב עַתָּה הֶרֶף יָדֶךָ; וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה עֹמֵד, עִם-גֹּרֶן אָרְנָן הַיְבוּסִי.  {ס}    15 And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it; and as he was about to destroy, the LORD beheld, and He repented Him of the evil, and said to the destroying angel: 'It is enough; now stay thy hand.' And the angel of the LORD was standing by the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite. {S}
21.16 טז  וַיִּשָּׂא דָוִיד אֶת-עֵינָיו, וַיַּרְא אֶת-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה עֹמֵד בֵּין הָאָרֶץ וּבֵין הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְחַרְבּוֹ שְׁלוּפָה בְּיָדוֹ, נְטוּיָה עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַיִּפֹּל דָּוִיד וְהַזְּקֵנִים מְכֻסִּים בַּשַּׂקִּים, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם.    16 And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the LORD standing between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.
21.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים הֲלֹא אֲנִי אָמַרְתִּי לִמְנוֹת בָּעָם, וַאֲנִי-הוּא אֲשֶׁר-חָטָאתִי וְהָרֵעַ הֲרֵעוֹתִי, וְאֵלֶּה הַצֹּאן, מֶה עָשׂוּ; יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי, תְּהִי נָא יָדְךָ בִּי וּבְבֵית אָבִי, וּבְעַמְּךָ, לֹא לְמַגֵּפָה.  {ס}    17 And David said unto God: 'Is it not I that commanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done very wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? let Thy hand, I pray Thee, O LORD my God, be against me, and against my father's house; but not against Thy people, that they should be plagued.' {S}
21.18 יח  וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה אָמַר אֶל-גָּד, לֵאמֹר לְדָוִיד:  כִּי יַעֲלֶה דָוִיד, לְהָקִים מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה, בְּגֹרֶן, אָרְנָן הַיְבֻסִי.    18 Then the angel of the LORD commanded Gad to say to David, that David should go up, and rear an altar unto the LORD in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
21.19 יט  וַיַּעַל דָּוִיד בִּדְבַר-גָּד, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה.    19 And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spoke in the name of the LORD.
21.20 כ  וַיָּשָׁב אָרְנָן, וַיַּרְא אֶת-הַמַּלְאָךְ, וְאַרְבַּעַת בָּנָיו עִמּוֹ, מִתְחַבְּאִים; וְאָרְנָן, דָּשׁ חִטִּים.    20 And Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons that were with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.
21.21 כא  וַיָּבֹא דָוִיד, עַד-אָרְנָן; וַיַּבֵּט אָרְנָן, וַיַּרְא אֶת-דָּוִיד, וַיֵּצֵא מִן-הַגֹּרֶן, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לְדָוִיד אַפַּיִם אָרְצָה.    21 And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went out of the threshing-floor, and bowed down to David with his face to the ground.
21.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד אֶל-אָרְנָן, תְּנָה-לִּי מְקוֹם הַגֹּרֶן, וְאֶבְנֶה-בּוֹ מִזְבֵּחַ, לַיהוָה; בְּכֶסֶף מָלֵא תְּנֵהוּ לִי, וְתֵעָצַר הַמַּגֵּפָה מֵעַל הָעָם.    22 Then David said to Ornan: 'Give me the place of this threshing-floor, that I may build thereon an altar unto the LORD; for the full price shalt thou give it me; that the plague may be stayed from the people.'
21.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר אָרְנָן אֶל-דָּוִיד קַח-לָךְ, וְיַעַשׂ אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינָיו; רְאֵה נָתַתִּי הַבָּקָר לָעֹלוֹת, וְהַמּוֹרִגִּים לָעֵצִים וְהַחִטִּים לַמִּנְחָה--הַכֹּל נָתָתִּי.    23 And Ornan said unto David: 'Take it to thee, and let my lord the king do that which is good in his eyes; lo, I give thee the oxen for burnt-offerings, and the threshing-instruments for wood, and the wheat for the meal-offering; I give it all'
21.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד, לְאָרְנָן, לֹא, כִּי-קָנֹה אֶקְנֶה בְּכֶסֶף מָלֵא:  כִּי לֹא-אֶשָּׂא אֲשֶׁר-לְךָ, לַיהוָה, וְהַעֲלוֹת עוֹלָה, חִנָּם.    24 And king David said to Ornan: 'Nay, but I will verily buy it for the full price; for I will not take that which is thine for the LORD, nor offer a burnt-offering without cost.'
21.25 כה  וַיִּתֵּן דָּוִיד לְאָרְנָן, בַּמָּקוֹם, שִׁקְלֵי זָהָב, מִשְׁקָל שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.    25 So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight.
21.26 כו  וַיִּבֶן שָׁם דָּוִיד מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה, וַיַּעַל עֹלוֹת וּשְׁלָמִים; וַיִּקְרָא, אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיַּעֲנֵהוּ בָאֵשׁ מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, עַל מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה.  {ס}    26 And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and called upon the LORD; and He answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt-offering. {S}
21.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה לַמַּלְאָךְ, וַיָּשֶׁב חַרְבּוֹ אֶל-נְדָנָהּ.    27 And the LORD commanded the angel; and he put up his sword back into the sheath thereof.
21.28 כח  בָּעֵת הַהִיא--בִּרְאוֹת דָּוִיד כִּי-עָנָהוּ יְהוָה, בְּגֹרֶן אָרְנָן הַיְבוּסִי; וַיִּזְבַּח, שָׁם.    28 At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.
21.29 כט  וּמִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה מֹשֶׁה בַמִּדְבָּר, וּמִזְבַּח הָעוֹלָה--בָּעֵת הַהִיא:  בַּבָּמָה, בְּגִבְעוֹן.    29 For the tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt-offering, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon.
21.30 ל  וְלֹא-יָכֹל דָּוִיד לָלֶכֶת לְפָנָיו, לִדְרֹשׁ אֱלֹהִים:  כִּי נִבְעַת--מִפְּנֵי, חֶרֶב מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה.  {ס}    30 But David could not go before it to inquire of God; for he was terrified because of the sword of the angel of the LORD. {S}
22.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד--זֶה הוּא, בֵּית יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים; וְזֶה-מִּזְבֵּחַ לְעֹלָה, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    1 Then David said: 'This is the house of the LORD God, and this is the altar of burnt-offering for Israel.' {P}
22.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד--לִכְנוֹס אֶת-הַגֵּרִים, אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּעֲמֵד חֹצְבִים, לַחְצוֹב אַבְנֵי גָזִית, לִבְנוֹת, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.    2 And David commanded to gather together the strangers that were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God.
22.3 ג  וּבַרְזֶל לָרֹב לַמִּסְמְרִים לְדַלְתוֹת הַשְּׁעָרִים, וְלַמְחַבְּרוֹת--הֵכִין דָּוִיד; וּנְחֹשֶׁת לָרֹב, אֵין מִשְׁקָל.    3 And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the couplings; and brass in abundance without weight;
22.4 ד  וַעֲצֵי אֲרָזִים, לְאֵין מִסְפָּר:  כִּי-הֵבִיאוּ הַצִּידֹנִים וְהַצֹּרִים עֲצֵי אֲרָזִים, לָרֹב--לְדָוִיד.  {פ}    4 and cedar-trees without number; for the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought cedar-trees in abundance to David. {P}
22.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, שְׁלֹמֹה בְנִי נַעַר וָרָךְ, וְהַבַּיִת לִבְנוֹת לַיהוָה לְהַגְדִּיל לְמַעְלָה לְשֵׁם וּלְתִפְאֶרֶת לְכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת, אָכִינָה נָּא לוֹ; וַיָּכֶן דָּוִיד לָרֹב, לִפְנֵי מוֹתוֹ.    5 And David said: 'Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be builded for the LORD must be exceeding magnificent, of fame and of glory throughout all countries; I will therefore make preparation for him.' So David prepared abundantly before his death.
22.6 ו  וַיִּקְרָא, לִשְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ; וַיְצַוֵּהוּ לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    6 Then He called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel. {S}
22.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, לִשְׁלֹמֹה:  בנו (בְּנִי)--אֲנִי הָיָה עִם-לְבָבִי, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי.    7 And David said to Solomon: 'My son, as for me, it was in my heart to build a house unto the name of the LORD my God.
22.8 ח  וַיְהִי עָלַי דְּבַר-יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר, דָּם לָרֹב שָׁפַכְתָּ, וּמִלְחָמוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת עָשִׂיתָ:  לֹא-תִבְנֶה בַיִת, לִשְׁמִי--כִּי דָּמִים רַבִּים, שָׁפַכְתָּ אַרְצָה לְפָנָי.    8 But the word of the LORD came to me, saying: Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars; thou shalt not build a house unto My name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in My sight.
22.9 ט  הִנֵּה-בֵן נוֹלָד לָךְ, הוּא יִהְיֶה אִישׁ מְנוּחָה, וַהֲנִיחוֹתִי לוֹ מִכָּל-אוֹיְבָיו, מִסָּבִיב:  כִּי שְׁלֹמֹה יִהְיֶה שְׁמוֹ, וְשָׁלוֹם וָשֶׁקֶט אֶתֵּן עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּיָמָיו.    9 Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel in his days.
22.10 י  הוּא-יִבְנֶה בַיִת, לִשְׁמִי, וְהוּא יִהְיֶה-לִּי לְבֵן, וַאֲנִי-לוֹ לְאָב; וַהֲכִינוֹתִי כִּסֵּא מַלְכוּתוֹ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--עַד-עוֹלָם.    10 He shall build a house for My name; and he shall be to Me for a son, and I will be to him for a father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever.
22.11 יא  עַתָּה בְנִי, יְהִי יְהוָה עִמָּךְ; וְהִצְלַחְתָּ, וּבָנִיתָ בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר עָלֶיךָ.    11 Now, my son, the LORD be with thee; and prosper thou, and build the house of the LORD thy God, as He hath spoken concerning thee.
22.12 יב  אַךְ יִתֶּן-לְךָ יְהוָה שֵׂכֶל וּבִינָה, וִיצַוְּךָ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלִשְׁמוֹר, אֶת-תּוֹרַת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ.    12 Only the LORD give thee discretion and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel; that so thou mayest keep the law of the LORD thy God.
22.13 יג  אָז תַּצְלִיחַ--אִם-תִּשְׁמוֹר לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-הַחֻקִּים וְאֶת-הַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; חֲזַק וֶאֱמָץ, אַל-תִּירָא וְאַל-תֵּחָת.    13 Then shalt thou prosper, if thou observe to do the statutes and the ordinances which the LORD charged Moses with concerning Israel; be strong, and of good courage; fear not, neither be dismayed.
22.14 יד  וְהִנֵּה בְעָנְיִי הֲכִינוֹתִי לְבֵית-יְהוָה, זָהָב כִּכָּרִים מֵאָה-אֶלֶף וְכֶסֶף אֶלֶף אֲלָפִים כִּכָּרִים, וְלַנְּחֹשֶׁת וְלַבַּרְזֶל אֵין מִשְׁקָל, כִּי לָרֹב הָיָה; וְעֵצִים וַאֲבָנִים הֲכִינוֹתִי, וַעֲלֵיהֶם תּוֹסִיף.    14 Now, behold, in my straits I have prepared for the house of the LORD a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight, for it is in abundance; timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest add thereto.
22.15 טו  וְעִמְּךָ לָרֹב, עֹשֵׂי מְלָאכָה--חֹצְבִים, וְחָרָשֵׁי אֶבֶן וָעֵץ; וְכָל-חָכָם, בְּכָל-מְלָאכָה.    15 Moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber, and all men that are skilful in any manner of work;
22.16 טז  לַזָּהָב לַכֶּסֶף וְלַנְּחֹשֶׁת וְלַבַּרְזֶל, אֵין מִסְפָּר; קוּם וַעֲשֵׂה, וִיהִי יְהוָה עִמָּךְ.    16 of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is no number. Arise and be doing, and the LORD be with thee.'
22.17 יז  וַיְצַו דָּוִיד לְכָל-שָׂרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעְזֹר לִשְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ.  {ס}    17 David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son: {S}
22.18 יח  הֲלֹא יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם עִמָּכֶם, וְהֵנִיחַ לָכֶם מִסָּבִיב:  כִּי נָתַן בְּיָדִי, אֵת יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, וְנִכְבְּשָׁה הָאָרֶץ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְלִפְנֵי עַמּוֹ.    18 'Is not the LORD your God with you? and hath He not given you rest on every side? for He hath delivered the inhabitants of the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before the LORD, and before His people.
22.19 יט  עַתָּה, תְּנוּ לְבַבְכֶם וְנַפְשְׁכֶם, לִדְרוֹשׁ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם; וְקוּמוּ, וּבְנוּ אֶת-מִקְדַּשׁ יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים, לְהָבִיא אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה וּכְלֵי קֹדֶשׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, לַבַּיִת הַנִּבְנֶה לְשֵׁם-יְהוָה.  {פ}    19 Now set your heart and your soul to seek after the LORD your God; arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the LORD God, to bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of the LORD.' {P}
23.1 א  וְדָוִיד זָקֵן, וְשָׂבַע יָמִים; וַיַּמְלֵךְ אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 Now David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel.
23.2 ב  וַיֶּאֱסֹף אֶת-כָּל-שָׂרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם.    2 And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.
23.3 ג  וַיִּסָּפְרוּ, הַלְוִיִּם, מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה, וָמָעְלָה; וַיְהִי מִסְפָּרָם לְגֻלְגְּלֹתָם לִגְבָרִים, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁמוֹנָה אָלֶף.    3 And the Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward; and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and eight thousand.
23.4 ד  מֵאֵלֶּה, לְנַצֵּחַ עַל-מְלֶאכֶת בֵּית-יְהוָה, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף; וְשֹׁטְרִים וְשֹׁפְטִים, שֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים.    4 Of these, twenty and four thousand were to oversee the work of the house of the LORD; and six thousand were officers and judges;
23.5 ה  וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, שֹׁעֲרִים; וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, מְהַלְלִים לַיהוָה, בַּכֵּלִים, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי לְהַלֵּל.  {ס}    5 and four thousand were doorkeepers; and four thousand praised the LORD 'with the instruments which I made to praise therewith.' {S}
23.6 ו  וַיֶּחָלְקֵם דָּוִיד, מַחְלְקוֹת;  {ס}  לִבְנֵי לֵוִי, לְגֵרְשׁוֹן קְהָת וּמְרָרִי.  {ס}    6 And David divided them into courses {S} according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. {S}
23.7 ז  לַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי, לַעְדָּן וְשִׁמְעִי.  {ס}    7 Of the Gershonites: Ladan, and Shimei. {S}
23.8 ח  בְּנֵי לַעְדָּן, הָרֹאשׁ יְחִיאֵל וְזֵתָם וְיוֹאֵל--שְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    8 The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, and Zetham, and Joel, three. {S}
23.9 ט  בְּנֵי שִׁמְעִי, שלמות (שְׁלֹמִית) וַחֲזִיאֵל וְהָרָן--שְׁלֹשָׁה; אֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לְלַעְדָּן.  {ס}    9 The sons of Shimei: Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the heads of the fathers' houses of Ladan. {S}
23.10 י  וּבְנֵי שִׁמְעִי--יַחַת זִינָא, וִיעוּשׁ וּבְרִיעָה; אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-שִׁמְעִי, אַרְבָּעָה.    10 And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.
23.11 יא  וַיְהִי-יַחַת הָרֹאשׁ, וְזִיזָה הַשֵּׁנִי; וִיעוּשׁ וּבְרִיעָה, לֹא-הִרְבּוּ בָנִים, וַיִּהְיוּ לְבֵית אָב, לִפְקֻדָּה אֶחָת.  {ס}    11 And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second; but Jeush and Beriah had not many sons; therefore they became a fathers' house in one reckoning. {S}
23.12 יב  בְּנֵי קְהָת, עַמְרָם יִצְהָר חֶבְרוֹן וְעֻזִּיאֵל--אַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    12 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four. {S}
23.13 יג  בְּנֵי עַמְרָם, אַהֲרֹן וּמֹשֶׁה; וַיִּבָּדֵל אַהֲרֹן לְהַקְדִּישׁוֹ קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים הוּא-וּבָנָיו, עַד-עוֹלָם--לְהַקְטִיר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה לְשָׁרְתוֹ וּלְבָרֵךְ בִּשְׁמוֹ, עַד-עוֹלָם.    13 The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; and Aaron was separated, that he should be sanctified as most holy, he and his sons for ever, to offer before the LORD, to minister unto Him, and to bless in His name for ever.
23.14 יד  וּמֹשֶׁה, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים--בָּנָיו, יִקָּרְאוּ עַל-שֵׁבֶט הַלֵּוִי.  {ס}    14 But as for Moses the man of God, his sons are named among the tribe of Levi. {S}
23.15 טו  בְּנֵי מֹשֶׁה, גֵּרְשׁוֹם וֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר.    15 The sons of Moses: Gershom, and Eliezer.
23.16 טז  בְּנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹם, שְׁבוּאֵל הָרֹאשׁ.    16 The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the chief.
23.17 יז  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-אֱלִיעֶזֶר, רְחַבְיָה הָרֹאשׁ; וְלֹא-הָיָה לֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר בָּנִים אֲחֵרִים, וּבְנֵי רְחַבְיָה רָבוּ לְמָעְלָה.  {ס}    17 And the sons of Eliezer were: Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had no other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many. {S}
23.18 יח  בְּנֵי יִצְהָר, שְׁלֹמִית הָרֹאשׁ.    18 The sons of Izhar: Shelomith the chief.
23.19 יט  בְּנֵי, חֶבְרוֹן--יְרִיָּהוּ הָרֹאשׁ, אֲמַרְיָה הַשֵּׁנִי, יַחֲזִיאֵל הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, וִיקַמְעָם הָרְבִיעִי.    19 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
23.20 כ  בְּנֵי, עֻזִּיאֵל--מִיכָה הָרֹאשׁ, וְיִשִּׁיָּה הַשֵּׁנִי.    20 The sons of Uzziel: Micah the chief, and Isshiah the second.
23.21 כא  בְּנֵי מְרָרִי מַחְלִי וּמוּשִׁי, בְּנֵי מַחְלִי אֶלְעָזָר וְקִישׁ.    21 The sons of Merari: Mahli, and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar, and Kish.
23.22 כב  וַיָּמָת, אֶלְעָזָר, וְלֹא-הָיוּ לוֹ בָּנִים, כִּי אִם-בָּנוֹת; וַיִּשָּׂאוּם בְּנֵי-קִישׁ, אֲחֵיהֶם.    22 And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters only; and their brethren the sons of Kish took them to wife.
23.23 כג  בְּנֵי מוּשִׁי, מַחְלִי וְעֵדֶר וִירֵמוֹת--שְׁלוֹשָׁה.  {ס}    23 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three. {S}
23.24 כד  אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-לֵוִי לְבֵית אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לִפְקוּדֵיהֶם, בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת לְגֻלְגְּלֹתָם, עֹשֵׂה הַמְּלָאכָה, לַעֲבֹדַת בֵּית יְהוָה--מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וָמָעְלָה.    24 These were the sons of Levi after their fathers' houses, even the heads of the fathers' houses, according to their muster, in the number of names by their polls, who did the work for the service of the house of the LORD, from twenty years old and upward.
23.25 כה  כִּי אָמַר דָּוִיד, הֵנִיחַ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְעַמּוֹ; וַיִּשְׁכֹּן בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, עַד-לְעוֹלָם.    25 For David said: 'The LORD, the God of Israel, hath given rest unto His people, and He dwelleth in Jerusalem for ever;
23.26 כו  וְגַם, לַלְוִיִּם--אֵין-לָשֵׂאת אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, לַעֲבֹדָתוֹ.    26 and also the Levites shall no more have need to carry the tabernacle and all the vessels of it for the service thereof.'
23.27 כז  כִּי בְדִבְרֵי דָוִיד הָאַחֲרוֹנִים, הֵמָּה מִסְפַּר בְּנֵי-לֵוִי, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וּלְמָעְלָה.    27 For by the last ordinances of David the sons of Levi were numbered from twenty years old and upward.
23.28 כח  כִּי מַעֲמָדָם לְיַד-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, לַעֲבֹדַת בֵּית יְהוָה, עַל-הַחֲצֵרוֹת וְעַל-הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, וְעַל-טָהֳרַת לְכָל-קֹדֶשׁ--וּמַעֲשֵׂה, עֲבֹדַת בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.    28 For their station was at the side of the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of the LORD, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things, even the work of the service of the house of God;
23.29 כט  וּלְלֶחֶם הַמַּעֲרֶכֶת וּלְסֹלֶת לְמִנְחָה, וְלִרְקִיקֵי הַמַּצּוֹת, וְלַמַּחֲבַת, וְלַמֻּרְבָּכֶת; וּלְכָל-מְשׂוּרָה, וּמִדָּה.    29 for the showbread also, and for the fine flour for a meal-offering, whether of unleavened wafers, or of that which is baked on the griddle, or of that which is soaked, and for all manner of measure and size;
23.30 ל  וְלַעֲמֹד בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר, לְהֹדוֹת וּלְהַלֵּל לַיהוָה; וְכֵן, לָעָרֶב.    30 and to stand every morning to thank and praise the LORD, and likewise at even;
23.31 לא  וּלְכֹל הַעֲלוֹת עֹלוֹת, לַיהוָה, לַשַּׁבָּתוֹת, לֶחֳדָשִׁים וְלַמֹּעֲדִים--בְּמִסְפָּר כְּמִשְׁפָּט עֲלֵיהֶם תָּמִיד, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    31 and to offer all burnt-offerings unto the LORD, on the sabbaths, on the new moons, and in the appointed seasons, in number according to the ordinance concerning them, continually, before the LORD;
23.32 לב  וְשָׁמְרוּ אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד, וְאֵת מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וּמִשְׁמֶרֶת, בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֲחֵיהֶם--לַעֲבֹדַת, בֵּית יְהוָה.  {פ}    32 and that they should keep the charge of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brethren, for the service of the house of the LORD. {P}
24.1 א  וְלִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן, מַחְלְקוֹתָם:  בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן--נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא, אֶלְעָזָר וְאִיתָמָר.    1 And the courses of the sons of Aaron were these. The sons of Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
24.2 ב  וַיָּמָת נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא לִפְנֵי אֲבִיהֶם, וּבָנִים לֹא-הָיוּ לָהֶם; וַיְכַהֲנוּ, אֶלְעָזָר וְאִיתָמָר.    2 But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children; therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest's office.
24.3 ג  וַיֶּחָלְקֵם דָּוִיד--וְצָדוֹק מִן-בְּנֵי אֶלְעָזָר, וַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ מִן-בְּנֵי אִיתָמָר:  לִפְקֻדָּתָם, בַּעֲבֹדָתָם.    3 And David with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided them according to their ordering in their service.
24.4 ד  וַיִּמָּצְאוּ בְנֵי-אֶלְעָזָר רַבִּים לְרָאשֵׁי הַגְּבָרִים, מִן-בְּנֵי אִיתָמָר--וַיַּחְלְקוּם:  לִבְנֵי אֶלְעָזָר רָאשִׁים לְבֵית-אָבוֹת, שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר, וְלִבְנֵי אִיתָמָר לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם, שְׁמוֹנָה.    4 And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar; and thus were they divided: of the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen, heads of fathers' houses; and of the sons of Ithamar, according to their fathers' houses, eight.
24.5 ה  וַיַּחְלְקוּם בְּגוֹרָלוֹת, אֵלֶּה עִם-אֵלֶּה:  כִּי-הָיוּ שָׂרֵי-קֹדֶשׁ וְשָׂרֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, מִבְּנֵי אֶלְעָזָר וּבִבְנֵי אִיתָמָר.  {ס}    5 Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for they were princes of the sanctuary and princes of God, both of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar. {S}
24.6 ו  וַיִּכְתְּבֵם שְׁמַעְיָה בֶן-נְתַנְאֵל הַסּוֹפֵר מִן-הַלֵּוִי, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ וְהַשָּׂרִים וְצָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֶבְיָתָר, וְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם--בֵּית-אָב אֶחָד, אָחֻז לְאֶלְעָזָר, וְאָחֻז אָחֻז, לְאִיתָמָר.  {פ}    6 And Shemaiah the son of Nethanel the scribe, who was of the Levites, wrote them in the presence of the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and the heads of the fathers' houses of the priests and of the Levites: one father's house being taken for Eleazar, and proportionately for Ithamar. {P}
24.7 ז  וַיֵּצֵא הַגּוֹרָל הָרִאשׁוֹן, לִיהוֹיָרִיב,  {ס}  לִידַעְיָה, הַשֵּׁנִי.  {ס}    7 Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah;
24.8 ח  לְחָרִם,  {ר}  הַשְּׁלִישִׁי,  {ס}  לִשְׂעֹרִים, הָרְבִעִי.  {ס}    8 the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim;
24.9 ט  לְמַלְכִּיָּה,  {ר}  הַחֲמִישִׁי,  {ס}  לְמִיָּמִן, הַשִּׁשִּׁי.  {ס}    9 the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin;
24.10 י  לְהַקּוֹץ,  {ר}  הַשְּׁבִעִי,  {ס}  לַאֲבִיָּה, הַשְּׁמִינִי.  {ס}    10 the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah;
24.11 יא  לְיֵשׁוּעַ,  {ר}  הַתְּשִׁעִי,  {ס}  לִשְׁכַנְיָהוּ, הָעֲשִׂרִי.  {ס}    11 the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah;
24.12 יב  לְאֶלְיָשִׁיב,  {ר}  עַשְׁתֵּי עָשָׂר,  {ס}  לְיָקִים, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    12 the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim;
24.13 יג  לְחֻפָּה,  {ר}  שְׁלֹשָׁה עָשָׂר,  {ס}  לְיֶשֶׁבְאָב, אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר.  {ס}    13 the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab;
24.14 יד  לְבִלְגָּה,  {ר}  חֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר,  {ס}  לְאִמֵּר, שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר.  {ס}    14 the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer;
24.15 טו  לְחֵזִיר, שִׁבְעָה  {ר}  עָשָׂר,  {ס}  לְהַפִּצֵּץ, שְׁמוֹנָה עָשָׂר.  {ס}    15 the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez;
24.16 טז  לִפְתַחְיָה, תִּשְׁעָה  {ר}  עָשָׂר,  {ס}  לִיחֶזְקֵאל, הָעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    16 the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel;
24.17 יז  לְיָכִין, אֶחָד  {ר}  וְעֶשְׂרִים,  {ס}  לְגָמוּל, שְׁנַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    17 the one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul;
24.18 יח  לִדְלָיָהוּ, שְׁלֹשָׁה  {ר}  וְעֶשְׂרִים,  {ס}  לְמַעַזְיָהוּ, אַרְבָּעָה וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {פ}    18 the three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four and twentieth to Maaziah. {P}
24.19 יט  אֵלֶּה פְקֻדָּתָם לַעֲבֹדָתָם, לָבוֹא לְבֵית-יְהוָה כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם, בְּיַד, אַהֲרֹן אֲבִיהֶם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּהוּ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    19 These were the orderings of them in their service, to come into the house of the LORD according to the ordinance given unto them by the hand of Aaron their father, as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded him. {P}
24.20 כ  וְלִבְנֵי לֵוִי, הַנּוֹתָרִים:  לִבְנֵי עַמְרָם שׁוּבָאֵל, לִבְנֵי שׁוּבָאֵל יֶחְדְּיָהוּ.  {ס}    20 And of the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.
24.21 כא  לִרְחַבְיָהוּ--לִבְנֵי רְחַבְיָהוּ, הָרֹאשׁ יִשִּׁיָּה.  {ס}    21 Of Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief.
24.22 כב  לַיִּצְהָרִי שְׁלֹמוֹת, לִבְנֵי שְׁלֹמוֹת יָחַת.  {ס}    22 Of the Izharites, Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.
24.23 כג  וּבְנָי, יְרִיָּהוּ; אֲמַרְיָהוּ, הַשֵּׁנִי, יַחֲזִיאֵל הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, יְקַמְעָם הָרְבִיעִי.  {ס}    23 And Benai, Jeriah, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.
24.24 כד  בְּנֵי עֻזִּיאֵל מִיכָה, לִבְנֵי מִיכָה שמור (שָׁמִיר).    24 The sons of Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir.
24.25 כה  אֲחִי מִיכָה יִשִּׁיָּה,  {ס}  לִבְנֵי יִשִּׁיָּה זְכַרְיָהוּ.  {ס}    25 The brother of Micah, Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah.
24.26 כו  בְּנֵי מְרָרִי מַחְלִי וּמוּשִׁי,  {ס}  בְּנֵי יַעֲזִיָּהוּ בְנוֹ.  {ס}    26 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah, his son,
24.27 כז  בְּנֵי, מְרָרִי--לְיַעֲזִיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, וְשֹׁהַם וְזַכּוּר וְעִבְרִי.  {ס}    27 even the sons of Merari through Jaaziah his son: Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.
24.28 כח  לְמַחְלִי, אֶלְעָזָר, וְלֹא-הָיָה לוֹ, בָּנִים.  {ס}    28 Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
24.29 כט  לְקִישׁ, בְּנֵי-קִישׁ יְרַחְמְאֵל.  {ס}    29 Of Kish: the sons of Kish, Jerahmeel.
24.30 ל  וּבְנֵי מוּשִׁי, מַחְלִי וְעֵדֶר וִירִימוֹת; אֵלֶּה בְּנֵי הַלְוִיִּם, לְבֵית אֲבֹתֵיהֶם.    30 And the sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after their fathers' houses.
24.31 לא  וַיַּפִּילוּ גַם-הֵם גּוֹרָלוֹת לְעֻמַּת אֲחֵיהֶם בְּנֵי-אַהֲרֹן, לִפְנֵי דָוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ וְצָדוֹק וַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ, וְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם--אָבוֹת הָרֹאשׁ, לְעֻמַּת אָחִיו הַקָּטָן.  {ס}    31 These likewise cast lots even as their brethren the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the heads of the fathers' houses of the priests and of the Levites; the fathers' houses of the chief even as those of his younger brother. {S}
25.1 א  וַיַּבְדֵּל דָּוִיד וְשָׂרֵי הַצָּבָא לַעֲבֹדָה, לִבְנֵי אָסָף וְהֵימָן וִידוּתוּן, הנביאים (הַנִּבְּאִים) בְּכִנֹּרוֹת בִּנְבָלִים, וּבִמְצִלְתָּיִם; וַיְהִי, מִסְפָּרָם, אַנְשֵׁי מְלָאכָה, לַעֲבֹדָתָם.    1 Moreover David and the captains of the host separated for the service certain of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals; and the number of them that did the work according to their service was:
25.2 ב  לִבְנֵי אָסָף, זַכּוּר וְיוֹסֵף וּנְתַנְיָה וַאֲשַׂרְאֵלָה--בְּנֵי אָסָף:  עַל, יַד-אָסָף, הַנִּבָּא, עַל-יְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    2 of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph; under the hand of Asaph, who prophesied according to the direction of the king.
25.3 ג  לִידוּתוּן--בְּנֵי יְדוּתוּן גְּדַלְיָהוּ וּצְרִי וִישַׁעְיָהוּ חֲשַׁבְיָהוּ וּמַתִּתְיָהוּ שִׁשָּׁה, עַל יְדֵי אֲבִיהֶם יְדוּתוּן בַּכִּנּוֹר, הַנִּבָּא, עַל-הֹדוֹת וְהַלֵּל לַיהוָה.  {ס}    3 Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six; under the hands of their father Jeduthun with the harp, who prophesied in giving thanks and praising the LORD. {S}
25.4 ד  לְהֵימָן--בְּנֵי הֵימָן בֻּקִּיָּהוּ מַתַּנְיָהוּ עֻזִּיאֵל שְׁבוּאֵל וִירִימוֹת חֲנַנְיָה חֲנָנִי, אֱלִיאָתָה גִדַּלְתִּי וְרֹמַמְתִּי עֶזֶר, יָשְׁבְּקָשָׁה מַלּוֹתִי, הוֹתִיר מַחֲזִיאֹת.    4 Of Heman: the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth;
25.5 ה  כָּל-אֵלֶּה בָנִים לְהֵימָן, חֹזֵה הַמֶּלֶךְ בְּדִבְרֵי הָאֱלֹהִים--לְהָרִים קָרֶן; וַיִּתֵּן הָאֱלֹהִים לְהֵימָן, בָּנִים אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר--וּבָנוֹת שָׁלוֹשׁ.    5 all these were the sons of Heman the king's seer in the things pertaining to God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
25.6 ו  כָּל-אֵלֶּה עַל-יְדֵי אֲבִיהֶם בַּשִּׁיר בֵּית יְהוָה, בִּמְצִלְתַּיִם נְבָלִים וְכִנֹּרוֹת, לַעֲבֹדַת, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים--עַל יְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, אָסָף וִידוּתוּן וְהֵימָן.    6 All these were under the hands of their fathers for song in the house of the LORD, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God, according to the direction of the king--Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman.
25.7 ז  וַיְהִי מִסְפָּרָם עִם-אֲחֵיהֶם, מְלֻמְּדֵי-שִׁיר לַיהוָה:  כָּל-הַמֵּבִין--מָאתַיִם, שְׁמוֹנִים וּשְׁמוֹנָה.    7 And the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in singing unto the LORD, even all that were skilful, was two hundred fourscore and eight.
25.8 ח  וַיַּפִּילוּ גּוֹרָלוֹת מִשְׁמֶרֶת, לְעֻמַּת כַּקָּטֹן כַּגָּדוֹל--מֵבִין, עִם-תַּלְמִיד.  {פ}    8 And they cast lots ward against [ward], as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar. {P}
25.9 ט  וַיֵּצֵא הַגּוֹרָל הָרִאשׁוֹן, לְאָסָף--לְיוֹסֵף;  {ס}  גְּדַלְיָהוּ, הַשֵּׁנִי--הוּא-וְאֶחָיו  {ר}  וּבָנָיו, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    9 Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph; the second to Gedaliah; he and his brethren and sons were twelve;
25.10 י  הַשְּׁלִשִׁי זַכּוּר, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים  {ר}  עָשָׂר.  {ס}    10 The third to Zaccur, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.11 יא  הָרְבִיעִי, לַיִּצְרִי--בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    11 The fourth to Izri, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.12 יב  הַחֲמִישִׁי  {ר}  נְתַנְיָהוּ, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    12 The fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.13 יג  הַשִּׁשִּׁי בֻקִּיָּהוּ, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים  {ר}  עָשָׂר.  {ס}    13 The sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.14 יד  הַשְּׁבִעִי יְשַׂרְאֵלָה, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    14 The seventh to Jesarelah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.15 טו  הַשְּׁמִינִי  {ר}  יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    15 The eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.16 טז  הַתְּשִׁיעִי מַתַּנְיָהוּ, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו  {ר}  שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    16 The ninth to Mattaniah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.17 יז  הָעֲשִׂירִי שִׁמְעִי, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    17 The tenth to Shimei, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.18 יח  עַשְׁתֵּי-  {ר}  עָשָׂר עֲזַרְאֵל, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    18 The eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.19 יט  הַשְּׁנֵים עָשָׂר לַחֲשַׁבְיָה,  {ר}  בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    19 The twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.20 כ  לִשְׁלֹשָׁה עָשָׂר שׁוּבָאֵל, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים  {ר}  עָשָׂר.  {ס}    20 For the thirteenth, Shubael, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.21 כא  לְאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר מַתִּתְיָהוּ, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    21 For the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.22 כב  לַחֲמִשָּׁה  {ר}  עָשָׂר לִירֵמוֹת, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    22 For the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.23 כג  לְשִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר לַחֲנַנְיָהוּ, בָּנָיו  {ר}  וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    23 For the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.24 כד  לְשִׁבְעָה עָשָׂר לְיָשְׁבְּקָשָׁה, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים  {ר}  עָשָׂר.  {ס}    24 For the seventeenth to Joshbekashah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.25 כה  לִשְׁמוֹנָה עָשָׂר לַחֲנָנִי, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    25 For the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.26 כו  לְתִשְׁעָה  {ר}  עָשָׂר לְמַלּוֹתִי, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    26 For the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.27 כז  לְעֶשְׂרִים, לֶאֱלִיָּתָה--בָּנָיו  {ר}  וְאֶחָיו, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    27 For the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.28 כח  לְאֶחָד וְעֶשְׂרִים לְהוֹתִיר, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים  {ר}  עָשָׂר.  {ס}    28 For the one and twentieth to Hothir, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.29 כט  לִשְׁנַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים לְגִדַּלְתִּי, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    29 For the two and twentieth to Giddalti, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.30 ל  לִשְׁלֹשָׁה  {ר}  וְעֶשְׂרִים לְמַחֲזִיאוֹת, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    30 For the three and twentieth to Mahazioth, his sons and his brethren, twelve;
25.31 לא  לְאַרְבָּעָה וְעֶשְׂרִים  {ר}  לְרוֹמַמְתִּי עָזֶר, בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {פ}    31 For the four and twentieth to Romamti-ezer, his sons and his brethren, twelve. {P}
26.1 א  לְמַחְלְקוֹת, לְשֹׁעֲרִים--לַקָּרְחִים, מְשֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ בֶן-קֹרֵא מִן-בְּנֵי אָסָף.    1 For the courses of the doorkeepers: of the Korahites: Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.
26.2 ב  וְלִמְשֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ, בָּנִים--זְכַרְיָהוּ הַבְּכוֹר, יְדִיעֲאֵל הַשֵּׁנִי, זְבַדְיָהוּ הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, יַתְנִיאֵל הָרְבִיעִי.    2 And Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the first-born, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth;
26.3 ג  עֵילָם הַחֲמִישִׁי יְהוֹחָנָן הַשִּׁשִּׁי, אֶלְיְהוֹעֵינַי הַשְּׁבִיעִי.    3 Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh.
26.4 ד  וּלְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם, בָּנִים--שְׁמַעְיָה הַבְּכוֹר, יְהוֹזָבָד הַשֵּׁנִי, יוֹאָח הַשְּׁלִשִׁי וְשָׂכָר הָרְבִיעִי, וּנְתַנְאֵל הַחֲמִישִׁי.    4 And Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the first-born, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethanel the fifth;
26.5 ה  עַמִּיאֵל הַשִּׁשִּׁי יִשָּׂשכָר הַשְּׁבִיעִי, פְּעֻלְּתַי הַשְּׁמִינִי:  כִּי בֵרְכוֹ, אֱלֹהִים.  {ס}    5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth; for God blessed him. {S}
26.6 ו  וְלִשְׁמַעְיָה בְנוֹ נוֹלַד בָּנִים, הַמִּמְשָׁלִים לְבֵית אֲבִיהֶם:  כִּי-גִבּוֹרֵי חַיִל, הֵמָּה.    6 Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled over the house of their father; for they were mighty men of valour.
26.7 ז  בְּנֵי שְׁמַעְיָה, עָתְנִי וּרְפָאֵל וְעוֹבֵד אֶלְזָבָד אֶחָיו--בְּנֵי-חָיִל; אֱלִיהוּ, וּסְמַכְיָהוּ.    7 The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, and Rephael and Obed and Elzabad his brethren, valiant men; Elihu also, and Semachiah.
26.8 ח  כָּל-אֵלֶּה מִבְּנֵי עֹבֵד אֱדֹם, הֵמָּה וּבְנֵיהֶם וַאֲחֵיהֶם, אִישׁ-חַיִל בַּכֹּחַ, לַעֲבֹדָה--שִׁשִּׁים וּשְׁנַיִם, לְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם.    8 All these were of the sons of Obed-edom: they and their sons and their brethren, able men in strength for the service; threescore and two of Obed-edom.
26.9 ט  וְלִמְשֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ, בָּנִים וְאַחִים בְּנֵי-חָיִל--שְׁמוֹנָה עָשָׂר.  {ס}    9 And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, valiant men, eighteen. {S}
26.10 י  וּלְחֹסָה מִן-בְּנֵי-מְרָרִי, בָּנִים--שִׁמְרִי הָרֹאשׁ כִּי לֹא-הָיָה בְכוֹר, וַיְשִׂימֵהוּ אָבִיהוּ לְרֹאשׁ.    10 Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons: Shimri the chief--for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him chief--
26.11 יא  חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַשֵּׁנִי טְבַלְיָהוּ הַשְּׁלִשִׁי, זְכַרְיָהוּ הָרְבִעִי; כָּל-בָּנִים וְאַחִים לְחֹסָה, שְׁלֹשָׁה עָשָׂר.    11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth; all the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.
26.12 יב  לְאֵלֶּה מַחְלְקוֹת הַשֹּׁעֲרִים לְרָאשֵׁי הַגְּבָרִים, מִשְׁמָרוֹת--לְעֻמַּת אֲחֵיהֶם:  לְשָׁרֵת, בְּבֵית יְהוָה.    12 These courses of the doorkeepers, even the chief men, had wards over against their brethren, to minister in the house of the LORD.
26.13 יג  וַיַּפִּילוּ גוֹרָלוֹת כַּקָּטֹן כַּגָּדוֹל, לְבֵית אֲבוֹתָם--לְשַׁעַר וָשָׁעַר.  {פ}    13 And they cast lots, as well the small as the great, according to their fathers' houses, for every gate. {P}
26.14 יד  וַיִּפֹּל הַגּוֹרָל מִזְרָחָה, לְשֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ; וּזְכַרְיָהוּ בְנוֹ יוֹעֵץ בְּשֶׂכֶל, הִפִּילוּ גּוֹרָלוֹת, וַיֵּצֵא גוֹרָלוֹ, צָפוֹנָה.    14 And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a discreet counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward.
26.15 טו  לְעֹבֵד אֱדֹם, נֶגְבָּה; וּלְבָנָיו, בֵּית הָאֲסֻפִּים.    15 To Obed-edom southward; and to his sons the Storehouse.
26.16 טז  לְשֻׁפִּים וּלְחֹסָה, לַמַּעֲרָב, עִם שַׁעַר שַׁלֶּכֶת, בַּמְסִלָּה הָעוֹלָה; מִשְׁמָר, לְעֻמַּת מִשְׁמָר.  {ס}    16 To Shuppim and Hosah westward, by the gate of Shallecheth, at the causeway that goeth up, ward against ward. {S}
26.17 יז  לַמִּזְרָח, הַלְוִיִּם שִׁשָּׁה, לַצָּפוֹנָה לַיּוֹם אַרְבָּעָה, לַנֶּגְבָּה לַיּוֹם אַרְבָּעָה;  {ס}  וְלָאֲסֻפִּים, שְׁנַיִם שְׁנָיִם.    17 Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a day, {S} and for the Storehouse two and two.
26.18 יח  לַפַּרְבָּר, לַמַּעֲרָב--אַרְבָּעָה, לַמְסִלָּה, שְׁנַיִם, לַפַּרְבָּר.    18 For the Precinct westward, four at the causeway, and two at the Precinct.
26.19 יט  אֵלֶּה, מַחְלְקוֹת הַשֹּׁעֲרִים, לִבְנֵי הַקָּרְחִי, וְלִבְנֵי מְרָרִי.    19 These were the courses of the doorkeepers; of the sons of the Korahites, and of the sons of Merari.
26.20 כ  וְהַלְוִיִּם--אֲחִיָּה, עַל-אוֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, וּלְאֹצְרוֹת, הַקֳּדָשִׁים.  {ס}    20 And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasuries of the house of God, and over the treasuries of the hallowed things. {S}
26.21 כא  בְּנֵי לַעְדָּן בְּנֵי הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי לְלַעְדָּן, רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְלַעְדָּן הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי--יְחִיאֵלִי.  {ס}    21 The sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, the heads of the fathers' houses belonging to Ladan the Gershonite: Jehieli. {S}
26.22 כב  בְּנֵי, יְחִיאֵלִי--זֵתָם וְיוֹאֵל אָחִיו, עַל-אֹצְרוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה.  {ס}    22 The sons of Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his brother, over the treasuries of the house of the LORD. {S}
26.23 כג  לַעַמְרָמִי, לַיִּצְהָרִי, לַחֶבְרוֹנִי, לָעָזִּיאֵלִי.    23 Of the Amramites, of the Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the Uzzielites;
26.24 כד  וּשְׁבֻאֵל בֶּן-גֵּרְשׁוֹם בֶּן-מֹשֶׁה, נָגִיד עַל-הָאֹצָרוֹת.  {ס}    24 Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler over the treasuries. {S}
26.25 כה  וְאֶחָיו, לֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר--רְחַבְיָהוּ בְנוֹ וִישַׁעְיָהוּ בְנוֹ, וְיֹרָם בְּנוֹ, וְזִכְרִי בְנוֹ, ושלמות (וּשְׁלֹמִית) בְּנוֹ.    25 And his brethren by Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.
26.26 כו  הוּא שְׁלֹמוֹת וְאֶחָיו, עַל כָּל-אֹצְרוֹת הַקֳּדָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר הִקְדִּישׁ דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ וְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְשָׂרֵי-הָאֲלָפִים וְהַמֵּאוֹת--וְשָׂרֵי הַצָּבָא.    26 This Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasuries of the dedicated things, which David the king, and the heads of the fathers' houses, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated.
26.27 כז  מִן-הַמִּלְחָמוֹת וּמִן-הַשָּׁלָל, הִקְדִּישׁוּ--לְחַזֵּק, לְבֵית יְהוָה.    27 Out of the spoil won in battles did they dedicate to repair the house of the LORD.
26.28 כח  וְכֹל הַהִקְדִּישׁ שְׁמוּאֵל הָרֹאֶה, וְשָׁאוּל בֶּן-קִישׁ, וְאַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר, וְיוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה--כֹּל, הַמַּקְדִּישׁ, עַל יַד-שְׁלֹמִית, וְאֶחָיו.  {פ}    28 And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith, and of his brethren. {P}
26.29 כט  לַיִּצְהָרִי כְּנַנְיָהוּ וּבָנָיו, לַמְּלָאכָה הַחִיצוֹנָה עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְשֹׁטְרִים, וּלְשֹׁפְטִים.    29 Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sorts were for the outward business over Israel, for officers and judges.
26.30 ל  לַחֶבְרוֹנִי חֲשַׁבְיָהוּ וְאֶחָיו בְּנֵי-חַיִל אֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע-מֵאוֹת, עַל פְּקֻדַּת יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן, מַעְרָבָה--לְכֹל מְלֶאכֶת יְהוָה, וְלַעֲבֹדַת הַמֶּלֶךְ.    30 Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valour, a thousand and seven hundred, had the oversight of Israel beyond the Jordan westward; for all the business of the LORD, and for the service of the king.
26.31 לא  לַחֶבְרוֹנִי יְרִיָּה הָרֹאשׁ, לַחֶבְרוֹנִי לְתֹלְדֹתָיו לְאָבוֹת--בִּשְׁנַת הָאַרְבָּעִים לְמַלְכוּת דָּוִיד, נִדְרָשׁוּ, וַיִּמָּצֵא בָהֶם גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל, בְּיַעְזֵיר גִּלְעָד.    31 Of the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even of the Hebronites, according to their generations by fathers' houses. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead.
26.32 לב  וְאֶחָיו בְּנֵי-חַיִל, אַלְפַּיִם וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת--רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת; וַיַּפְקִידֵם דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-הָראוּבֵנִי וְהַגָּדִי וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשִּׁי, לְכָל-דְּבַר הָאֱלֹהִים, וּדְבַר הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {פ}    32 And his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven hundred, heads of fathers' houses, whom king David made overseers over the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of the Manassites, for every matter pertaining to God, and for the affairs of the king. {P}
27.1 א  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לְמִסְפָּרָם רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת וְשָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וְהַמֵּאוֹת וְשֹׁטְרֵיהֶם הַמְשָׁרְתִים אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ לְכֹל דְּבַר הַמַּחְלְקוֹת, הַבָּאָה וְהַיֹּצֵאת חֹדֶשׁ בְּחֹדֶשׁ, לְכֹל, חָדְשֵׁי הַשָּׁנָה:  הַמַּחֲלֹקֶת, הָאַחַת--עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {פ}    1 Now the children of Israel after their number, to wit, the heads of fathers' houses and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and their officers that served the king, in any matter of the courses which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of every course were twenty and four thousand. {P}
27.2 ב  עַל הַמַּחֲלֹקֶת הָרִאשׁוֹנָה, לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן--יָשָׁבְעָם, בֶּן-זַבְדִּיאֵל; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    2 Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.3 ג  מִן-בְּנֵי-פֶרֶץ, הָרֹאשׁ לְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַצְּבָאוֹת--לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן.  {ס}    3 Of the children of Perez was he, and the chief of all the captains of the host for the first month.
27.4 ד  וְעַל מַחֲלֹקֶת הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, דּוֹדַי הָאֲחוֹחִי וּמַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, וּמִקְלוֹת, הַנָּגִיד; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    4 And over the course of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite, and his course, and Mikloth the ruler; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.5 ה  שַׂר הַצָּבָא הַשְּׁלִישִׁי לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, בְּנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן רֹאשׁ; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.    5 The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the priest, chief; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.6 ו  הוּא בְנָיָהוּ גִּבּוֹר הַשְּׁלֹשִׁים, וְעַל-הַשְּׁלֹשִׁים; וּמַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עַמִּיזָבָד בְּנוֹ.  {ס}    6 This is that Benaiah, who was the mighty man of the thirty, and over the thirty; and of his course was Ammizabad his son.
27.7 ז  הָרְבִיעִי לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרְבִיעִי, עֲשָׂהאֵל אֲחִי יוֹאָב, וּזְבַדְיָה בְנוֹ, אַחֲרָיו; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    7 The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.8 ח  הַחֲמִישִׁי לַחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי, הַשַּׂר שַׁמְהוּת הַיִּזְרָח; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    8 The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.9 ט  הַשִּׁשִּׁי לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשִּׁשִּׁי, עִירָא בֶן-עִקֵּשׁ הַתְּקוֹעִי; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    9 The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.10 י  הַשְּׁבִיעִי לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, חֶלֶץ הַפְּלוֹנִי מִן-בְּנֵי אֶפְרָיִם; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    10 The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.11 יא  הַשְּׁמִינִי לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁמִינִי, סִבְּכַי הַחֻשָׁתִי לַזַּרְחִי; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    11 The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.12 יב  הַתְּשִׁיעִי לַחֹדֶשׁ הַתְּשִׁיעִי, אֲבִיעֶזֶר הָעַנְּתוֹתִי לבנימיני (לַבֵּן יְמִינִי); וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    12 The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjamites; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.13 יג  הָעֲשִׂירִי לַחֹדֶשׁ הָעֲשִׂירִי, מַהְרַי הַנְּטוֹפָתִי לַזַּרְחִי; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    13 The tenth captain for the tenth month was Mahrai, the Netophathite, of the Zerahites; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.14 יד  עַשְׁתֵּי-עָשָׂר לְעַשְׁתֵּי עָשָׂר הַחֹדֶשׁ, בְּנָיָה הַפִּרְעָתוֹנִי מִן-בְּנֵי אֶפְרָיִם; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {ס}    14 The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim; and in his course were twenty and four thousand.
27.15 טו  הַשְּׁנֵים עָשָׂר לִשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר הַחֹדֶשׁ, חֶלְדַּי הַנְּטוֹפָתִי לְעָתְנִיאֵל; וְעַל, מַחֲלֻקְתּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה, אָלֶף.  {פ}    15 The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel; and in his course were twenty and four thousand. {P}
27.16 טז  וְעַל, שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לָראוּבֵנִי נָגִיד, אֱלִיעֶזֶר בֶּן-זִכְרִי;  {ס}  לַשִּׁמְעוֹנִי--שְׁפַטְיָהוּ, בֶּן-מַעֲכָה.  {ס}    16 Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri the ruler; of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maacah;
27.17 יז  לְלֵוִי חֲשַׁבְיָה בֶן-קְמוּאֵל, לְאַהֲרֹן צָדוֹק.  {ס}    17 of Levi, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok;
27.18 יח  לִיהוּדָה, אֱלִיהוּ מֵאֲחֵי דָוִיד;  {ס}  לְיִשָּׂשכָר--עָמְרִי, בֶּן-מִיכָאֵל.  {ס}    18 of Judah, Elihu, one of the brethren of David; of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael;
27.19 יט  לִזְבוּלֻן, יִשְׁמַעְיָהוּ בֶּן-עֹבַדְיָהוּ;  {ס}  לְנַפְתָּלִי--יְרִימוֹת, בֶּן-עַזְרִיאֵל.  {ס}    19 of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel;
27.20 כ  לִבְנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, הוֹשֵׁעַ בֶּן-עֲזַזְיָהוּ; לַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט מְנַשֶּׁה, יוֹאֵל בֶּן-פְּדָיָהוּ.  {ס}    20 of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah;
27.21 כא  לַחֲצִי הַמְנַשֶּׁה גִּלְעָדָה, יִדּוֹ בֶּן-זְכַרְיָהוּ;  {ס}  לְבִנְיָמִן--יַעֲשִׂיאֵל, בֶּן-אַבְנֵר.  {ס}    21 of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner;
27.22 כב  לְדָן, עֲזַרְאֵל בֶּן-יְרֹחָם; אֵלֶּה, שָׂרֵי שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    22 of Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the captains of the tribes of Israel.
27.23 כג  וְלֹא-נָשָׂא דָוִיד מִסְפָּרָם, לְמִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וּלְמָטָּה:  כִּי אָמַר יְהוָה, לְהַרְבּוֹת אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל כְּכוֹכְבֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם.    23 But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and under; because the LORD had said He would increase Israel like to the stars of heaven.
27.24 כד  יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה הֵחֵל לִמְנוֹת, וְלֹא כִלָּה, וַיְהִי בָזֹאת קֶצֶף, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא עָלָה הַמִּסְפָּר, בְּמִסְפַּר דִּבְרֵי-הַיָּמִים לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד.  {ס}    24 Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but finished not; and there came wrath for this upon Israel; neither was the number put into the account in the chronicles of king David.
27.25 כה  וְעַל אֹצְרוֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַזְמָוֶת בֶּן-עֲדִיאֵל;  {ס}  וְעַל הָאֹצָרוֹת בַּשָּׂדֶה בֶּעָרִים וּבַכְּפָרִים, וּבַמִּגְדָּלוֹת, יְהוֹנָתָן, בֶּן-עֻזִּיָּהוּ.  {ס}    25 And over the king's treasuries was Azmaveth the son of Adiel; and over the treasuries in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the towers, was Jonathan the son of Uzziah;
27.26 כו  וְעַל, עֹשֵׂי מְלֶאכֶת הַשָּׂדֶה, לַעֲבֹדַת, הָאֲדָמָה--עֶזְרִי, בֶּן-כְּלוּב.  {ס}    26 and over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub;
27.27 כז  וְעַל-הַכְּרָמִים--שִׁמְעִי, הָרָמָתִי;  {ס}  וְעַל שֶׁבַּכְּרָמִים לְאֹצְרוֹת הַיַּיִן, זַבְדִּי הַשִּׁפְמִי.  {ס}    27 and over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite; and over the increase of the vineyards for the wine-cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite;
27.28 כח  וְעַל-הַזֵּיתִים וְהַשִּׁקְמִים אֲשֶׁר בַּשְּׁפֵלָה, בַּעַל חָנָן הַגְּדֵרִי;  {ס}  וְעַל-אֹצְרוֹת הַשֶּׁמֶן, יוֹעָשׁ.  {ס}    28 and over the olive-trees and the sycomore-trees that were in the Lowland was Baal-hanan the Gederite; and over the cellars of oil was Joash;
27.29 כט  וְעַל-הַבָּקָר הָרֹעִים בַּשָּׁרוֹן, שטרי (שִׁרְטַי) הַשָּׁרוֹנִי;  {ס}  וְעַל-הַבָּקָר, בָּעֲמָקִים, שָׁפָט, בֶּן-עַדְלָי.  {ס}    29 and over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shirtai the Sharonite; and over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai;
27.30 ל  וְעַל-הַגְּמַלִּים--אוֹבִיל, הַיִּשְׁמְעֵלִי;  {ס}  וְעַל-הָאֲתֹנוֹת, יֶחְדְּיָהוּ הַמֵּרֹנֹתִי.  {ס}    30 and over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite; and over the asses was Jehdeiah the Meronothite;
27.31 לא  וְעַל-הַצֹּאן, יָזִיז הַהַגְרִי; כָּל-אֵלֶּה שָׂרֵי הָרְכוּשׁ, אֲשֶׁר לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד.  {ס}    31 and over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite. All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's.
27.32 לב  וִיהוֹנָתָן דּוֹד-דָּוִיד יוֹעֵץ, אִישׁ-מֵבִין וְסוֹפֵר הוּא; וִיחִיאֵל בֶּן-חַכְמוֹנִי, עִם-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    32 Also Jonathan David's uncle was a counsellor, a man of understanding, and a scribe; and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons;
27.33 לג  וַאֲחִיתֹפֶל, יוֹעֵץ לַמֶּלֶךְ; וְחוּשַׁי הָאַרְכִּי, רֵעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    33 and Ahithophel was the king's counsellor; and Hushai the Archite was the king's friend;
27.34 לד  וְאַחֲרֵי אֲחִיתֹפֶל, יְהוֹיָדָע בֶּן-בְּנָיָהוּ וְאֶבְיָתָר, וְשַׂר-צָבָא לַמֶּלֶךְ, יוֹאָב.  {פ}    34 and after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar; and the captain of the king's host was Joab. {P}
28.1 א  וַיַּקְהֵל דָּוִיד אֶת-כָּל-שָׂרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל שָׂרֵי הַשְּׁבָטִים וְשָׂרֵי הַמַּחְלְקוֹת הַמְשָׁרְתִים אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ וְשָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וְשָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת וְשָׂרֵי כָל-רְכוּשׁ-וּמִקְנֶה לַמֶּלֶךְ וּלְבָנָיו עִם-הַסָּרִיסִים וְהַגִּבּוֹרִים, וּלְכָל-גִּבּוֹר חָיִל--אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    1 And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that served the king by course, and the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, and the rulers over all the substance and cattle of the king and of his sons, with the officers, and the mighty men, even all the mighty men of valour, unto Jerusalem.
28.2 ב  וַיָּקָם דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-רַגְלָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר, שְׁמָעוּנִי אַחַי וְעַמִּי:  אֲנִי עִם-לְבָבִי לִבְנוֹת בֵּית מְנוּחָה לַאֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, וְלַהֲדֹם רַגְלֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וַהֲכִינוֹתִי, לִבְנוֹת.    2 Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said: 'Hear me, my brethren, and my people; as for me, it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and for the footstool of our God; and I had made ready for the building.
28.3 ג  וְהָאֱלֹהִים אָמַר לִי, לֹא-תִבְנֶה בַיִת לִשְׁמִי:  כִּי אִישׁ מִלְחָמוֹת אַתָּה, וְדָמִים שָׁפָכְתָּ.    3 But God said unto me: Thou shalt not build a house for My name, because thou art a man of war, and hast shed blood.
28.4 ד  וַיִּבְחַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בִּי מִכֹּל בֵּית-אָבִי, לִהְיוֹת לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְעוֹלָם--כִּי בִיהוּדָה בָּחַר לְנָגִיד, וּבְבֵית יְהוּדָה בֵּית אָבִי; וּבִבְנֵי אָבִי--בִּי רָצָה, לְהַמְלִיךְ עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    4 Howbeit the LORD, the God of Israel, chose me out of all the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever; for He hath chosen Judah to be prince, and in the house of Judah, the house of my father, and among the sons of my father He took pleasure in me to make me king over all Israel;
28.5 ה  וּמִכָּל-בָּנַי--כִּי רַבִּים בָּנִים, נָתַן לִי יְהוָה; וַיִּבְחַר בִּשְׁלֹמֹה בְנִי--לָשֶׁבֶת עַל-כִּסֵּא מַלְכוּת יְהוָה, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    5 and of all my sons--for the LORD hath given me many sons--He hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel.
28.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי--שְׁלֹמֹה בִנְךָ, הוּא-יִבְנֶה בֵיתִי וַחֲצֵרוֹתָי:  כִּי-בָחַרְתִּי בוֹ לִי לְבֵן, וַאֲנִי אֶהְיֶה-לּוֹ לְאָב.    6 And He said unto me: Solomon thy son, he shall build My house and My courts; for I have chosen him to be to Me for a son, and I will be to him for a father.
28.7 ז  וַהֲכִינוֹתִי אֶת-מַלְכוּתוֹ, עַד-לְעוֹלָם:  אִם-יֶחֱזַק, לַעֲשׂוֹת מִצְוֺתַי וּמִשְׁפָּטַי--כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    7 And I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do My commandments and Mine ordinances, as at this day.
28.8 ח  וְעַתָּה לְעֵינֵי כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל קְהַל-יְהוָה, וּבְאָזְנֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ, שִׁמְרוּ וְדִרְשׁוּ, כָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--לְמַעַן תִּירְשׁוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַטּוֹבָה, וְהִנְחַלְתֶּם לִבְנֵיכֶם אַחֲרֵיכֶם עַד-עוֹלָם.    8 Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the congregation of the LORD, and in the hearing of our God, observe and seek out all the commandments of the LORD your God; that ye may possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children after you for ever.
28.9 ט  וְאַתָּה שְׁלֹמֹה-בְנִי דַּע אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי אָבִיךָ וְעָבְדֵהוּ, בְּלֵב שָׁלֵם וּבְנֶפֶשׁ חֲפֵצָה--כִּי כָל-לְבָבוֹת דּוֹרֵשׁ יְהוָה, וְכָל-יֵצֶר מַחֲשָׁבוֹת מֵבִין:  אִם-תִּדְרְשֶׁנּוּ יִמָּצֵא לָךְ, וְאִם-תַּעַזְבֶנּוּ יַזְנִיחֲךָ לָעַד.    9 And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve Him with a whole heart and with a willing mind; for the LORD searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek Him, He will be found of thee; but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off for ever.
28.10 י  רְאֵה עַתָּה, כִּי-יְהוָה בָּחַר בְּךָ לִבְנוֹת-בַּיִת לַמִּקְדָּשׁ--חֲזַק וַעֲשֵׂה.  {פ}    10 Take heed now; for the LORD hath chosen thee to build a house for the sanctuary; be strong, and do it.' {P}
28.11 יא  וַיִּתֵּן דָּוִיד לִשְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ אֶת-תַּבְנִית הָאוּלָם וְאֶת-בָּתָּיו וְגַנְזַכָּיו וַעֲלִיֹּתָיו, וַחֲדָרָיו הַפְּנִימִים--וּבֵית הַכַּפֹּרֶת.    11 Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch [of the temple], and of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper rooms thereof, and of the inner chambers thereof, and of the place of the ark-cover;
28.12 יב  וְתַבְנִית, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר הָיָה בָרוּחַ עִמּוֹ, לְחַצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה וּלְכָל-הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, סָבִיב--לְאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, וּלְאֹצְרוֹת הַקֳּדָשִׁים.    12 and the pattern of all that he had by the spirit, for the courts of the house of the LORD, and for all the chambers round about, for the treasuries of the house of God, and for the treasuries of the hallowed things;
28.13 יג  וּלְמַחְלְקוֹת הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, וּלְכָל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-יְהוָה; וּלְכָל-כְּלֵי, עֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-יְהוָה.    13 also for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and for all the vessels of service in the house of the LORD:
28.14 יד  לַזָּהָב בַּמִּשְׁקָל לַזָּהָב, לְכָל-כְּלֵי עֲבוֹדָה וַעֲבוֹדָה; לְכֹל כְּלֵי הַכֶּסֶף בְּמִשְׁקָל, לְכָל-כְּלֵי עֲבוֹדָה וַעֲבוֹדָה.    14 of gold by weight for the vessels of gold, for all vessels of every kind of service; of silver for all the vessels of silver by weight, for all vessels of every kind of service;
28.15 טו  וּמִשְׁקָל לִמְנֹרוֹת הַזָּהָב, וְנֵרֹתֵיהֶם זָהָב, בְּמִשְׁקַל-מְנוֹרָה וּמְנוֹרָה, וְנֵרֹתֶיהָ; וְלִמְנֹרוֹת הַכֶּסֶף בְּמִשְׁקָל לִמְנוֹרָה וְנֵרֹתֶיהָ, כַּעֲבוֹדַת מְנוֹרָה וּמְנוֹרָה.    15 by weight also for the candlesticks of gold, and for the lamps thereof, of gold, by weight for every candlestick and for the lamps thereof; and for the candlesticks of silver, silver by weight for every candlestick and for the lamps thereof, according to the use of every candlestick;
28.16 טז  וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב מִשְׁקָל לְשֻׁלְחֲנוֹת הַמַּעֲרֶכֶת, לְשֻׁלְחַן וְשֻׁלְחָן; וְכֶסֶף, לְשֻׁלְחֲנוֹת הַכָּסֶף.    16 and the gold by weight for the tables of showbread, for every table; and silver for the tables of silver;
28.17 יז  וְהַמִּזְלָגוֹת וְהַמִּזְרָקוֹת וְהַקְּשָׂוֺת, זָהָב טָהוֹר; וְלִכְפוֹרֵי הַזָּהָב בְּמִשְׁקָל לִכְפוֹר וּכְפוֹר, וְלִכְפוֹרֵי הַכֶּסֶף בְּמִשְׁקָל לִכְפוֹר וּכְפוֹר.    17 and the flesh-hooks, and the basins, and the jars, of pure gold; and for the golden bowls by weight for every bowl; and for the silver bowls by weight for every bowl;
28.18 יח  וּלְמִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת זָהָב מְזֻקָּק, בַּמִּשְׁקָל; וּלְתַבְנִית הַמֶּרְכָּבָה, הַכְּרוּבִים זָהָב לְפֹרְשִׂים, וְסֹכְכִים, עַל-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה.    18 and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the chariot, even the cherubim, that spread out their wings, and covered the ark of the covenant of the LORD.
28.19 יט  הַכֹּל בִּכְתָב מִיַּד יְהוָה, עָלַי הִשְׂכִּיל--כֹּל, מַלְאֲכוֹת הַתַּבְנִית.  {פ}    19 'All this [do I give thee] in writing, as the LORD hath made me wise by His hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.' {P}
28.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד לִשְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ, חֲזַק וֶאֱמַץ וַעֲשֵׂה--אַל-תִּירָא, וְאַל-תֵּחָת:  כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהַי, עִמָּךְ--לֹא יַרְפְּךָ וְלֹא יַעַזְבֶךָּ, עַד-לִכְלוֹת כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-יְהוָה.    20 And David said to Solomon his son: 'Be strong and of good courage, and do it; fear not, nor be dismayed; for the LORD God, even my God, is with thee; He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until all the work for the service of the house of the LORD be finished.
28.21 כא  וְהִנֵּה, מַחְלְקוֹת הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, לְכָל-עֲבוֹדַת, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים; וְעִמְּךָ בְכָל-מְלָאכָה לְכָל-נָדִיב בַּחָכְמָה, לְכָל-עֲבוֹדָה, וְהַשָּׂרִים וְכָל-הָעָם, לְכָל-דְּבָרֶיךָ.  {ס}    21 And, behold, there are the courses of the priests and the Levites, for all the service of the house of God; and there shall be with thee in all manner of work every willing man that hath skill, for any manner of service; also the captains and all the people will be wholly at thy commandment.' {S}
29.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ לְכָל-הַקָּהָל, שְׁלֹמֹה בְנִי אֶחָד בָּחַר-בּוֹ אֱלֹהִים נַעַר וָרָךְ; וְהַמְּלָאכָה גְדוֹלָה--כִּי לֹא לְאָדָם הַבִּירָה, כִּי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהִים.    1 And David the king said unto all the congregation: 'Solomon my son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work is great; for the palace is not for man, but for the LORD God.
29.2 ב  וּכְכָל-כֹּחִי הֲכִינוֹתִי לְבֵית-אֱלֹהַי, הַזָּהָב לַזָּהָב וְהַכֶּסֶף לַכֶּסֶף וְהַנְּחֹשֶׁת לַנְּחֹשֶׁת הַבַּרְזֶל לַבַּרְזֶל, וְהָעֵצִים, לָעֵצִים; אַבְנֵי-שֹׁהַם וּמִלּוּאִים אַבְנֵי-פוּךְ וְרִקְמָה, וְכֹל אֶבֶן יְקָרָה וְאַבְנֵי-שַׁיִשׁ--לָרֹב.    2 Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the gold for the things of gold, and the silver for the things of silver, and the brass for the things of brass, the iron for the things of iron, and wood for the things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set, glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance.
29.3 ג  וְעוֹד, בִּרְצוֹתִי בְּבֵית אֱלֹהַי, יֶשׁ-לִי סְגֻלָּה, זָהָב וָכָסֶף:  נָתַתִּי לְבֵית-אֱלֹהַי לְמַעְלָה, מִכָּל-הֲכִינוֹתִי לְבֵית הַקֹּדֶשׁ.    3 Moreover also, because I have set my affection on the house of my God, seeing that I have a treasure of mine own of gold and silver, I give it unto the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,
29.4 ד  שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים כִּכְּרֵי זָהָב, מִזְּהַב אוֹפִיר; וְשִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים כִּכַּר-כֶּסֶף מְזֻקָּק, לָטוּחַ קִירוֹת הַבָּתִּים.    4 even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, wherewith to overlay the walls of the houses;
29.5 ה  לַזָּהָב לַזָּהָב וְלַכֶּסֶף לַכֶּסֶף, וּלְכָל-מְלָאכָה בְּיַד חָרָשִׁים; וּמִי מִתְנַדֵּב, לְמַלֹּאות יָדוֹ הַיּוֹם לַיהוָה.    5 of gold for the things of gold, and of silver for the things of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands of artificers. Who then offereth willingly to consecrate himself this day unto the LORD?'
29.6 ו  וַיִּתְנַדְּבוּ שָׂרֵי הָאָבוֹת וְשָׂרֵי שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְשָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וְהַמֵּאוֹת, וּלְשָׂרֵי, מְלֶאכֶת הַמֶּלֶךְ.    6 Then the princes of the fathers' houses, and the princes of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers over the king's work, offered willingly;
29.7 ז  וַיִּתְּנוּ לַעֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים, זָהָב כִּכָּרִים חֲמֵשֶׁת-אֲלָפִים וַאֲדַרְכֹנִים רִבּוֹ, וְכֶסֶף כִּכָּרִים עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים, וּנְחֹשֶׁת רִבּוֹ וּשְׁמוֹנַת אֲלָפִים כִּכָּרִים; וּבַרְזֶל, מֵאָה-אֶלֶף כִּכָּרִים.    7 and they gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand darics, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen thousand talents, and of iron a hundred thousand talents.
29.8 ח  וְהַנִּמְצָא אִתּוֹ אֲבָנִים, נָתְנוּ לְאוֹצַר בֵּית-יְהוָה--עַל יַד-יְחִיאֵל, הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי.    8 And they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of the LORD, under the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.
29.9 ט  וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ הָעָם, עַל-הִתְנַדְּבָם, כִּי בְּלֵב שָׁלֵם, הִתְנַדְּבוּ לַיהוָה; וְגַם דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ, שָׂמַח שִׂמְחָה גְדוֹלָה.  {פ}    9 Then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly, because with a whole heart they offered willingly to the LORD; and David the king also rejoiced with great joy. {P}
29.10 י  וַיְבָרֶךְ דָּוִיד אֶת-יְהוָה, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-הַקָּהָל; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד, בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אָבִינוּ, מֵעוֹלָם, וְעַד-עוֹלָם.    10 Wherefore David blessed the LORD before all the congregation; and David said: 'Blessed be Thou, O LORD, the God of Israel our father, for ever and ever.
29.11 יא  לְךָ יְהוָה הַגְּדֻלָּה וְהַגְּבוּרָה וְהַתִּפְאֶרֶת, וְהַנֵּצַח וְהַהוֹד, כִּי-כֹל, בַּשָּׁמַיִם וּבָאָרֶץ:  לְךָ יְהוָה הַמַּמְלָכָה, וְהַמִּתְנַשֵּׂא לְכֹל לְרֹאשׁ.    11 Thine, O LORD, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is Thine; Thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and Thou art exalted as head above all.
29.12 יב  וְהָעֹשֶׁר וְהַכָּבוֹד, מִלְּפָנֶיךָ, וְאַתָּה מוֹשֵׁל בַּכֹּל, וּבְיָדְךָ כֹּחַ וּגְבוּרָה; וּבְיָדְךָ, לְגַדֵּל וּלְחַזֵּק לַכֹּל.    12 Both riches and honour come of Thee, and Thou rulest over all; and in Thy hand is power and might; and in Thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.
29.13 יג  וְעַתָּה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, מוֹדִים אֲנַחְנוּ לָךְ; וּמְהַלְלִים, לְשֵׁם תִּפְאַרְתֶּךָ.    13 Now therefore, our God, we thank Thee, and praise Thy glorious name.
29.14 יד  וְכִי מִי אֲנִי, וּמִי עַמִּי, כִּי-נַעְצֹר כֹּחַ, לְהִתְנַדֵּב כָּזֹאת:  כִּי-מִמְּךָ הַכֹּל, וּמִיָּדְךָ נָתַנּוּ לָךְ.    14 But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of Thee, and of Thine own have we given Thee.
29.15 טו  כִּי-גֵרִים אֲנַחְנוּ לְפָנֶיךָ וְתוֹשָׁבִים, כְּכָל-אֲבֹתֵינוּ:  כַּצֵּל יָמֵינוּ עַל-הָאָרֶץ, וְאֵין מִקְוֶה.    15 For we are strangers before Thee, and sojourners, as all our fathers were: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no abiding.
29.16 טז  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--כֹּל הֶהָמוֹן הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר הֲכִינֹנוּ, לִבְנוֹת-לְךָ בַיִת לְשֵׁם קָדְשֶׁךָ:  מִיָּדְךָ היא (הוּא), וּלְךָ הַכֹּל.    16 O LORD our God, all this store that we have prepared to build Thee a house for Thy holy name cometh of Thy hand, and is all Thine own.
29.17 יז  וְיָדַעְתִּי אֱלֹהַי--כִּי אַתָּה בֹּחֵן לֵבָב, וּמֵישָׁרִים תִּרְצֶה; אֲנִי, בְּיֹשֶׁר לְבָבִי הִתְנַדַּבְתִּי כָל-אֵלֶּה, וְעַתָּה עַמְּךָ הַנִּמְצְאוּ-פֹה, רָאִיתִי בְשִׂמְחָה לְהִתְנַדֶּב-לָךְ.    17 I know also, my God, that Thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things; and now have I seen with joy Thy people, that are present here, offer willingly unto Thee.
29.18 יח  יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם יִצְחָק וְיִשְׂרָאֵל אֲבֹתֵינוּ, שָׁמְרָה-זֹּאת לְעוֹלָם, לְיֵצֶר מַחְשְׁבוֹת לְבַב עַמֶּךָ; וְהָכֵן לְבָבָם, אֵלֶיךָ.    18 O LORD, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever, even the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of Thy people, and direct their heart unto Thee;
29.19 יט  וְלִשְׁלֹמֹה בְנִי, תֵּן לֵבָב שָׁלֵם, לִשְׁמוֹר מִצְוֺתֶיךָ, עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ וְחֻקֶּיךָ; וְלַעֲשׂוֹת הַכֹּל, וְלִבְנוֹת הַבִּירָה אֲשֶׁר-הֲכִינוֹתִי.  {פ}    19 and give unto Solomon my son a whole heart, to keep Thy commandments, Thy testimonies, and Thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for which I have made, provision.' {P}
29.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִיד לְכָל-הַקָּהָל, בָּרְכוּ-נָא אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם; וַיְבָרְכוּ כָל-הַקָּהָל, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיהֶם, וַיִּקְּדוּ וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַיהוָה, וְלַמֶּלֶךְ.    20 And David said to all the congregation: 'Now bless the LORD your God.' And all the congregation blessed the LORD, the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and prostrated themselves before the LORD, and before the king.
29.21 כא  וַיִּזְבְּחוּ לַיהוָה זְבָחִים וַיַּעֲלוּ עֹלוֹת לַיהוָה, לְמָחֳרַת הַיּוֹם הַהוּא--פָּרִים אֶלֶף אֵלִים אֶלֶף כְּבָשִׂים אֶלֶף, וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם; וּזְבָחִים לָרֹב, לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    21 And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the LORD, and offered burnt-offerings unto the LORD, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel;
29.22 כב  וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׁתּוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--בְּשִׂמְחָה גְדוֹלָה; וַיַּמְלִיכוּ שֵׁנִית לִשְׁלֹמֹה בֶן-דָּוִיד, וַיִּמְשְׁחוּ לַיהוָה לְנָגִיד וּלְצָדוֹק לְכֹהֵן.    22 and did eat and drink before the LORD on that day with great gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him unto the LORD to be prince, and Zadok to be priest.
29.23 כג  וַיֵּשֶׁב שְׁלֹמֹה עַל-כִּסֵּא יְהוָה לְמֶלֶךְ, תַּחַת-דָּוִיד אָבִיו--וַיַּצְלַח; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ אֵלָיו, כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    23 Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel hearkened to him.
29.24 כד  וְכָל-הַשָּׂרִים, וְהַגִּבֹּרִים, וְגַם, כָּל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד--נָתְנוּ יָד, תַּחַת שְׁלֹמֹה הַמֶּלֶךְ.    24 And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the king.
29.25 כה  וַיְגַדֵּל יְהוָה אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה לְמַעְלָה, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּתֵּן עָלָיו, הוֹד מַלְכוּת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיָה עַל-כָּל-מֶלֶךְ לְפָנָיו, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    25 And the LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel. {P}
29.26 כו  וְדָוִיד, בֶּן-יִשָׁי, מָלַךְ, עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    26 Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
29.27 כז  וְהַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--אַרְבָּעִים, שָׁנָה:  בְּחֶבְרוֹן מָלַךְ שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם מָלַךְ שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשָׁלוֹשׁ.    27 And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years: seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in Jerusalem.
29.28 כח  וַיָּמָת בְּשֵׂיבָה טוֹבָה, שְׂבַע יָמִים עֹשֶׁר וְכָבוֹד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    28 And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour; and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
29.29 כט  וְדִבְרֵי דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרֹנִים--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-דִּבְרֵי שְׁמוּאֵל הָרֹאֶה, וְעַל-דִּבְרֵי נָתָן הַנָּבִיא, וְעַל-דִּבְרֵי גָּד הַחֹזֶה.    29 Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the words of Samuel the seer, and in the words of Nathan the prophet, and in the words of Gad the seer;
29.30 ל  עִם כָּל-מַלְכוּתוֹ, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ; וְהָעִתִּים, אֲשֶׁר עָבְרוּ עָלָיו וְעַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְעַל, כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאֲרָצוֹת.  {פ}    30 with all his reign and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries. {P}
