1.1 א  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד זָקֵן, בָּא בַּיָּמִים; וַיְכַסֻּהוּ, בַּבְּגָדִים, וְלֹא יִחַם, לוֹ.	1 Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered him with clothes, but he could get no heat.
1.2 ב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ עֲבָדָיו, יְבַקְשׁוּ לַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ נַעֲרָה בְתוּלָה, וְעָמְדָה לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּתְהִי-לוֹ סֹכֶנֶת; וְשָׁכְבָה בְחֵיקֶךָ, וְחַם לַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	2 Wherefore his servants said unto him: 'Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin; and let her stand before the king, and be a companion unto him; and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat.'
1.3 ג  וַיְבַקְשׁוּ נַעֲרָה יָפָה, בְּכֹל גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּמְצְאוּ, אֶת-אֲבִישַׁג הַשּׁוּנַמִּית, וַיָּבִאוּ אֹתָהּ, לַמֶּלֶךְ.	3 So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the borders of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunammite, and brought her to the king.
1.4 ד  וְהַנַּעֲרָה, יָפָה עַד-מְאֹד; וַתְּהִי לַמֶּלֶךְ סֹכֶנֶת וַתְּשָׁרְתֵהוּ, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ לֹא יְדָעָהּ.	4 And the damsel was very fair; and she became a companion unto the king, and ministered to him; but the king knew her not.
1.5 ה  וַאֲדֹנִיָּה בֶן-חַגִּית מִתְנַשֵּׂא לֵאמֹר, אֲנִי אֶמְלֹךְ; וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ, רֶכֶב וּפָרָשִׁים, וַחֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ, רָצִים לְפָנָיו.	5 Now Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying: 'I will be king'; and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.
1.6 ו  וְלֹא-עֲצָבוֹ אָבִיו מִיָּמָיו לֵאמֹר, מַדּוּעַ כָּכָה עָשִׂיתָ; וְגַם-הוּא טוֹב-תֹּאַר מְאֹד, וְאֹתוֹ יָלְדָה אַחֲרֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם.	6 And his father had not grieved him all his life in saying: 'Why hast thou done so?' and he was also a very goodly man; and he was born after Absalom.
1.7 ז  וַיִּהְיוּ דְבָרָיו--עִם יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, וְעִם אֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן; וַיַּעְזְרוּ, אַחֲרֵי אֲדֹנִיָּה.	7 And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest; and they following Adonijah helped him.
1.8 ח  וְצָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וּבְנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע וְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא, וְשִׁמְעִי וְרֵעִי, וְהַגִּבּוֹרִים, אֲשֶׁר לְדָוִד--לֹא הָיוּ, עִם-אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ.	8 But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men that belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.
1.9 ט  וַיִּזְבַּח אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ, צֹאן וּבָקָר וּמְרִיא, עִם אֶבֶן הַזֹּחֶלֶת, אֲשֶׁר-אֵצֶל עֵין רֹגֵל; וַיִּקְרָא, אֶת-כָּל-אֶחָיו בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּלְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי יְהוּדָה, עַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	9 And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fatlings by the stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel; and he called all his brethren the king's sons, and all the men of Judah the king's servants;
1.10 י  וְאֶת-נָתָן הַנָּבִיא וּבְנָיָהוּ וְאֶת-הַגִּבּוֹרִים, וְאֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה אָחִיו--לֹא קָרָא.	10 but Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not.
1.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר נָתָן, אֶל-בַּת-שֶׁבַע אֵם-שְׁלֹמֹה לֵאמֹר, הֲלוֹא שָׁמַעַתְּ, כִּי מָלַךְ אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ בֶן-חַגִּית; וַאֲדֹנֵינוּ דָוִד, לֹא יָדָע.	11 Then Nathan spoke unto Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon, saying: 'Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not?
1.12 יב  וְעַתָּה, לְכִי אִיעָצֵךְ נָא עֵצָה:  וּמַלְּטִי, אֶת-נַפְשֵׁךְ, וְאֶת-נֶפֶשׁ בְּנֵךְ, שְׁלֹמֹה.	12 Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.
1.13 יג  לְכִי וּבֹאִי אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, וְאָמַרְתְּ אֵלָיו הֲלֹא-אַתָּה אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ נִשְׁבַּעְתָּ לַאֲמָתְךָ לֵאמֹר, כִּי-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנֵךְ יִמְלֹךְ אַחֲרַי, וְהוּא יֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאִי; וּמַדּוּעַ, מָלַךְ אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ.	13 Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him: Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thy handmaid, saying: Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign?
1.14 יד  הִנֵּה, עוֹדָךְ מְדַבֶּרֶת שָׁם--עִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַאֲנִי אָבוֹא אַחֲרַיִךְ, וּמִלֵּאתִי אֶת-דְּבָרָיִךְ.	14 Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy words.'
1.15 טו  וַתָּבֹא בַת-שֶׁבַע אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ הַחַדְרָה, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ זָקֵן מְאֹד; וַאֲבִישַׁג, הַשּׁוּנַמִּית, מְשָׁרַת, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ.	15 And Bath-sheba went in unto the king into the chamber.--Now the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the king.--
1.16 טז  וַתִּקֹּד בַּת-שֶׁבַע, וַתִּשְׁתַּחוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, מַה-לָּךְ.	16 And Bath-sheba bowed, and prostrated herself unto the king. And the king said: 'What wouldest thou?'
1.17 יז  וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ, אֲדֹנִי אַתָּה נִשְׁבַּעְתָּ בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ לַאֲמָתֶךָ, כִּי-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנֵךְ, יִמְלֹךְ אַחֲרָי; וְהוּא, יֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאִי.	17 And she said unto him: 'My lord, thou didst swear by the LORD thy God unto thy handmaid: Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.
1.18 יח  וְעַתָּה, הִנֵּה אֲדֹנִיָּה מָלָךְ; וְעַתָּה אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֹא יָדָעְתָּ.	18 And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and thou, my lord the king, knowest it not.
1.19 יט  וַיִּזְבַּח שׁוֹר וּמְרִיא-וְצֹאן, לָרֹב,  {פ} וַיִּקְרָא לְכָל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּלְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן וּלְיֹאָב שַׂר הַצָּבָא; וְלִשְׁלֹמֹה עַבְדְּךָ, לֹא קָרָא.	19 And he hath slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance, {P} and hath called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar, the priest, and Joab the captain of the host; but Solomon thy servant hath he not called.
1.20 כ  וְאַתָּה אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, עֵינֵי כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עָלֶיךָ:  לְהַגִּיד לָהֶם--מִי יֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא אֲדֹנִי-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַחֲרָיו.	20 And thou, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
1.21 כא  וְהָיָה, כִּשְׁכַב אֲדֹנִי-הַמֶּלֶךְ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וְהָיִיתִי, אֲנִי וּבְנִי שְׁלֹמֹה--חַטָּאִים.	21 Otherwise it will come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders.'
1.22 כב  וְהִנֵּה עוֹדֶנָּה מְדַבֶּרֶת, עִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא, בָּא.	22 And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet came in.
1.23 כג  וַיַּגִּידוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה נָתָן הַנָּבִיא; וַיָּבֹא לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-אַפָּיו אָרְצָה.	23 And they told the king, saying: 'Behold Nathan the prophet.' And when he was come in before the king, he bowed down before the king with his face to the ground.
1.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר, נָתָן, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַתָּה אָמַרְתָּ אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ יִמְלֹךְ אַחֲרָי; וְהוּא, יֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאִי.	24 And Nathan said: 'My lord, O king, hast thou said: Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
1.25 כה  כִּי יָרַד הַיּוֹם, וַיִּזְבַּח שׁוֹר וּמְרִיא-וְצֹאן לָרֹב, וַיִּקְרָא לְכָל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ וּלְשָׂרֵי הַצָּבָא וּלְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנָּם אֹכְלִים וְשֹׁתִים לְפָנָיו; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ.	25 For he is gone down this day, and hath slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink before him, and say: Long live king Adonijah.
1.26 כו  וְלִי אֲנִי-עַבְדֶּךָ וּלְצָדֹק הַכֹּהֵן וְלִבְנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע, וְלִשְׁלֹמֹה עַבְדְּךָ--לֹא קָרָא.	26 But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon hath he not called.
1.27 כז  אִם, מֵאֵת אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, נִהְיָה, הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וְלֹא הוֹדַעְתָּ, אֶת-עבדיך (עַבְדְּךָ), מִי יֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא אֲדֹנִי-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַחֲרָיו.  {ס}	27 Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not declared unto thy servant who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?' {S}
1.28 כח  וַיַּעַן הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד וַיֹּאמֶר, קִרְאוּ-לִי לְבַת-שָׁבַע; וַתָּבֹא לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַתַּעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	28 Then king David answered and said: 'Call me Bath-sheba.' And she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.
1.29 כט  וַיִּשָּׁבַע הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמַר:  חַי-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-פָּדָה אֶת-נַפְשִׁי מִכָּל-צָרָה.	29 And the king swore and said: 'As the LORD liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
1.30 ל  כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי לָךְ בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר, כִּי-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנֵךְ יִמְלֹךְ אַחֲרַי, וְהוּא יֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאִי תַּחְתָּי:  כִּי כֵּן אֶעֱשֶׂה, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	30 verily as I swore unto thee by the LORD, the God of Israel, saying: Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; verily so will I do this day.'
1.31 לא  וַתִּקֹּד בַּת-שֶׁבַע אַפַּיִם אֶרֶץ, וַתִּשְׁתַּחוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ; וַתֹּאמֶר--יְחִי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, לְעֹלָם.  {פ}	31 Then Bath-sheba bowed with her face to the earth, and prostrated herself to the king, and said: 'Let my lord king David live for ever.' {P}
1.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, קִרְאוּ-לִי לְצָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וּלְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא, וְלִבְנָיָהוּ, בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע; וַיָּבֹאוּ, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	32 And king David said: 'Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada.' And they came before the king.
1.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ לָהֶם, קְחוּ עִמָּכֶם אֶת-עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנֵיכֶם, וְהִרְכַּבְתֶּם אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנִי, עַל-הַפִּרְדָּה אֲשֶׁר-לִי; וְהוֹרַדְתֶּם אֹתוֹ, אֶל-גִּחוֹן.	33 And the king said unto them: 'Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon.
1.34 לד  וּמָשַׁח אֹתוֹ שָׁם צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא, לְמֶלֶךְ--עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּתְקַעְתֶּם, בַּשּׁוֹפָר, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה.	34 And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel; and blow ye with the horn, and say: Long live king Solomon.
1.35 לה  וַעֲלִיתֶם אַחֲרָיו, וּבָא וְיָשַׁב עַל-כִּסְאִי, וְהוּא יִמְלֹךְ, תַּחְתָּי; וְאֹתוֹ צִוִּיתִי לִהְיוֹת נָגִיד, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וְעַל-יְהוּדָה.	35 Then ye shall come up after him, and he shall come and sit upon my throne; for he shall be king in my stead; and I have appointed him to be prince over Israel and over Judah.'
1.36 לו  וַיַּעַן בְּנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר אָמֵן:  כֵּן יֹאמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	36 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said: 'Amen; so say the LORD, the God of my lord the king.
1.37 לז  כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיָה יְהוָה עִם-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, כֵּן יהי (יִהְיֶה) עִם-שְׁלֹמֹה; וִיגַדֵּל, אֶת-כִּסְאוֹ, מִכִּסֵּא, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד.	37 As the LORD hath been with my lord the king, even so be He with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.'
1.38 לח  וַיֵּרֶד צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא וּבְנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע, וְהַכְּרֵתִי וְהַפְּלֵתִי, וַיַּרְכִּבוּ אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה, עַל-פִּרְדַּת הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד; וַיֹּלִכוּ אֹתוֹ, עַל-גִּחוֹן.	38 So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to Gihon.
1.39 לט  וַיִּקַּח צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-קֶרֶן הַשֶּׁמֶן, מִן-הָאֹהֶל, וַיִּמְשַׁח, אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה; וַיִּתְקְעוּ, בַּשּׁוֹפָר, וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָּל-הָעָם, יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה.	39 And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the Tent, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the ram's horn; and all the people said: 'Long live king Solomon.'
1.40 מ  וַיַּעֲלוּ כָל-הָעָם, אַחֲרָיו, וְהָעָם מְחַלְּלִים בַּחֲלִלִים, וּשְׂמֵחִים שִׂמְחָה גְדוֹלָה; וַתִּבָּקַע הָאָרֶץ, בְּקוֹלָם.	40 And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them.
1.41 מא  וַיִּשְׁמַע אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ, וְכָל-הַקְּרֻאִים אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, וְהֵם, כִּלּוּ לֶאֱכֹל; וַיִּשְׁמַע יוֹאָב, אֶת-קוֹל הַשּׁוֹפָר, וַיֹּאמֶר, מַדּוּעַ קוֹל-הַקִּרְיָה הוֹמָה.	41 And Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the horn, he said: 'Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an uproar?'
1.42 מב  עוֹדֶנּוּ מְדַבֵּר, וְהִנֵּה יוֹנָתָן בֶּן-אֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן בָּא; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ בֹּא, כִּי אִישׁ חַיִל אַתָּה וְטוֹב תְּבַשֵּׂר.	42 While he yet spoke, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came; and Adonijah said: 'Come in; for thou art a worthy man, and bringest good tidings.'
1.43 מג  וַיַּעַן, יוֹנָתָן, וַיֹּאמֶר, לַאֲדֹנִיָּהוּ:  אֲבָל, אֲדֹנֵינוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ-דָּוִד הִמְלִיךְ אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה.	43 And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah: 'Verily our lord king David hath made Solomon king.
1.44 מד  וַיִּשְׁלַח אִתּוֹ-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וְאֶת-נָתָן הַנָּבִיא, וּבְנָיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע, וְהַכְּרֵתִי, וְהַפְּלֵתִי; וַיַּרְכִּבוּ אֹתוֹ, עַל פִּרְדַּת הַמֶּלֶךְ.	44 And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule.
1.45 מה  וַיִּמְשְׁחוּ אֹתוֹ צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן וְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא לְמֶלֶךְ בְּגִחוֹן, וַיַּעֲלוּ מִשָּׁם שְׂמֵחִים, וַתֵּהֹם, הַקִּרְיָה; הוּא הַקּוֹל, אֲשֶׁר שְׁמַעְתֶּם.	45 And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon; and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the city is in an uproar. This is the noise that ye have heard.
1.46 מו  וְגַם יָשַׁב שְׁלֹמֹה, עַל כִּסֵּא הַמְּלוּכָה.	46 And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.
1.47 מז  וְגַם-בָּאוּ עַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-אֲדֹנֵינוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד לֵאמֹר, יֵיטֵב אלהיך (אֱלֹהִים) אֶת-שֵׁם שְׁלֹמֹה מִשְּׁמֶךָ, וִיגַדֵּל אֶת-כִּסְאוֹ מִכִּסְאֶךָ; וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּב.	47 And moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king David, saying: God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne; and the king bowed down upon the bed.
1.48 מח  וְגַם-כָּכָה, אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ:  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן הַיּוֹם יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאִי--וְעֵינַי רֹאוֹת.	48 And also thus said the king: Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even seeing it.'
1.49 מט  וַיֶּחֶרְדוּ, וַיָּקֻמוּ, כָּל-הַקְּרֻאִים, אֲשֶׁר לַאֲדֹנִיָּהוּ; וַיֵּלְכוּ, אִישׁ לְדַרְכּוֹ.	49 And all the guests of Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way.
1.50 נ  וַאֲדֹנִיָּהוּ, יָרֵא מִפְּנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה; וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיַּחֲזֵק בְּקַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	50 And Adonijah feared because of Solomon; and he arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
1.51 נא  וַיֻּגַּד לִשְׁלֹמֹה, לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ, יָרֵא אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה; וְהִנֵּה אָחַז בְּקַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, לֵאמֹר, יִשָּׁבַע-לִי כַיּוֹם הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, אִם-יָמִית אֶת-עַבְדּוֹ בֶּחָרֶב.	51 And it was told Solomon, saying: 'Behold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon; for, lo, he hath laid hold on the horns of the altar, saying: Let king Solomon swear unto me first of all that he will not slay his servant with the sword.'
1.52 נב  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁלֹמֹה--אִם יִהְיֶה לְבֶן-חַיִל, לֹא-יִפֹּל מִשַּׂעֲרָתוֹ אָרְצָה; וְאִם-רָעָה תִמָּצֵא-בוֹ, וָמֵת.	52 And Solomon said: 'If he shall show himself a worthy man, there shall not a hair of him fall to the earth; but if wickedness be found in him, he shall die.'
1.53 נג  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, וַיּוֹרִדֻהוּ מֵעַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וַיָּבֹא, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה; וַיֹּאמֶר-לוֹ שְׁלֹמֹה, לֵךְ לְבֵיתֶךָ.  {פ}	53 So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And he came and prostrated himself before king Solomon; and Solomon said unto him: 'Go to thy house.' {P}
2.1 א  וַיִּקְרְבוּ יְמֵי-דָוִד, לָמוּת; וַיְצַו אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ, לֵאמֹר.	1 Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying:
2.2 ב  אָנֹכִי הֹלֵךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וְחָזַקְתָּ, וְהָיִיתָ לְאִישׁ.	2 'I go the way of all the earth; be thou strong therefore, and show thyself a man;
2.3 ג  וְשָׁמַרְתָּ אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, לָלֶכֶת בִּדְרָכָיו לִשְׁמֹר חֻקֹּתָיו מִצְוֺתָיו וּמִשְׁפָּטָיו וְעֵדְוֺתָיו, כַּכָּתוּב, בְּתוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה--לְמַעַן תַּשְׂכִּיל, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר תִּפְנֶה, שָׁם.	3 and keep the charge of the LORD thy God, to walk in His ways, to keep His statutes, and His commandments, and His ordinances, and His testimonies, according to that which is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself;
2.4 ד  לְמַעַן יָקִים יְהוָה אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר עָלַי לֵאמֹר, אִם-יִשְׁמְרוּ בָנֶיךָ אֶת-דַּרְכָּם לָלֶכֶת לְפָנַי בֶּאֱמֶת, בְּכָל-לְבָבָם וּבְכָל-נַפְשָׁם:  לֵאמֹר--לֹא-יִכָּרֵת לְךָ אִישׁ, מֵעַל כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 that the LORD may establish His word which He spoke concerning me, saying: If thy children take heed to their way, to walk before Me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee, said He, a man on the throne of Israel.
2.5 ה  וְגַם אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה לִי יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לִשְׁנֵי-שָׂרֵי צִבְאוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל לְאַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר וְלַעֲמָשָׂא בֶן-יֶתֶר וַיַּהַרְגֵם, וַיָּשֶׂם דְּמֵי-מִלְחָמָה, בְּשָׁלֹם; וַיִּתֵּן דְּמֵי מִלְחָמָה, בַּחֲגֹרָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר בְּמָתְנָיו, וּבְנַעֲלוֹ, אֲשֶׁר בְּרַגְלָיו.	5 Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did unto me, even what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet.
2.6 ו  וְעָשִׂיתָ, כְּחָכְמָתֶךָ; וְלֹא-תוֹרֵד שֵׂיבָתוֹ בְּשָׁלֹם, שְׁאֹל.	6 Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.
2.7 ז  וְלִבְנֵי בַרְזִלַּי הַגִּלְעָדִי תַּעֲשֶׂה-חֶסֶד, וְהָיוּ בְּאֹכְלֵי שֻׁלְחָנֶךָ:  כִּי-כֵן, קָרְבוּ אֵלַי, בְּבָרְחִי, מִפְּנֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם אָחִיךָ.	7 But show kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table; for so they drew nigh unto me when I fled from Absalom thy brother.
2.8 ח  וְהִנֵּה עִמְּךָ שִׁמְעִי בֶן-גֵּרָא בֶן-הַיְמִינִי, מִבַּחֻרִים, וְהוּא קִלְלַנִי קְלָלָה נִמְרֶצֶת, בְּיוֹם לֶכְתִּי מַחֲנָיִם; וְהוּא-יָרַד לִקְרָאתִי, הַיַּרְדֵּן, וָאֶשָּׁבַע לוֹ בַיהוָה לֵאמֹר, אִם-אֲמִיתְךָ בֶּחָרֶב.	8 And, behold, there is with thee Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to meet me at the Jordan, and I swore to him by the LORD, saying: I will not put thee to death with the sword.
2.9 ט  וְעַתָּה, אַל-תְּנַקֵּהוּ, כִּי אִישׁ חָכָם, אָתָּה; וְיָדַעְתָּ אֵת אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה-לּוֹ, וְהוֹרַדְתָּ אֶת-שֵׂיבָתוֹ בְּדָם שְׁאוֹל.	9 Now therefore hold him not guiltless, for thou art a wise man; and thou wilt know what thou oughtest to do unto him, and thou shalt bring his hoar head down to the grave with blood.'
2.10 י  וַיִּשְׁכַּב דָּוִד, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וַיִּקָּבֵר, בְּעִיר דָּוִד.  {פ}	10 And David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David. {P}
2.11 יא  וְהַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ דָּוִד עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַרְבָּעִים, שָׁנָה:  בְּחֶבְרוֹן מָלַךְ, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם מָלַךְ, שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים.	11 And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years: seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in Jerusalem.
2.12 יב  וּשְׁלֹמֹה--יָשַׁב, עַל-כִּסֵּא דָּוִד אָבִיו; וַתִּכֹּן מַלְכֻתוֹ, מְאֹד.  {ס}	12 And Solomon sat upon the throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established firmly. {S}
2.13 יג  וַיָּבֹא אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ בֶן-חַגִּית, אֶל-בַּת-שֶׁבַע אֵם-שְׁלֹמֹה, וַתֹּאמֶר, הֲשָׁלוֹם בֹּאֶךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר, שָׁלוֹם.	13 Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon. And she said: 'Comest thou peaceably?' And he said: 'Peaceably.'
2.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר, דָּבָר לִי אֵלָיִךְ; וַתֹּאמֶר, דַּבֵּר.	14 He said moreover: 'I have somewhat to say unto thee.' And she said: 'Say on.'
2.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַתְּ יָדַעַתְּ כִּי-לִי הָיְתָה הַמְּלוּכָה, וְעָלַי שָׂמוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל פְּנֵיהֶם, לִמְלֹךְ; וַתִּסֹּב הַמְּלוּכָה וַתְּהִי לְאָחִי, כִּי מֵיְהוָה הָיְתָה לּוֹ.	15 And he said: 'Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign; howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother's; for it was his from the LORD.
2.16 טז  וְעַתָּה, שְׁאֵלָה אַחַת אָנֹכִי שֹׁאֵל מֵאִתָּךְ--אַל-תָּשִׁבִי, אֶת-פָּנָי; וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, דַּבֵּר.	16 And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not.' And she said unto him: 'Say on.'
2.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר, אִמְרִי-נָא לִשְׁלֹמֹה הַמֶּלֶךְ, כִּי לֹא-יָשִׁיב, אֶת-פָּנָיִךְ; וְיִתֶּן-לִי אֶת-אֲבִישַׁג הַשּׁוּנַמִּית, לְאִשָּׁה.	17 And he said: 'Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king--for he will not say thee nay--that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.'
2.18 יח  וַתֹּאמֶר בַּת-שֶׁבַע, טוֹב; אָנֹכִי, אֲדַבֵּר עָלֶיךָ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.	18 And Bath-sheba said: 'Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.'
2.19 יט  וַתָּבֹא בַת-שֶׁבַע אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, לְדַבֶּר-לוֹ עַל-אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ; וַיָּקָם הַמֶּלֶךְ לִקְרָאתָהּ וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לָהּ, וַיֵּשֶׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, וַיָּשֶׂם כִּסֵּא לְאֵם הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַתֵּשֶׁב לִימִינוֹ.	19 Bath-sheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed down unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a throne to be set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.
2.20 כ  וַתֹּאמֶר, שְׁאֵלָה אַחַת קְטַנָּה אָנֹכִי שֹׁאֶלֶת מֵאִתָּךְ--אַל-תָּשֶׁב, אֶת-פָּנָי; וַיֹּאמֶר-לָהּ הַמֶּלֶךְ שַׁאֲלִי אִמִּי, כִּי לֹא-אָשִׁיב אֶת-פָּנָיִךְ.	20 Then she said: 'I ask one small petition of thee; deny me not.' And the king said unto her: 'Ask on, my mother; for I will not deny thee.'
2.21 כא  וַתֹּאמֶר, יֻתַּן אֶת-אֲבִישַׁג הַשֻּׁנַמִּית, לַאֲדֹנִיָּהוּ אָחִיךָ, לְאִשָּׁה.	21 And she said: 'Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.'
2.22 כב  וַיַּעַן הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה וַיֹּאמֶר לְאִמּוֹ, וְלָמָה אַתְּ שֹׁאֶלֶת אֶת-אֲבִישַׁג הַשֻּׁנַמִּית לַאֲדֹנִיָּהוּ, וְשַׁאֲלִי-לוֹ אֶת-הַמְּלוּכָה, כִּי הוּא אָחִי הַגָּדוֹל מִמֶּנִּי; וְלוֹ וּלְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן, וּלְיוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה.  {פ}	22 And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother: 'And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.' {P}
2.23 כג  וַיִּשָּׁבַע הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בַּיהוָה לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה יַעֲשֶׂה-לִּי אֱלֹהִים, וְכֹה יוֹסִיף, כִּי בְנַפְשׁוֹ, דִּבֶּר אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	23 Then king Solomon swore by the LORD, saying: 'God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.
2.24 כד  וְעַתָּה, חַי-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר הֱכִינַנִי ויושיביני (וַיּוֹשִׁיבַנִי) עַל-כִּסֵּא דָּוִד אָבִי, וַאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה-לִי בַּיִת, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר:  כִּי הַיּוֹם, יוּמַת אֲדֹנִיָּהוּ.	24 Now therefore as the LORD liveth, who hath established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me a house, as He promised, surely Adonijah shall be put to death this day.'
2.25 כה  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בְּיַד בְּנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע; וַיִּפְגַּע-בּוֹ, וַיָּמֹת.  {ס}	25 And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him, so that he died. {S}
2.26 כו  וּלְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, עֲנָתֹת לֵךְ עַל-שָׂדֶיךָ--כִּי אִישׁ מָוֶת, אָתָּה; וּבַיּוֹם הַזֶּה לֹא אֲמִיתֶךָ, כִּי-נָשָׂאתָ אֶת-אֲרוֹן אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה לִפְנֵי דָּוִד אָבִי, וְכִי הִתְעַנִּיתָ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-הִתְעַנָּה אָבִי.	26 And unto Abiathar the priest said the king: 'Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou art deserving of death; but I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou didst bear the ark of the Lord GOD before David my father, and because thou wast afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.'
2.27 כז  וַיְגָרֶשׁ שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-אֶבְיָתָר, מִהְיוֹת כֹּהֵן לַיהוָה, לְמַלֵּא אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר עַל-בֵּית עֵלִי בְּשִׁלֹה.  {פ}	27 So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the LORD; that the word of the LORD might be fulfilled, which He spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh. {P}
2.28 כח  וְהַשְּׁמֻעָה, בָּאָה עַד-יוֹאָב, כִּי יוֹאָב נָטָה אַחֲרֵי אֲדֹנִיָּה, וְאַחֲרֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם לֹא נָטָה; וַיָּנָס יוֹאָב אֶל-אֹהֶל יְהוָה, וַיַּחֲזֵק בְּקַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	28 And the tidings came to Joab; for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the Tent of the LORD, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
2.29 כט  וַיֻּגַּד לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, כִּי נָס יוֹאָב אֶל-אֹהֶל יְהוָה, וְהִנֵּה, אֵצֶל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וַיִּשְׁלַח שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-בְּנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע, לֵאמֹר--לֵךְ פְּגַע-בּוֹ.	29 And it was told king Solomon: 'Joab is fled unto the Tent of the LORD, and, behold, he is by the altar.' Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying: 'Go, fall upon him.'
2.30 ל  וַיָּבֹא בְנָיָהוּ אֶל-אֹהֶל יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו כֹּה-אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ צֵא, וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא, כִּי פֹה אָמוּת; וַיָּשֶׁב בְּנָיָהוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּבָר לֵאמֹר, כֹּה-דִבֶּר יוֹאָב וְכֹה עָנָנִי.	30 And Benaiah came to the Tent of the LORD, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the king: Come forth.' And he said: 'Nay; but I will die here.' And Benaiah brought back word unto the king, saying: 'Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.'
2.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, עֲשֵׂה כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, וּפְגַע-בּוֹ, וּקְבַרְתּוֹ; וַהֲסִירֹתָ דְּמֵי חִנָּם, אֲשֶׁר שָׁפַךְ יוֹאָב, מֵעָלַי, וּמֵעַל בֵּית אָבִי.	31 And the king said unto him: 'Do as he hath said, and fall upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the blood, which Joab shed without cause, from me and from my father's house.
2.32 לב  וְהֵשִׁיב יְהוָה אֶת-דָּמוֹ עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, אֲשֶׁר פָּגַע בִּשְׁנֵי-אֲנָשִׁים צַדִּקִים וְטֹבִים מִמֶּנּוּ וַיַּהַרְגֵם בַּחֶרֶב--וְאָבִי דָוִד, לֹא יָדָע:  אֶת-אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר שַׂר-צְבָא יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-עֲמָשָׂא בֶן-יֶתֶר שַׂר-צְבָא יְהוּדָה.	32 And the LORD will return his blood upon his own head, because he fell upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the sword, and my father David knew it not: Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah.
2.33 לג  וְשָׁבוּ דְמֵיהֶם בְּרֹאשׁ יוֹאָב, וּבְרֹאשׁ זַרְעוֹ לְעֹלָם; וּלְדָוִד וּלְזַרְעוֹ וּלְבֵיתוֹ וּלְכִסְאוֹ יִהְיֶה שָׁלוֹם, עַד-עוֹלָם--מֵעִם יְהוָה.	33 So shall their blood return upon the head of Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever; but unto David, and unto his seed, and unto his house, and unto his throne, shall there be peace for ever from the LORD.'
2.34 לד  וַיַּעַל, בְּנָיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע, וַיִּפְגַּע-בּוֹ, וַיְמִתֵהוּ; וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּבֵיתוֹ, בַּמִּדְבָּר.	34 Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and slew him; and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.
2.35 לה  וַיִּתֵּן הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-בְּנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע, תַּחְתָּיו--עַל-הַצָּבָא; וְאֶת-צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן נָתַן הַמֶּלֶךְ, תַּחַת אֶבְיָתָר.	35 And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the host; and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.
2.36 לו  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּקְרָא לְשִׁמְעִי, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ בְּנֵה-לְךָ בַיִת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְיָשַׁבְתָּ שָׁם; וְלֹא-תֵצֵא מִשָּׁם, אָנֶה וָאָנָה.	36 And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him: Build thee a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither.
2.37 לז  וְהָיָה בְּיוֹם צֵאתְךָ, וְעָבַרְתָּ אֶת-נַחַל קִדְרוֹן--יָדֹעַ תֵּדַע, כִּי מוֹת תָּמוּת:  דָּמְךָ, יִהְיֶה בְרֹאשֶׁךָ.	37 For on the day thou goest out, and passest over the brook Kidron, know thou for certain that thou shalt surely die; thy blood shall be upon thine own head.'
2.38 לח  וַיֹּאמֶר שִׁמְעִי לַמֶּלֶךְ, טוֹב הַדָּבָר, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה עַבְדֶּךָ; וַיֵּשֶׁב שִׁמְעִי בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, יָמִים רַבִּים.  {ס}	38 And Shimei said unto the king: 'The saying is good; as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do.' And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days. {S}
2.39 לט  וַיְהִי, מִקֵּץ שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים, וַיִּבְרְחוּ שְׁנֵי-עֲבָדִים לְשִׁמְעִי, אֶל-אָכִישׁ בֶּן-מַעֲכָה מֶלֶךְ גַּת; וַיַּגִּידוּ לְשִׁמְעִי לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה עֲבָדֶיךָ בְּגַת.	39 And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish, son of Maacah, king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying: 'Behold, thy servants are in Gath.'
2.40 מ  וַיָּקָם שִׁמְעִי, וַיַּחֲבֹשׁ אֶת-חֲמֹרוֹ, וַיֵּלֶךְ גַּתָה אֶל-אָכִישׁ, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-עֲבָדָיו; וַיֵּלֶךְ שִׁמְעִי, וַיָּבֵא אֶת-עֲבָדָיו מִגַּת.  {ס}	40 And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish, to seek his servants; and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath. {S}
2.41 מא  וַיֻּגַּד, לִשְׁלֹמֹה:  כִּי-הָלַךְ שִׁמְעִי מִירוּשָׁלִַם גַּת, וַיָּשֹׁב.	41 And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come back.
2.42 מב  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ וַיִּקְרָא לְשִׁמְעִי, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הֲלוֹא הִשְׁבַּעְתִּיךָ בַיהוָה וָאָעִד בְּךָ לֵאמֹר, בְּיוֹם צֵאתְךָ וְהָלַכְתָּ אָנֶה וָאָנָה, יָדֹעַ תֵּדַע כִּי מוֹת תָּמוּת; וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלַי טוֹב הַדָּבָר, שָׁמָעְתִּי.	42 And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him: 'Did I not make thee to swear by the LORD, and forewarned thee, saying: Know for certain, that on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any whither, thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me: The saying is good; I have heard it.
2.43 מג  וּמַדּוּעַ--לֹא שָׁמַרְתָּ, אֵת שְׁבֻעַת יְהוָה; וְאֶת-הַמִּצְוָה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתִי עָלֶיךָ.	43 Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the LORD, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?'
2.44 מד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-שִׁמְעִי, אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר יָדַע לְבָבְךָ, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ, לְדָוִד אָבִי; וְהֵשִׁיב יְהוָה אֶת-רָעָתְךָ, בְּרֹאשֶׁךָ.	44 The king said moreover to Shimei: 'Thou knowest all the wickedness which thy heart is privy to, that thou didst to David my father; therefore the LORD shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head.
2.45 מה  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בָּרוּךְ; וְכִסֵּא דָוִד, יִהְיֶה נָכוֹן לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--עַד-עוֹלָם.	45 But king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the LORD for ever.'
2.46 מו  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-בְּנָיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע, וַיֵּצֵא, וַיִּפְגַּע-בּוֹ וַיָּמֹת; וְהַמַּמְלָכָה נָכוֹנָה, בְּיַד-שְׁלֹמֹה.	46 So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he went out, and fell upon him, so that he died. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.
3.1 א  וַיִּתְחַתֵּן שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ מִצְרָיִם; וַיִּקַּח אֶת-בַּת-פַּרְעֹה, וַיְבִיאֶהָ אֶל-עִיר דָּוִד, עַד כַּלֹּתוֹ לִבְנוֹת אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ וְאֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, וְאֶת-חוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם סָבִיב.	1 And Solomon became allied to Pharaoh king of Egypt by marriage, and took Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the LORD, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.
3.2 ב  רַק הָעָם, מְזַבְּחִים בַּבָּמוֹת:  כִּי לֹא-נִבְנָה בַיִת לְשֵׁם יְהוָה, עַד הַיָּמִים הָהֵם.  {פ}	2 Only the people sacrificed in the high places, because there was no house built for the name of the LORD until those days. {P}
3.3 ג  וַיֶּאֱהַב שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-יְהוָה, לָלֶכֶת, בְּחֻקּוֹת דָּוִד אָבִיו:  רַק, בַּבָּמוֹת--הוּא מְזַבֵּחַ, וּמַקְטִיר.	3 And Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his father; only he sacrificed and offered in the high places.
3.4 ד  וַיֵּלֶךְ הַמֶּלֶךְ גִּבְעֹנָה לִזְבֹּחַ שָׁם, כִּי-הִיא הַבָּמָה הַגְּדוֹלָה; אֶלֶף עֹלוֹת יַעֲלֶה שְׁלֹמֹה, עַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ הַהוּא.	4 And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place; a thousand burnt-offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar.
3.5 ה  בְּגִבְעוֹן, נִרְאָה יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה--בַּחֲלוֹם הַלָּיְלָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים, שְׁאַל מָה אֶתֶּן-לָךְ.	5 In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night; and God said: 'Ask what I shall give thee.'
3.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁלֹמֹה, אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ עִם-עַבְדְּךָ דָוִד אָבִי חֶסֶד גָּדוֹל, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ לְפָנֶיךָ בֶּאֱמֶת וּבִצְדָקָה וּבְיִשְׁרַת לֵבָב, עִמָּךְ; וַתִּשְׁמָר-לוֹ, אֶת-הַחֶסֶד הַגָּדוֹל הַזֶּה, וַתִּתֶּן-לוֹ בֵן יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	6 And Solomon said: 'Thou hast shown unto Thy servant David my father great kindness, according as he walked before Thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with Thee; and Thou hast kept for him this great kindness, that Thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.
3.7 ז  וְעַתָּה, יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי, אַתָּה הִמְלַכְתָּ אֶת-עַבְדְּךָ, תַּחַת דָּוִד אָבִי; וְאָנֹכִי נַעַר קָטֹן, לֹא אֵדַע צֵאת וָבֹא.	7 And now, O LORD my God, Thou hast made Thy servant king instead of David my father; and I am but a little child; I know not how to go out or come in.
3.8 ח  וְעַבְדְּךָ--בְּתוֹךְ עַמְּךָ, אֲשֶׁר בָּחָרְתָּ:  עַם-רָב, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִמָּנֶה וְלֹא יִסָּפֵר מֵרֹב.	8 And Thy servant is in the midst of Thy people which Thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.
3.9 ט  וְנָתַתָּ לְעַבְדְּךָ לֵב שֹׁמֵעַ, לִשְׁפֹּט אֶת-עַמְּךָ, לְהָבִין, בֵּין-טוֹב לְרָע:  כִּי מִי יוּכַל לִשְׁפֹּט, אֶת-עַמְּךָ הַכָּבֵד הַזֶּה.	9 Give Thy servant therefore an understanding heart to judge Thy people, that I may discern between good and evil; for who is able to judge this Thy great people?'
3.10 י  וַיִּיטַב הַדָּבָר, בְּעֵינֵי אֲדֹנָי:  כִּי שָׁאַל שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	10 And the speech pleased the LORD, that Solomon had asked this thing.
3.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים אֵלָיו, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר שָׁאַלְתָּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה וְלֹא-שָׁאַלְתָּ לְּךָ יָמִים רַבִּים וְלֹא-שָׁאַלְתָּ לְּךָ עֹשֶׁר, וְלֹא שָׁאַלְתָּ, נֶפֶשׁ אֹיְבֶיךָ; וְשָׁאַלְתָּ לְּךָ הָבִין, לִשְׁמֹעַ מִשְׁפָּט.	11 And God said unto him: 'Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern justice;
3.12 יב  הִנֵּה עָשִׂיתִי, כִּדְבָרֶיךָ; הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי לְךָ, לֵב חָכָם וְנָבוֹן, אֲשֶׁר כָּמוֹךָ לֹא-הָיָה לְפָנֶיךָ, וְאַחֲרֶיךָ לֹא-יָקוּם כָּמוֹךָ.	12 behold, I have done according to thy word: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there hath been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.
3.13 יג  וְגַם אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁאַלְתָּ נָתַתִּי לָךְ, גַּם-עֹשֶׁר גַּם-כָּבוֹד:  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיָה כָמוֹךָ אִישׁ בַּמְּלָכִים, כָּל-יָמֶיךָ.	13 And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches and honour--so that there hath not been any among the kings like unto thee--all thy days.
3.14 יד  וְאִם תֵּלֵךְ בִּדְרָכַי, לִשְׁמֹר חֻקַּי וּמִצְוֺתַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ, דָּוִיד אָבִיךָ--וְהַאֲרַכְתִּי, אֶת-יָמֶיךָ.  {ס}	14 And if thou wilt walk in My ways, to keep My statutes and My commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days.' {S}
3.15 טו  וַיִּקַץ שְׁלֹמֹה, וְהִנֵּה חֲלוֹם; וַיָּבוֹא יְרוּשָׁלִַם וַיַּעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-אֲדֹנָי, וַיַּעַל עֹלוֹת וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלָמִים, וַיַּעַשׂ מִשְׁתֶּה, לְכָל-עֲבָדָיו.  {פ}	15 And Solomon awoke, and, behold, it was a dream; and he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and offered up burnt-offerings, and offered peace-offerings, and made a feast to all his servants. {P}
3.16 טז  אָז תָּבֹאנָה, שְׁתַּיִם נָשִׁים זֹנוֹת--אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַתַּעֲמֹדְנָה, לְפָנָיו.	16 Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and stood before him.
3.17 יז  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה הָאַחַת, בִּי אֲדֹנִי, אֲנִי וְהָאִשָּׁה הַזֹּאת, יֹשְׁבֹת בְּבַיִת אֶחָד; וָאֵלֵד עִמָּהּ, בַּבָּיִת.	17 And the one woman said: 'Oh, my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.
3.18 יח  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, לְלִדְתִּי, וַתֵּלֶד, גַּם-הָאִשָּׁה הַזֹּאת; וַאֲנַחְנוּ יַחְדָּו, אֵין-זָר אִתָּנוּ בַּבַּיִת, זוּלָתִי שְׁתַּיִם-אֲנַחְנוּ, בַּבָּיִת.	18 And it came to pass the third day after I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also; and we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.
3.19 יט  וַיָּמָת בֶּן-הָאִשָּׁה הַזֹּאת, לָיְלָה, אֲשֶׁר שָׁכְבָה, עָלָיו.	19 And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlay it.
3.20 כ  וַתָּקָם בְּתוֹךְ הַלַּיְלָה וַתִּקַּח אֶת-בְּנִי מֵאֶצְלִי, וַאֲמָתְךָ יְשֵׁנָה, וַתַּשְׁכִּיבֵהוּ, בְּחֵיקָהּ; וְאֶת-בְּנָהּ הַמֵּת, הִשְׁכִּיבָה בְחֵיקִי.	20 And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while thy handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.
3.21 כא  וָאָקֻם בַּבֹּקֶר לְהֵינִיק אֶת-בְּנִי, וְהִנֵּה-מֵת; וָאֶתְבּוֹנֵן אֵלָיו בַּבֹּקֶר, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-הָיָה בְנִי אֲשֶׁר יָלָדְתִּי.	21 And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead; but when I had looked well at it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, whom I did bear.'
3.22 כב  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה הָאַחֶרֶת לֹא כִי, בְּנִי הַחַי וּבְנֵךְ הַמֵּת, וְזֹאת אֹמֶרֶת לֹא כִי, בְּנֵךְ הַמֵּת וּבְנִי הֶחָי; וַתְּדַבֵּרְנָה, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	22 And the other woman said: 'Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son.' And this said: 'No; but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son.' Thus they spoke before the king.
3.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ--זֹאת אֹמֶרֶת, זֶה-בְּנִי הַחַי וּבְנֵךְ הַמֵּת; וְזֹאת אֹמֶרֶת לֹא כִי, בְּנֵךְ הַמֵּת וּבְנִי הֶחָי.  {פ}	23 Then said the king: 'The one saith: This is my son that liveth, and thy son is the dead; and the other saith: Nay; but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.' {P}
3.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, קְחוּ לִי-חָרֶב; וַיָּבִאוּ הַחֶרֶב, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	24 And the king said: 'Fetch me a sword.' And they brought a sword before the king.
3.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, גִּזְרוּ אֶת-הַיֶּלֶד הַחַי לִשְׁנָיִם; וּתְנוּ אֶת-הַחֲצִי לְאַחַת, וְאֶת-הַחֲצִי לְאֶחָת.	25 And the king said: 'Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.'
3.26 כו  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה אֲשֶׁר-בְּנָהּ הַחַי אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, כִּי-נִכְמְרוּ רַחֲמֶיהָ עַל-בְּנָהּ, וַתֹּאמֶר בִּי אֲדֹנִי תְּנוּ-לָהּ אֶת-הַיָּלוּד הַחַי, וְהָמֵת אַל-תְּמִיתֻהוּ; וְזֹאת אֹמֶרֶת, גַּם-לִי גַם-לָךְ לֹא יִהְיֶה--גְּזֹרוּ.	26 Then spoke the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her heart yearned upon her son, and she said: 'Oh, my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it.' But the other said: 'It shall be neither mine nor thine; divide it.'
3.27 כז  וַיַּעַן הַמֶּלֶךְ וַיֹּאמֶר, תְּנוּ-לָהּ אֶת-הַיָּלוּד הַחַי, וְהָמֵת, לֹא תְמִיתֻהוּ:  הִיא, אִמּוֹ.  {ס}	27 Then the king answered and said: 'Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.' {S}
3.28 כח  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַמִּשְׁפָּט אֲשֶׁר שָׁפַט הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּרְאוּ, מִפְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כִּי רָאוּ, כִּי-חָכְמַת אֱלֹהִים בְּקִרְבּוֹ לַעֲשׂוֹת מִשְׁפָּט.  {ס}	28 And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king; for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice. {S}
4.1 א  וַיְהִי הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, מֶלֶךְ עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	1 And king Solomon was king over all Israel. {S}
4.2 ב  וְאֵלֶּה הַשָּׂרִים, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ:  עֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶן-צָדוֹק, הַכֹּהֵן.  {ס}	2 And these were the princes whom he had: Azariah the son of Zadok, the priest; {S}
4.3 ג  אֱלִיחֹרֶף וַאֲחִיָּה בְּנֵי שִׁישָׁא, סֹפְרִים;  {ס}  יְהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-אֲחִילוּד, הַמַּזְכִּיר.  {ס}	3 Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; {S} Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder; {S}
4.4 ד  וּבְנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע, עַל-הַצָּבָא;  {ס}  וְצָדוֹק וְאֶבְיָתָר, כֹּהֲנִים.  {ס}	4 and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host; {S} and Zadok and Abiathar were priests; {S}
4.5 ה  וַעֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶן-נָתָן, עַל-הַנִּצָּבִים;  {ס}  וְזָבוּד בֶּן-נָתָן כֹּהֵן, רֵעֶה הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}	5 and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers; {S} and Zabud the son of Nathan was chief minister and the king's friend; {S}
4.6 ו  וַאֲחִישָׁר, עַל-הַבָּיִת;  {ס}  וַאֲדֹנִירָם בֶּן-עַבְדָּא, עַל-הַמַּס.  {ס}	6 and Ahishar was over the household; {S} and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the levy. {S}
4.7 ז  וְלִשְׁלֹמֹה שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר נִצָּבִים, עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְכִלְכְּלוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֶת-בֵּיתוֹ:  חֹדֶשׁ בַּשָּׁנָה יִהְיֶה עַל-אחד (הָאֶחָד), לְכַלְכֵּל.  {ס}	7 And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, who provided victuals for the king and his household: each man had to make provision for a month in the year. {S}
4.8 ח  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹתָם, בֶּן-חוּר בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם.  {ס}	8 And these are their names: The son of Hur, in the hill-country of Ephraim; {S}
4.9 ט  בֶּן-דֶּקֶר בְּמָקַץ וּבְשַׁעַלְבִים, וּבֵית שָׁמֶשׁ; וְאֵילוֹן, בֵּית חָנָן.  {ס}	9 the son of Deker, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Beth-shemesh, and Elon-beth-hanan; {S}
4.10 י  בֶּן-חֶסֶד, בָּאֲרֻבּוֹת; לוֹ שֹׂכֹה, וְכָל-אֶרֶץ חֵפֶר.  {ס}	10 the son of Hesed, in Arubboth; to him pertained Socoh, and all the land of Hepher; {S}
4.11 יא  בֶּן-אֲבִינָדָב, כָּל-נָפַת דֹּאר; טָפַת, בַּת-שְׁלֹמֹה, הָיְתָה לּוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה.  {ס}	11 the son of Abinadab, in all the region of Dor; he had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife; {S}
4.12 יב  בַּעֲנָא, בֶּן-אֲחִילוּד, תַּעְנַךְ, וּמְגִדּוֹ; וְכָל-בֵּית שְׁאָן אֲשֶׁר אֵצֶל צָרְתַנָה מִתַּחַת לְיִזְרְעֶאל, מִבֵּית שְׁאָן עַד אָבֵל מְחוֹלָה, עַד, מֵעֵבֶר לְיָקְמְעָם.  {ס}	12 Baana the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is beside Zarethan, beneath Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as beyond Jokmeam; {S}
4.13 יג  בֶּן-גֶּבֶר, בְּרָמֹת גִּלְעָד; לוֹ חַוֺּת יָאִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה אֲשֶׁר בַּגִּלְעָד, לוֹ חֶבֶל אַרְגֹּב אֲשֶׁר בַּבָּשָׁן--שִׁשִּׁים עָרִים גְּדֹלוֹת, חוֹמָה וּבְרִיחַ נְחֹשֶׁת.  {ס}	13 the son of Geber, in Ramoth-gilead; to him pertained the villages of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; even to him pertained the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, threescore great cities with walls and brazen bars; {S}
4.14 יד  אֲחִינָדָב בֶּן-עִדֹּא, מַחֲנָיְמָה.  {ס}	14 Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim; {S}
4.15 טו  אֲחִימַעַץ, בְּנַפְתָּלִי; גַּם-הוּא, לָקַח אֶת-בָּשְׂמַת בַּת-שְׁלֹמֹה--לְאִשָּׁה.  {ס}	15 Ahimaaz, in Naphtali; he also took Basemath the daughter of Solomon to wife; {S}
4.16 טז  בַּעֲנָא, בֶּן-חוּשָׁי, בְּאָשֵׁר, וּבְעָלוֹת.  {ס}	16 Baana the son of Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth; {S}
4.17 יז  יְהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-פָּרוּחַ, בְּיִשָּׂשכָר.  {ס}	17 Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar; {S}
4.18 יח  שִׁמְעִי בֶן-אֵלָא, בְּבִנְיָמִן.  {ס}	18 Shimei the son of Ela, in Benjamin; {S}
4.19 יט  גֶּבֶר בֶּן-אֻרִי, בְּאֶרֶץ גִּלְעָד--אֶרֶץ סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, וְעֹג מֶלֶךְ הַבָּשָׁן, וּנְצִיב אֶחָד, אֲשֶׁר בָּאָרֶץ.	19 Geber the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan; and one officer that was [over all the officers] in the land.
4.20 כ  יְהוּדָה וְיִשְׂרָאֵל רַבִּים, כַּחוֹל אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַיָּם לָרֹב, אֹכְלִים וְשֹׁתִים, וּשְׂמֵחִים.	20 Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.
4.21 א  וּשְׁלֹמֹה, הָיָה מוֹשֵׁל בְּכָל-הַמַּמְלָכוֹת--מִן-הַנָּהָר אֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְעַד גְּבוּל מִצְרָיִם:  מַגִּשִׁים מִנְחָה וְעֹבְדִים אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה, כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּיו.  {פ}	1 And Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt; they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life. {P}
4.22 ב  וַיְהִי לֶחֶם-שְׁלֹמֹה, לְיוֹם אֶחָד:  שְׁלֹשִׁים כֹּר סֹלֶת, וְשִׁשִּׁים כֹּר קָמַח.	2 And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal;
4.23 ג  עֲשָׂרָה בָקָר בְּרִאִים, וְעֶשְׂרִים בָּקָר רְעִי--וּמֵאָה צֹאן; לְבַד מֵאַיָּל וּצְבִי, וְיַחְמוּר, וּבַרְבֻּרִים, אֲבוּסִים.	3 ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and a hundred sheep, beside harts, and gazelles, and roebucks, and fatted fowl.
4.24 ד  כִּי-הוּא רֹדֶה בְּכָל-עֵבֶר הַנָּהָר, מִתִּפְסַח וְעַד-עַזָּה--בְּכָל-מַלְכֵי, עֵבֶר הַנָּהָר; וְשָׁלוֹם, הָיָה לוֹ מִכָּל-עֲבָרָיו--מִסָּבִיב.	4 For he had dominion over all the region on this side the River, from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over all the kings on this side the River; and he had peace on all sides round about him.
4.25 ה  וַיֵּשֶׁב יְהוּדָה וְיִשְׂרָאֵל לָבֶטַח, אִישׁ תַּחַת גַּפְנוֹ וְתַחַת תְּאֵנָתוֹ, מִדָּן, וְעַד-בְּאֵר שָׁבַע--כֹּל, יְמֵי שְׁלֹמֹה.  {ס}	5 And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig-tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon. {S}
4.26 ו  וַיְהִי לִשְׁלֹמֹה, אַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף אֻרְוֺת סוּסִים--לְמֶרְכָּבוֹ; וּשְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף, פָּרָשִׁים.	6 And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.
4.27 ז  וְכִלְכְּלוּ הַנִּצָּבִים הָאֵלֶּה אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, וְאֵת כָּל-הַקָּרֵב אֶל-שֻׁלְחַן הַמֶּלֶךְ-שְׁלֹמֹה--אִישׁ חָדְשׁוֹ:  לֹא יְעַדְּרוּ, דָּבָר.	7 And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon's table, every man in his month; they let nothing be lacking.
4.28 ח  וְהַשְּׂעֹרִים וְהַתֶּבֶן, לַסּוּסִים וְלָרָכֶשׁ--יָבִאוּ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה-שָּׁם, אִישׁ, כְּמִשְׁפָּטוֹ.  {ס}	8 Barley also and straw for the horses and swift steeds brought they unto the place where it should be, every man according to his charge. {S}
4.29 ט  וַיִּתֵּן אֱלֹהִים חָכְמָה לִשְׁלֹמֹה וּתְבוּנָה, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד; וְרֹחַב לֵב--כַּחוֹל, אֲשֶׁר עַל-שְׂפַת הַיָּם.	9 And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore.
4.30 י  וַתֵּרֶב חָכְמַת שְׁלֹמֹה, מֵחָכְמַת כָּל-בְּנֵי-קֶדֶם, וּמִכֹּל, חָכְמַת מִצְרָיִם.	10 And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east, and all the wisdom of Egypt.
4.31 יא  וַיֶּחְכַּם, מִכָּל-הָאָדָם, מֵאֵיתָן הָאֶזְרָחִי וְהֵימָן וְכַלְכֹּל וְדַרְדַּע, בְּנֵי מָחוֹל; וַיְהִי-שְׁמוֹ בְכָל-הַגּוֹיִם, סָבִיב.	11 For he was wiser than all men: than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol; and his fame was in all the nations round about.
4.32 יב  וַיְדַבֵּר, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים מָשָׁל; וַיְהִי שִׁירוֹ, חֲמִשָּׁה וָאָלֶף.	12 And he spoke three thousand proverbs; and his songs were a thousand and five.
4.33 יג  וַיְדַבֵּר, עַל-הָעֵצִים, מִן-הָאֶרֶז אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן, וְעַד הָאֵזוֹב אֲשֶׁר יֹצֵא בַּקִּיר; וַיְדַבֵּר עַל-הַבְּהֵמָה וְעַל-הָעוֹף, וְעַל-הָרֶמֶשׂ וְעַל-הַדָּגִים.	13 And he spoke of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall; he spoke also of beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.
4.34 יד  וַיָּבֹאוּ, מִכָּל-הָעַמִּים, לִשְׁמֹעַ, אֵת חָכְמַת שְׁלֹמֹה--מֵאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמְעוּ אֶת-חָכְמָתוֹ.  {ס}	14 And there came of all peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, who had heard of his wisdom. {S}
5.1 טו  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִירָם מֶלֶךְ-צוֹר אֶת-עֲבָדָיו, אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה, כִּי שָׁמַע, כִּי אֹתוֹ מָשְׁחוּ לְמֶלֶךְ תַּחַת אָבִיהוּ:  כִּי אֹהֵב, הָיָה חִירָם לְדָוִד--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {ס}	15 And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father; for Hiram was ever a lover of David. {S}
5.2 טז  וַיִּשְׁלַח שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶל-חִירָם לֵאמֹר.	16 And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying:
5.3 יז  אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-דָּוִד אָבִי, כִּי לֹא יָכֹל לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, מִפְּנֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה, אֲשֶׁר סְבָבֻהוּ--עַד תֵּת-יְהוָה אֹתָם, תַּחַת כַּפּוֹת רגלו (רַגְלָי).	17 'Thou knowest how that David my father could not build a house for the name of the LORD his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the LORD put them under the soles of my feet.
5.4 יח  וְעַתָּה, הֵנִיחַ יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי לִי מִסָּבִיב:  אֵין שָׂטָן, וְאֵין פֶּגַע רָע.	18 But now the LORD my God hath given me rest on every side; there is neither adversary, nor evil occurrence.
5.5 יט  וְהִנְנִי אֹמֵר--לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת, לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, אֶל-דָּוִד אָבִי לֵאמֹר, בִּנְךָ אֲשֶׁר אֶתֵּן תַּחְתֶּיךָ עַל-כִּסְאֶךָ, הוּא-יִבְנֶה הַבַּיִת לִשְׁמִי.	19 And, behold, I purpose to build a house for the name of the LORD my God, as the LORD spoke unto David my father, saying: Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build the house for My name.
5.6 כ  וְעַתָּה צַוֵּה וְיִכְרְתוּ-לִי אֲרָזִים מִן-הַלְּבָנוֹן, וַעֲבָדַי יִהְיוּ עִם-עֲבָדֶיךָ, וּשְׂכַר עֲבָדֶיךָ אֶתֵּן לְךָ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר תֹּאמֵר:  כִּי אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ, כִּי אֵין בָּנוּ אִישׁ יֹדֵעַ לִכְרָת-עֵצִים--כַּצִּדֹנִים.	20 Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar-trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants; and I will give thee hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt say; for thou knowest that there is not among us any that hath skill to hew timber like unto the Zidonians.'
5.7 כא  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ חִירָם, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי שְׁלֹמֹה--וַיִּשְׂמַח מְאֹד; וַיֹּאמֶר, בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לְדָוִד בֵּן חָכָם, עַל-הָעָם הָרָב הַזֶּה.	21 And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said: 'Blessed be the LORD this day, who hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.'
5.8 כב  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִירָם, אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה לֵאמֹר, שָׁמַעְתִּי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַחְתָּ אֵלָי; אֲנִי אֶעֱשֶׂה אֶת-כָּל-חֶפְצְךָ, בַּעֲצֵי אֲרָזִים וּבַעֲצֵי בְרוֹשִׁים.	22 And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying: 'I have heard that which thou hast sent unto me; I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of cypress.
5.9 כג  עֲבָדַי יֹרִדוּ מִן-הַלְּבָנוֹן יָמָּה, וַאֲנִי אֲשִׂימֵם דֹּבְרוֹת בַּיָּם עַד-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-תִּשְׁלַח אֵלַי וְנִפַּצְתִּים שָׁם--וְאַתָּה תִשָּׂא; וְאַתָּה תַּעֲשֶׂה אֶת-חֶפְצִי, לָתֵת לֶחֶם בֵּיתִי.	23 My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea; and I will make them into rafts to go by sea unto the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be broken up there, and thou shalt receive them; and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.'
5.10 כד  וַיְהִי חִירוֹם נֹתֵן לִשְׁלֹמֹה, עֲצֵי אֲרָזִים וַעֲצֵי בְרוֹשִׁים--כָּל-חֶפְצוֹ.	24 So Hiram gave Solomon timber of cedar and timber of cypress according to all his desire.
5.11 כה  וּשְׁלֹמֹה נָתַן לְחִירָם עֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף כֹּר חִטִּים, מַכֹּלֶת לְבֵיתוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים כֹּר, שֶׁמֶן כָּתִית:  כֹּה-יִתֵּן שְׁלֹמֹה לְחִירָם, שָׁנָה בְשָׁנָה.  {פ}	25 And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of beaten oil; thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year. {P}
5.12 כו  וַיהוָה, נָתַן חָכְמָה לִשְׁלֹמֹה, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר-לוֹ; וַיְהִי שָׁלֹם, בֵּין חִירָם וּבֵין שְׁלֹמֹה, וַיִּכְרְתוּ בְרִית, שְׁנֵיהֶם.	26 And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as He promised him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together.
5.13 כז  וַיַּעַל הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה מַס, מִכָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְהִי הַמַּס, שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף אִישׁ.	27 And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.
5.14 כח  וַיִּשְׁלָחֵם לְבָנוֹנָה, עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים בַּחֹדֶשׁ חֲלִיפוֹת--חֹדֶשׁ יִהְיוּ בַלְּבָנוֹן, שְׁנַיִם חֳדָשִׁים בְּבֵיתוֹ; וַאֲדֹנִירָם, עַל-הַמַּס.  {ס}	28 And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home; and Adoniram was over the levy. {S}
5.15 כט  וַיְהִי לִשְׁלֹמֹה שִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, נֹשֵׂא סַבָּל; וּשְׁמֹנִים אֶלֶף, חֹצֵב בָּהָר.	29 And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bore burdens, and fourscore thousand that were hewers in the mountains;
5.16 ל  לְבַד מִשָּׂרֵי הַנִּצָּבִים לִשְׁלֹמֹה, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמְּלָאכָה, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וּשְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת--הָרֹדִים בָּעָם, הָעֹשִׂים בַּמְּלָאכָה.  {ס}	30 besides Solomon's chief officers that were over the work, three thousand and three hundred, who bore rule over the people that wrought in the work. {S}
5.17 לא  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ וַיַּסִּעוּ אֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת אֲבָנִים יְקָרוֹת, לְיַסֵּד הַבָּיִת--אַבְנֵי גָזִית.	31 And the king commanded, and they quarried great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the house with hewn stone.
5.18 לב  וַיִּפְסְלוּ בֹּנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה, וּבֹנֵי חִירוֹם--וְהַגִּבְלִים; וַיָּכִינוּ הָעֵצִים וְהָאֲבָנִים, לִבְנוֹת הַבָּיִת.  {פ}	32 And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders and the Gebalites did fashion them, and prepared the timber and the stones to build the house. {P}
6.1 א  וַיְהִי בִשְׁמוֹנִים שָׁנָה וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת שָׁנָה לְצֵאת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם בַּשָּׁנָה הָרְבִיעִית בְּחֹדֶשׁ זִו, הוּא הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, לִמְלֹךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּבֶן הַבַּיִת, לַיהוָה.	1 And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Ziv, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the LORD.
6.2 ב  וְהַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה לַיהוָה--שִׁשִּׁים-אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים רָחְבּוֹ; וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אַמָּה, קוֹמָתוֹ.	2 And the house which king Solomon built for the LORD, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits.
6.3 ג  וְהָאוּלָם, עַל-פְּנֵי הֵיכַל הַבַּיִת--עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ, עַל-פְּנֵי רֹחַב הַבָּיִת; עֶשֶׂר בָּאַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ, עַל-פְּנֵי הַבָּיִת.	3 And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.
6.4 ד  וַיַּעַשׂ לַבָּיִת, חַלּוֹנֵי שְׁקֻפִים אֲטוּמִים.	4 And for the house he made windows broad within, and narrow without.
6.5 ה  וַיִּבֶן עַל-קִיר הַבַּיִת יצוע (יָצִיעַ), סָבִיב, אֶת-קִירוֹת הַבַּיִת סָבִיב, לַהֵיכָל וְלַדְּבִיר; וַיַּעַשׂ צְלָעוֹת, סָבִיב.	5 And against the wall of the house he built a side-structure round about, against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of the sanctuary; and he made side-chambers round about;
6.6 ו  היצוע (הַיָּצִיעַ) הַתַּחְתֹּנָה חָמֵשׁ בָּאַמָּה רָחְבָּהּ, וְהַתִּיכֹנָה שֵׁשׁ בָּאַמָּה רָחְבָּהּ, וְהַשְּׁלִישִׁית, שֶׁבַע בָּאַמָּה רָחְבָּהּ:  כִּי מִגְרָעוֹת נָתַן לַבַּיִת סָבִיב, חוּצָה, לְבִלְתִּי, אֲחֹז בְּקִירוֹת-הַבָּיִת.	6 the nethermost story of the side-structure was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad; for on the outside he made rebatements in the wall of the house round about, that the beams should not have hold in the walls of the house.--
6.7 ז  וְהַבַּיִת, בְּהִבָּנֹתוֹ--אֶבֶן-שְׁלֵמָה מַסָּע, נִבְנָה; וּמַקָּבוֹת וְהַגַּרְזֶן כָּל-כְּלִי בַרְזֶל, לֹא-נִשְׁמַע בַּבַּיִת בְּהִבָּנֹתוֹ.	7 For the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready at the quarry; and there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building.--
6.8 ח  פֶּתַח, הַצֵּלָע הַתִּיכֹנָה, אֶל-כֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת, הַיְמָנִית; וּבְלוּלִּים, יַעֲלוּ עַל-הַתִּיכֹנָה, וּמִן-הַתִּיכֹנָה, אֶל-הַשְּׁלִשִׁים.	8 The door for the lowest row of chambers was in the right side of the house and they went up by winding stairs into the middle row, and out of the middle into the third.
6.9 ט  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-הַבַּיִת, וַיְכַלֵּהוּ; וַיִּסְפֹּן אֶת-הַבַּיִת גֵּבִים, וּשְׂדֵרֹת בָּאֲרָזִים.	9 So he built the house, and finished it; and he covered in the house with planks of cedar over beams.
6.10 י  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-היצוע (הַיָּצִיעַ) עַל-כָּל-הַבַּיִת, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת קוֹמָתוֹ; וַיֶּאֱחֹז אֶת-הַבַּיִת, בַּעֲצֵי אֲרָזִים.  {פ}	10 And he built the stories of the side-structure against all the house, each five cubits high; and they rested on the house with timber of cedar. {P}
6.11 יא  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה, לֵאמֹר.	11 And the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying:
6.12 יב  הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה בֹנֶה, אִם-תֵּלֵךְ בְּחֻקֹּתַי וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי תַּעֲשֶׂה, וְשָׁמַרְתָּ אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺתַי, לָלֶכֶת בָּהֶם--וַהֲקִמֹתִי אֶת-דְּבָרִי אִתָּךְ, אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי אֶל-דָּוִד אָבִיךָ.	12 'As for this house which thou art building, if thou wilt walk in My statutes, and execute Mine ordinances, and keep all My commandments to walk in them; then will I establish My word with thee, which I spoke unto David thy father;
6.13 יג  וְשָׁכַנְתִּי, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא אֶעֱזֹב, אֶת-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	13 in that I will dwell therein among the children of Israel, and will not forsake My people Israel.' {P}
6.14 יד  וַיִּבֶן שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-הַבַּיִת, וַיְכַלֵּהוּ.	14 So Solomon built the house, and finished it.
6.15 טו  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-קִירוֹת הַבַּיִת מִבַּיְתָה, בְּצַלְעוֹת אֲרָזִים--מִקַּרְקַע הַבַּיִת עַד-קִירוֹת הַסִּפֻּן, צִפָּה עֵץ מִבָּיִת; וַיְצַף אֶת-קַרְקַע הַבַּיִת, בְּצַלְעוֹת בְּרוֹשִׁים.	15 And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar; from the floor of the house unto the joists of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood; and he covered the floor of the house with boards of cypress.
6.16 טז  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה מירכותי (מִיַּרְכְּתֵי) הַבַּיִת, בְּצַלְעוֹת אֲרָזִים, מִן-הַקַּרְקַע, עַד-הַקִּירוֹת; וַיִּבֶן לוֹ מִבַּיִת לִדְבִיר, לְקֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים.	16 And he built twenty cubits on the hinder part of the house with boards of cedar from the floor unto the joists; he even built them for himself within, for a Sanctuary, even for the most holy place.
6.17 יז  וְאַרְבָּעִים בָּאַמָּה, הָיָה הַבָּיִת--הוּא, הַהֵיכָל לִפְנָי.	17 And the house, that is, the temple before [the Sanctuary], was forty cubits long.
6.18 יח  וְאֶרֶז אֶל-הַבַּיִת, פְּנִימָה, מִקְלַעַת פְּקָעִים, וּפְטוּרֵי צִצִּים:  הַכֹּל אֶרֶז, אֵין אֶבֶן נִרְאָה.	18 And the cedar on the house within was carved with knops and open flowers; all was cedar; there was no stone seen.
6.19 יט  וּדְבִיר בְּתוֹךְ-הַבַּיִת מִפְּנִימָה, הֵכִין, לְתִתֵּן שָׁם, אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית יְהוָה.	19 And he prepared the Sanctuary in the midst of the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the LORD.
6.20 כ  וְלִפְנֵי הַדְּבִיר עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה אֹרֶךְ וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה רֹחַב, וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה קוֹמָתוֹ, וַיְצַפֵּהוּ, זָהָב סָגוּר; וַיְצַף מִזְבֵּחַ, אָרֶז.	20 And before the Sanctuary which was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof, overlaid with pure gold, he set an altar, which he covered with cedar.
6.21 כא  וַיְצַף שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-הַבַּיִת מִפְּנִימָה, זָהָב סָגוּר; וַיְעַבֵּר ברתיקות (בְּרַתּוּקוֹת) זָהָב, לִפְנֵי הַדְּבִיר, וַיְצַפֵּהוּ, זָהָב.	21 So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold; and he drew chains of gold across the wall before the Sanctuary; and he overlaid it with gold.
6.22 כב  וְאֶת-כָּל-הַבַּיִת צִפָּה זָהָב, עַד-תֹּם כָּל-הַבָּיִת; וְכָל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֲשֶׁר-לַדְּבִיר, צִפָּה זָהָב.	22 And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until all the house was finished; also the whole altar that belonged to the Sanctuary he overlaid with gold.
6.23 כג  וַיַּעַשׂ בַּדְּבִיר, שְׁנֵי כְרוּבִים עֲצֵי-שָׁמֶן:  עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת, קוֹמָתוֹ.	23 And in the Sanctuary he made two cherubim of olive-wood, each ten cubits high.
6.24 כד  וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת, כְּנַף הַכְּרוּב הָאֶחָת, וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת, כְּנַף הַכְּרוּב הַשֵּׁנִית; עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת, מִקְצוֹת כְּנָפָיו וְעַד-קְצוֹת כְּנָפָיו.	24 And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub; from the uttermost part of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.
6.25 כה  וְעֶשֶׂר, בָּאַמָּה, הַכְּרוּב, הַשֵּׁנִי:  מִדָּה אַחַת וְקֶצֶב אֶחָד, לִשְׁנֵי הַכְּרֻבִים.	25 And the other cherub was ten cubits; both the cherubim were of one measure and one form.
6.26 כו  קוֹמַת הַכְּרוּב הָאֶחָד, עֶשֶׂר בָּאַמָּה; וְכֵן, הַכְּרוּב הַשֵּׁנִי.	26 The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the other cherub.
6.27 כז  וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הַכְּרוּבִים בְּתוֹךְ הַבַּיִת הַפְּנִימִי, וַיִּפְרְשׂוּ אֶת-כַּנְפֵי הַכְּרֻבִים, וַתִּגַּע כְּנַף-הָאֶחָד בַּקִּיר, וּכְנַף הַכְּרוּב הַשֵּׁנִי נֹגַעַת בַּקִּיר הַשֵּׁנִי; וְכַנְפֵיהֶם אֶל-תּוֹךְ הַבַּיִת, נֹגְעֹת כָּנָף אֶל-כָּנָף.	27 And he set the cherubim within the inner house; and the wings of the cherubim were stretched forth, so that the wing of the one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house.
6.28 כח  וַיְצַף אֶת-הַכְּרוּבִים, זָהָב.	28 And he overlaid the cherubim with gold.
6.29 כט  וְאֵת כָּל-קִירוֹת הַבַּיִת מֵסַב קָלַע, פִּתּוּחֵי מִקְלְעוֹת כְּרוּבִים וְתִמֹרֹת, וּפְטוּרֵי, צִצִּים--מִלִּפְנִים, וְלַחִיצוֹן.	29 And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubim and palm-trees and open flowers, within and without.
6.30 ל  וְאֶת-קַרְקַע הַבַּיִת, צִפָּה זָהָב--לִפְנִימָה, וְלַחִיצוֹן.	30 And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within and without.
6.31 לא  וְאֵת פֶּתַח הַדְּבִיר, עָשָׂה דַּלְתוֹת עֲצֵי-שָׁמֶן; הָאַיִל מְזוּזוֹת, חֲמִשִׁית.	31 And for the entrance of the Sanctuary he made doors of olive-wood, the door-posts within the frame having five angles.
6.32 לב  וּשְׁתֵּי, דַּלְתוֹת עֲצֵי-שֶׁמֶן, וְקָלַע עֲלֵיהֶם מִקְלְעוֹת כְּרוּבִים וְתִמֹרֹת וּפְטוּרֵי צִצִּים, וְצִפָּה זָהָב; וַיָּרֶד עַל-הַכְּרוּבִים וְעַל-הַתִּמֹרוֹת, אֶת-הַזָּהָב.	32 And as for the two doors of olive-wood, he carved upon them carvings of cherubim and palm-trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold; and he spread the gold upon the cherubim, and upon the palm-trees.
6.33 לג  וְכֵן עָשָׂה לְפֶתַח הַהֵיכָל, מְזוּזוֹת עֲצֵי-שָׁמֶן, מֵאֵת, רְבִעִית.	33 So also made he for the entrance of the temple door-posts of olive-wood, within a frame four-square;
6.34 לד  וּשְׁתֵּי דַלְתוֹת, עֲצֵי בְרוֹשִׁים; שְׁנֵי צְלָעִים הַדֶּלֶת הָאַחַת, גְּלִילִים, וּשְׁנֵי קְלָעִים הַדֶּלֶת הַשֵּׁנִית, גְּלִילִים.	34 and two doors of cypress-wood; the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.
6.35 לה  וְקָלַע כְּרוּבִים וְתִמֹרוֹת, וּפְטֻרֵי צִצִּים; וְצִפָּה זָהָב, מְיֻשָּׁר עַל-הַמְּחֻקֶּה.	35 And he carved thereon cherubim and palm-trees and open flowers; and he overlaid them with gold fitted upon the graven work.
6.36 לו  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית, שְׁלֹשָׁה טוּרֵי גָזִית; וְטוּר, כְּרֻתֹת אֲרָזִים.	36 And he built the inner court with three rows of hewn stone, and a row of cedar beams.
6.37 לז  בַּשָּׁנָה, הָרְבִיעִית, יֻסַּד, בֵּית יְהוָה--בְּיֶרַח, זִו.	37 In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the LORD laid, in the month Ziv.
6.38 לח  וּבַשָּׁנָה הָאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה בְּיֶרַח בּוּל, הוּא הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁמִינִי, כָּלָה הַבַּיִת, לְכָל-דְּבָרָיו וּלְכָל-מִשְׁפָּטָו; וַיִּבְנֵהוּ, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים.	38 And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it.
7.1 א  וְאֶת-בֵּיתוֹ בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה, שְׁלֹשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה; וַיְכַל, אֶת-כָּל-בֵּיתוֹ.	1 And Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished all his house.
7.2 ב  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-בֵּית יַעַר הַלְּבָנוֹן, מֵאָה אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ וַחֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אַמָּה, קוֹמָתוֹ; עַל, אַרְבָּעָה טוּרֵי עַמּוּדֵי אֲרָזִים, וּכְרֻתוֹת אֲרָזִים, עַל-הָעַמּוּדִים.	2 For he built the house of the forest of Lebanon: the length thereof was a hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.
7.3 ג  וְסָפֻן בָּאֶרֶז, מִמַּעַל עַל-הַצְּלָעוֹת אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָעַמּוּדִים, אַרְבָּעִים, וַחֲמִשָּׁה--חֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר, הַטּוּר.	3 And it was covered with cedar above upon the side-chambers, that lay on forty and five pillars, fifteen in a row.
7.4 ד  וּשְׁקֻפִים, שְׁלֹשָׁה טוּרִים; וּמֶחֱזָה אֶל-מֶחֱזָה, שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים.	4 And there were beams in three rows; and light was over against light in three ranks.
7.5 ה  וְכָל-הַפְּתָחִים וְהַמְּזוּזוֹת, רְבֻעִים שָׁקֶף; וּמוּל מֶחֱזָה אֶל-מֶחֱזָה, שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים.	5 And all the doors with their posts were square in the frame; and light was over against light in three ranks.
7.6 ו  וְאֵת אוּלָם הָעַמּוּדִים, עָשָׂה, חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ; וְאוּלָם, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם, וְעַמֻּדִים וְעָב, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם.	6 And he made the porch of pillars: the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits; and a porch before them; and pillars and thick beams before them.
7.7 ז  וְאוּלָם הַכִּסֵּא אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁפָּט-שָׁם, אֻלָם הַמִּשְׁפָּט עָשָׂה; וְסָפוּן בָּאֶרֶז, מֵהַקַּרְקַע עַד-הַקַּרְקָע.	7 And he made the porch of the throne where he might judge, even the porch of judgment; and it was covered with cedar from floor to floor.
7.8 ח  וּבֵיתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-יֵשֶׁב שָׁם חָצֵר הָאַחֶרֶת, מִבֵּית לָאוּלָם, כַּמַּעֲשֶׂה הַזֶּה, הָיָה; וּבַיִת יַעֲשֶׂה לְבַת-פַּרְעֹה, אֲשֶׁר לָקַח שְׁלֹמֹה, כָּאוּלָם, הַזֶּה.	8 And his house where he might dwell, in the other court, within the porch, was of the like work. He made also a house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom Solomon had taken to wife, like unto this porch.
7.9 ט  כָּל-אֵלֶּה אֲבָנִים יְקָרֹת, כְּמִדּוֹת גָּזִית, מְגֹרָרוֹת בַּמְּגֵרָה, מִבַּיִת וּמִחוּץ; וּמִמַּסָּד, עַד-הַטְּפָחוֹת, וּמִחוּץ, עַד-הֶחָצֵר הַגְּדוֹלָה.	9 All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewn stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside unto the great court.
7.10 י  וּמְיֻסָּד, אֲבָנִים יְקָרוֹת אֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת--אַבְנֵי עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת, וְאַבְנֵי שְׁמֹנֶה אַמּוֹת.	10 And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.
7.11 יא  וּמִלְמַעְלָה, אֲבָנִים יְקָרוֹת כְּמִדּוֹת גָּזִית--וָאָרֶז.	11 And above were costly stones, after the measure of hewn stones, and cedar-wood.
7.12 יב  וְחָצֵר הַגְּדוֹלָה סָבִיב, שְׁלֹשָׁה טוּרִים גָּזִית, וְטוּר, כְּרֻתֹת אֲרָזִים; וְלַחֲצַר בֵּית-יְהוָה הַפְּנִימִית, וּלְאֻלָם הַבָּיִת.  {פ}	12 And the great court round about had three rows of hewn stone, and a row of cedar beams, like as the inner court of the house of the LORD, and the court of the porch of the house. {P}
7.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-חִירָם מִצֹּר.	13 And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.
7.14 יד  בֶּן-אִשָּׁה אַלְמָנָה הוּא מִמַּטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי, וְאָבִיו אִישׁ-צֹרִי חֹרֵשׁ נְחֹשֶׁת, וַיִּמָּלֵא אֶת-הַחָכְמָה וְאֶת-הַתְּבוּנָה וְאֶת-הַדַּעַת, לַעֲשׂוֹת כָּל-מְלָאכָה בַּנְּחֹשֶׁת; וַיָּבוֹא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-כָּל-מְלַאכְתּוֹ.	14 He was the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass; and he was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill, to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.
7.15 טו  וַיָּצַר אֶת-שְׁנֵי הָעַמּוּדִים, נְחֹשֶׁת:  שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה, קוֹמַת הָעַמּוּד הָאֶחָד, וְחוּט שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה, יָסֹב אֶת-הָעַמּוּד הַשֵּׁנִי.	15 Thus he fashioned the two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high each; and a line of twelve cubits did compass it about; [and so] the other pillar.
7.16 טז  וּשְׁתֵּי כֹתָרֹת עָשָׂה, לָתֵת עַל-רָאשֵׁי הָעַמּוּדִים--מֻצַק נְחֹשֶׁת:  חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת, קוֹמַת הַכֹּתֶרֶת הָאֶחָת, וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת, קוֹמַת הַכֹּתֶרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית.	16 And he made two capitals of molten brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars; the height of the one capital was five cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits.
7.17 יז  שְׂבָכִים מַעֲשֵׂה שְׂבָכָה, גְּדִלִים מַעֲשֵׂה שַׁרְשְׁרוֹת, לַכֹּתָרֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים--שִׁבְעָה לַכֹּתֶרֶת הָאֶחָת, וְשִׁבְעָה לַכֹּתֶרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית.	17 He also made nets of checker-work, and wreaths of chain-work, for the capitals which were upon the top of the pillars: seven for the one capital, and seven for the other capital.
7.18 יח  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-הָעַמּוּדִים; וּשְׁנֵי טוּרִים סָבִיב עַל-הַשְּׂבָכָה הָאֶחָת, לְכַסּוֹת אֶת-הַכֹּתָרֹת אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ הָרִמֹּנִים, וְכֵן עָשָׂה, לַכֹּתֶרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית.	18 And he made the pillars; and there were two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the capitals that were upon the top of the pomegranates; and so did he for the other capital.
7.19 יט  וְכֹתָרֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים--מַעֲשֵׂה, שׁוּשַׁן בָּאוּלָם:  אַרְבַּע, אַמּוֹת.	19 And the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars in the porch were of lily-work, four cubits.
7.20 כ  וְכֹתָרֹת, עַל-שְׁנֵי הָעַמּוּדִים, גַּם-מִמַּעַל מִלְּעֻמַּת הַבֶּטֶן, אֲשֶׁר לְעֵבֶר שבכה (הַשְּׂבָכָה); וְהָרִמּוֹנִים מָאתַיִם טֻרִים סָבִיב, עַל הַכֹּתֶרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית.	20 And there were capitals above also upon the two pillars, close by the belly which was beside the network; and the pomegranates were two hundred, in rows round about upon each capital.
7.21 כא  וַיָּקֶם, אֶת-הָעַמֻּדִים, לְאֻלָם, הַהֵיכָל; וַיָּקֶם אֶת-הָעַמּוּד הַיְמָנִי, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ יָכִין, וַיָּקֶם אֶת-הָעַמּוּד הַשְּׂמָאלִי, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ בֹּעַז.	21 And he set up the pillars at the porch of the temple; and he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.
7.22 כב  וְעַל רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים, מַעֲשֵׂה שׁוֹשָׁן; וַתִּתֹּם, מְלֶאכֶת הָעַמּוּדִים.	22 And upon the top of the pillars was lily-work; so was the work of the pillars finished.
7.23 כג  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַיָּם, מוּצָק:  עֶשֶׂר בָּאַמָּה מִשְּׂפָתוֹ עַד-שְׂפָתוֹ עָגֹל סָבִיב, וְחָמֵשׁ בָּאַמָּה קוֹמָתוֹ, וקוה (וְקָו) שְׁלֹשִׁים בָּאַמָּה, יָסֹב אֹתוֹ סָבִיב.	23 And he made the molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and the height thereof was five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
7.24 כד  וּפְקָעִים מִתַּחַת לִשְׂפָתוֹ סָבִיב, סֹבְבִים אֹתוֹ--עֶשֶׂר בָּאַמָּה, מַקִּפִים אֶת-הַיָּם סָבִיב; שְׁנֵי טוּרִים הַפְּקָעִים, יְצֻקִים בִּיצֻקָתוֹ.	24 And under the brim of it round about there were knops which did compass it, for ten cubits, compassing the sea round about; the knops were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
7.25 כה  עֹמֵד עַל-שְׁנֵי עָשָׂר בָּקָר, שְׁלֹשָׁה פֹנִים צָפוֹנָה וּשְׁלֹשָׁה פֹנִים יָמָּה וּשְׁלֹשָׁה פֹּנִים נֶגְבָּה וּשְׁלֹשָׁה פֹּנִים מִזְרָחָה, וְהַיָּם עֲלֵיהֶם, מִלְמָעְלָה; וְכָל-אֲחֹרֵיהֶם, בָּיְתָה.	25 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.
7.26 כו  וְעָבְיוֹ טֶפַח, וּשְׂפָתוֹ כְּמַעֲשֵׂה שְׂפַת-כּוֹס פֶּרַח שׁוֹשָׁן; אַלְפַּיִם בַּת, יָכִיל.  {פ}	26 And it was a hand-breadth thick; and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily; it held two thousand baths. {P}
7.27 כז  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַמְּכֹנוֹת עֶשֶׂר, נְחֹשֶׁת:  אַרְבַּע בָּאַמָּה, אֹרֶךְ הַמְּכוֹנָה הָאֶחָת, וְאַרְבַּע בָּאַמָּה רָחְבָּהּ, וְשָׁלֹשׁ בָּאַמָּה קוֹמָתָהּ.	27 And he made the ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height of it.
7.28 כח  וְזֶה מַעֲשֵׂה הַמְּכוֹנָה, מִסְגְּרֹת לָהֶם; וּמִסְגְּרֹת, בֵּין הַשְׁלַבִּים.	28 And the work of the bases was on this manner: they had borders; and there were borders between the stays;
7.29 כט  וְעַל-הַמִּסְגְּרוֹת אֲשֶׁר בֵּין הַשְׁלַבִּים, אֲרָיוֹת בָּקָר וּכְרוּבִים, וְעַל-הַשְׁלַבִּים, כֵּן מִמָּעַל; וּמִתַּחַת לַאֲרָיוֹת וְלַבָּקָר, לֹיוֹת מַעֲשֵׂה מוֹרָד.	29 and on the borders that were between the stays were lions, oxen, and cherubim; and upon the stays it was in like manner above; and beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging work.
7.30 ל  וְאַרְבָּעָה אוֹפַנֵּי נְחֹשֶׁת לַמְּכוֹנָה הָאַחַת, וְסַרְנֵי נְחֹשֶׁת, וְאַרְבָּעָה פַעֲמֹתָיו, כְּתֵפֹת לָהֶם; מִתַּחַת לַכִּיֹּר הַכְּתֵפוֹת יְצֻקוֹת, מֵעֵבֶר אִישׁ לֹיוֹת.	30 And every base had four brazen wheels, and axles of brass; and the four feet thereof had undersetters; beneath the laver were the undersetters molten, with wreaths at the side of each.
7.31 לא  וּפִיהוּ מִבֵּית לַכֹּתֶרֶת וָמַעְלָה, בָּאַמָּה, וּפִיהָ עָגֹל מַעֲשֵׂה-כֵן, אַמָּה וַחֲצִי הָאַמָּה; וְגַם-עַל-פִּיהָ, מִקְלָעוֹת, וּמִסְגְּרֹתֵיהֶם מְרֻבָּעוֹת, לֹא עֲגֻלּוֹת.	31 And the mouth of it within the crown and above was a cubit high; and the mouth thereof was round after the work of a pedestal, a cubit and a half; and also upon the mouth of it were gravings; and their borders were foursquare, not round.
7.32 לב  וְאַרְבַּעַת הָאוֹפַנִּים, לְמִתַּחַת לַמִּסְגְּרוֹת, וִידוֹת הָאוֹפַנִּים, בַּמְּכוֹנָה; וְקוֹמַת הָאוֹפַן הָאֶחָד, אַמָּה וַחֲצִי הָאַמָּה.	32 And the four wheels were underneath the borders; and the axletrees of the wheels were in the base; and the height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.
7.33 לג  וּמַעֲשֵׂה, הָאוֹפַנִּים, כְּמַעֲשֵׂה, אוֹפַן הַמֶּרְכָּבָה; יְדוֹתָם וְגַבֵּיהֶם, וְחִשֻּׁקֵיהֶם וְחִשֻּׁרֵיהֶם--הַכֹּל מוּצָק.	33 And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel; their axletrees, and their felloes, and their spokes, and their naves, were all molten.
7.34 לד  וְאַרְבַּע כְּתֵפוֹת--אֶל אַרְבַּע פִּנּוֹת, הַמְּכֹנָה הָאֶחָת; מִן-הַמְּכֹנָה, כְּתֵפֶיהָ.	34 And there were four undersetters at the four corners of each base; the undersetters thereof were of one piece with the base itself.
7.35 לה  וּבְרֹאשׁ הַמְּכוֹנָה, חֲצִי הָאַמָּה קוֹמָה--עָגֹל סָבִיב; וְעַל רֹאשׁ הַמְּכֹנָה יְדֹתֶיהָ, וּמִסְגְּרֹתֶיהָ מִמֶּנָּה.	35 And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a cubit high; and on the top of the base the stays thereof and the borders thereof were of one piece therewith.
7.36 לו  וַיְפַתַּח עַל-הַלֻּחֹת, יְדֹתֶיהָ, וְעַל ומסגרתיה (מִסְגְּרֹתֶיהָ), כְּרוּבִים אֲרָיוֹת וְתִמֹרֹת--כְּמַעַר-אִישׁ וְלֹיוֹת, סָבִיב.	36 And on the plates of the stays thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubim, lions, and palm-trees, according to the space of each, with wreaths round about.
7.37 לז  כָּזֹאת עָשָׂה, אֵת עֶשֶׂר הַמְּכֹנוֹת:  מוּצָק אֶחָד מִדָּה אַחַת, קֶצֶב אֶחָד--לְכֻלָּהְנָה.  {ס}	37 After this manner he made the ten bases; all of them had one casting, one measure, and one form. {S}
7.38 לח  וַיַּעַשׂ עֲשָׂרָה כִיֹּרוֹת, נְחֹשֶׁת:  אַרְבָּעִים בַּת יָכִיל הַכִּיּוֹר הָאֶחָד, אַרְבַּע בָּאַמָּה הַכִּיּוֹר הָאֶחָד--כִּיּוֹר אֶחָד עַל-הַמְּכוֹנָה הָאַחַת, לְעֶשֶׂר הַמְּכֹנוֹת.	38 And he made ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths; and every laver was four cubits; and upon every one of the ten bases one laver.
7.39 לט  וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-הַמְּכֹנוֹת, חָמֵשׁ עַל-כֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת מִיָּמִין, וְחָמֵשׁ עַל-כֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת מִשְּׂמֹאלוֹ; וְאֶת-הַיָּם, נָתַן מִכֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת הַיְמָנִית קֵדְמָה--מִמּוּל נֶגֶב.  {ס}	39 And he set the bases, five on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house; and he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south. {S}
7.40 מ  וַיַּעַשׂ חִירוֹם--אֶת-הַכִּיֹּרוֹת, וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקוֹת; וַיְכַל חִירָם, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-כָּל-הַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בֵּית יְהוָה.	40 And Hiram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basins. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he wrought for king Solomon in the house of the LORD:
7.41 מא  עַמֻּדִים שְׁנַיִם, וְגֻלֹּת הַכֹּתָרֹת אֲשֶׁר-עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים שְׁתָּיִם; וְהַשְּׂבָכוֹת שְׁתַּיִם--לְכַסּוֹת אֶת-שְׁתֵּי גֻּלּוֹת הַכֹּתָרֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים.	41 the two pillars, and the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars; and the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars;
7.42 מב  וְאֶת-הָרִמֹּנִים אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת, לִשְׁתֵּי הַשְּׂבָכוֹת--שְׁנֵי-טוּרִים רִמֹּנִים, לַשְּׂבָכָה הָאֶחָת, לְכַסּוֹת אֶת-שְׁתֵּי גֻּלּוֹת הַכֹּתָרֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָעַמּוּדִים.	42 and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars;
7.43 מג  וְאֶת-הַמְּכֹנוֹת, עָשֶׂר; וְאֶת-הַכִּיֹּרֹת עֲשָׂרָה, עַל-הַמְּכֹנוֹת.	43 and the ten bases, and the ten lavers on the bases;
7.44 מד  וְאֶת-הַיָּם, הָאֶחָד; וְאֶת-הַבָּקָר שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר, תַּחַת הַיָּם.	44 and the one sea, and the twelve oxen under the sea;
7.45 מה  וְאֶת-הַסִּירוֹת וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקוֹת, וְאֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים האהל (הָאֵלֶּה), אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה חִירָם לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בֵּית יְהוָה--נְחֹשֶׁת, מְמֹרָט.	45 and the pots, and the shovels, and the basins; even all these vessels, which Hiram made for king Solomon, in the house of the LORD, were of burnished brass.
7.46 מו  בְּכִכַּר הַיַּרְדֵּן יְצָקָם הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּמַעֲבֵה הָאֲדָמָה, בֵּין סֻכּוֹת, וּבֵין צָרְתָן.	46 In the plain of the Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan.
7.47 מז  וַיַּנַּח שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-כָּל-הַכֵּלִים, מֵרֹב מְאֹד מְאֹד--לֹא נֶחְקַר, מִשְׁקַל הַנְּחֹשֶׁת.	47 And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were exceeding many; the weight of the brass could not be found out.
7.48 מח  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלֹמֹה--אֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים, אֲשֶׁר בֵּית יְהוָה:  אֵת, מִזְבַּח הַזָּהָב, וְאֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו לֶחֶם הַפָּנִים, זָהָב.	48 And Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of the LORD: the golden altar, and the table whereupon the showbread was, of gold;
7.49 מט  וְאֶת-הַמְּנֹרוֹת חָמֵשׁ מִיָּמִין וְחָמֵשׁ מִשְּׂמֹאול, לִפְנֵי הַדְּבִיר--זָהָב סָגוּר; וְהַפֶּרַח וְהַנֵּרֹת וְהַמֶּלְקַחַיִם, זָהָב.	49 and the candlesticks, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the Sanctuary, of pure gold; and the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold;
7.50 נ  וְהַסִּפּוֹת וְהַמְזַמְּרוֹת וְהַמִּזְרָקוֹת, וְהַכַּפּוֹת וְהַמַּחְתּוֹת--זָהָב סָגוּר; וְהַפֹּתוֹת לְדַלְתוֹת הַבַּיִת הַפְּנִימִי לְקֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים, לְדַלְתֵי הַבַּיִת לַהֵיכָל--זָהָב.  {פ}	50 and the cups, and the snuffers, and the basins, and the pans, and the fire-pans, of pure gold; and the hinges, both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, that is, of the temple, of gold. {P}
7.51 נא  וַתִּשְׁלַם, כָּל-הַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בֵּית יְהוָה; וַיָּבֵא שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-קָדְשֵׁי דָּוִד אָבִיו, אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב וְאֶת-הַכֵּלִים--נָתַן, בְּאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה.  {פ}	51 Thus all the work that king Solomon wrought in the house of the LORD was finished. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated, the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house of the LORD. {P}
8.1 א  אָז יַקְהֵל שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-כָּל-רָאשֵׁי הַמַּטּוֹת נְשִׂיאֵי הָאָבוֹת לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה--יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  לְהַעֲלוֹת אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, מֵעִיר דָּוִד--הִיא צִיּוֹן.	1 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers' houses of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.
8.2 ב  וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּיֶרַח הָאֵתָנִים, בֶּחָג--הוּא, הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי.	2 And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.
8.3 ג  וַיָּבֹאוּ, כֹּל זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּשְׂאוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶת-הָאָרוֹן.	3 And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.
8.4 ד  וַיַּעֲלוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, וְאֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר בָּאֹהֶל; וַיַּעֲלוּ אֹתָם, הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם.	4 And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent; even these did the priests and the Levites bring up.
8.5 ה  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, וְכָל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל הַנּוֹעָדִים עָלָיו, אִתּוֹ, לִפְנֵי הָאָרוֹן--מְזַבְּחִים צֹאן וּבָקָר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִסָּפְרוּ וְלֹא יִמָּנוּ מֵרֹב.	5 And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.
8.6 ו  וַיָּבִאוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה אֶל-מְקוֹמוֹ, אֶל-דְּבִיר הַבַּיִת--אֶל-קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים:  אֶל-תַּחַת, כַּנְפֵי הַכְּרוּבִים.	6 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD unto its place, into the Sanctuary of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
8.7 ז  כִּי הַכְּרוּבִים פֹּרְשִׂים כְּנָפַיִם, אֶל-מְקוֹם הָאָרוֹן; וַיָּסֹכּוּ הַכְּרֻבִים עַל-הָאָרוֹן וְעַל-בַּדָּיו, מִלְמָעְלָה.	7 For the cherubim spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and the staves thereof above.
8.8 ח  וַיַּאֲרִכוּ, הַבַּדִּים, וַיֵּרָאוּ רָאשֵׁי הַבַּדִּים מִן-הַקֹּדֶשׁ עַל-פְּנֵי הַדְּבִיר, וְלֹא יֵרָאוּ הַחוּצָה; וַיִּהְיוּ שָׁם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	8 And the staves were so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the holy place, even before the Sanctuary; but they could not be seen without; and there they are unto this day.
8.9 ט  אֵין, בָּאָרוֹן, רַק שְׁנֵי לֻחוֹת הָאֲבָנִים, אֲשֶׁר הִנִּחַ שָׁם מֹשֶׁה בְּחֹרֵב--אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת יְהוָה עִם-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּצֵאתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	9 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone which Moses put there at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel when they came out of the land of Egypt.
8.10 י  וַיְהִי, בְּצֵאת הַכֹּהֲנִים מִן-הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וְהֶעָנָן מָלֵא, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה.	10 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of the LORD,
8.11 יא  וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים לַעֲמֹד לְשָׁרֵת, מִפְּנֵי הֶעָנָן:  כִּי-מָלֵא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה.  {פ}	11 so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD. {P}
8.12 יב  אָז, אָמַר שְׁלֹמֹה:  יְהוָה אָמַר, לִשְׁכֹּן בָּעֲרָפֶל.	12 Then spoke Solomon: The LORD hath said that He would dwell in the thick darkness.
8.13 יג  בָּנֹה בָנִיתִי בֵּית זְבֻל, לָךְ--מָכוֹן לְשִׁבְתְּךָ, עוֹלָמִים.	13 I have surely built Thee a house of habitation, a place for Thee to dwell in for ever.
8.14 יד  וַיַּסֵּב הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-פָּנָיו, וַיְבָרֶךְ, אֵת כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכָל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֹמֵד.	14 And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the congregation of Israel; and all the congregation of Israel stood.
8.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּפִיו, אֵת דָּוִד אָבִי; וּבְיָדוֹ מִלֵּא, לֵאמֹר.	15 And he said: 'Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke with His mouth unto David my father, and hath with His hand fulfilled it, saying:
8.16 טז  מִן-הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִי אֶת-עַמִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִמִּצְרַיִם, לֹא-בָחַרְתִּי בְעִיר מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לִהְיוֹת שְׁמִי שָׁם; וָאֶבְחַר בְּדָוִד, לִהְיוֹת עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	16 Since the day that I brought forth My people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house, that My name might be there; but I chose David to be over My people Israel.
8.17 יז  וַיְהִי, עִם-לְבַב דָּוִד אָבִי--לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת, לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	17 Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
8.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-דָּוִד אָבִי, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר הָיָה עִם-לְבָבְךָ, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לִשְׁמִי--הֱטִיבֹתָ, כִּי הָיָה עִם-לְבָבֶךָ.	18 But the LORD said unto David my father: Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for My name, thou didst well that it was in thy heart;
8.19 יט  רַק אַתָּה, לֹא תִבְנֶה הַבָּיִת:  כִּי אִם-בִּנְךָ הַיֹּצֵא מֵחֲלָצֶיךָ, הוּא-יִבְנֶה הַבַּיִת לִשְׁמִי.	19 nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for My name.
8.20 כ  וַיָּקֶם יְהוָה, אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר; וָאָקֻם תַּחַת דָּוִד אָבִי וָאֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, וָאֶבְנֶה הַבַּיִת, לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	20 And the LORD hath established His word that He spoke; for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
8.21 כא  וָאָשִׂם שָׁם מָקוֹם לָאָרוֹן, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם בְּרִית יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת עִם-אֲבֹתֵינוּ, בְּהוֹצִיאוֹ אֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.  {ס}	21 And there have I set a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, which He made with our fathers, when He brought them out of the land of Egypt.' {S}
8.22 כב  וַיַּעֲמֹד שְׁלֹמֹה, לִפְנֵי מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, נֶגֶד, כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּפְרֹשׂ כַּפָּיו, הַשָּׁמָיִם.	22 And Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven;
8.23 כג  וַיֹּאמַר, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֵין-כָּמוֹךָ אֱלֹהִים, בַּשָּׁמַיִם מִמַּעַל, וְעַל-הָאָרֶץ מִתָּחַת:  שֹׁמֵר הַבְּרִית, וְהַחֶסֶד, לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, הַהֹלְכִים לְפָנֶיךָ בְּכָל-לִבָּם.	23 and he said: 'O LORD, the God of Israel, there is no God like Thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath; who keepest covenant and mercy with Thy servants, that walk before Thee with all their heart;
8.24 כד  אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַרְתָּ, לְעַבְדְּךָ דָּוִד אָבִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתָּ, לוֹ; וַתְּדַבֵּר בְּפִיךָ וּבְיָדְךָ מִלֵּאתָ, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	24 who hast kept with Thy servant David my father that which Thou didst promise him; yea, Thou spokest with Thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with Thy hand, as it is this day.
8.25 כה  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁמֹר לְעַבְדְּךָ דָוִד אָבִי אֵת אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ לּוֹ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יִכָּרֵת לְךָ אִישׁ מִלְּפָנַי, יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל:  רַק אִם-יִשְׁמְרוּ בָנֶיךָ אֶת-דַּרְכָּם, לָלֶכֶת לְפָנַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַכְתָּ, לְפָנָי.	25 Now therefore, O LORD, the God of Israel, keep with Thy servant David my father that which Thou hast promised him saying: There shall not fail thee a man in My sight to sit on the throne of Israel, if only thy children take heed to their way, to walk before Me as thou hast walked before Me.
8.26 כו  וְעַתָּה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--יֵאָמֶן נָא, דבריך (דְּבָרְךָ), אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ, לְעַבְדְּךָ דָּוִד אָבִי.	26 Now therefore, O God of Israel, let Thy word, I pray Thee, be verified, which Thou didst speak unto Thy servant David my father.
8.27 כז  כִּי, הַאֻמְנָם, יֵשֵׁב אֱלֹהִים, עַל-הָאָרֶץ; הִנֵּה הַשָּׁמַיִם וּשְׁמֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם, לֹא יְכַלְכְּלוּךָ--אַף, כִּי-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר בָּנִיתִי.	27 But will God in very truth dwell on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee; how much less this house that I have builded!
8.28 כח  וּפָנִיתָ אֶל-תְּפִלַּת עַבְדְּךָ, וְאֶל-תְּחִנָּתוֹ--יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי:  לִשְׁמֹעַ אֶל-הָרִנָּה וְאֶל-הַתְּפִלָּה, אֲשֶׁר עַבְדְּךָ מִתְפַּלֵּל לְפָנֶיךָ הַיּוֹם.	28 Yet have Thou respect unto the prayer of Thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer which Thy servant prayeth before Thee this day;
8.29 כט  לִהְיוֹת עֵינֶךָ פְתֻחֹת אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה, לַיְלָה וָיוֹם, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתָּ יִהְיֶה שְׁמִי שָׁם--לִשְׁמֹעַ, אֶל-הַתְּפִלָּה, אֲשֶׁר יִתְפַּלֵּל עַבְדְּךָ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	29 that Thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place whereof Thou hast said: My name shall be there; to hearken unto the prayer which Thy servant shall pray toward this place.
8.30 ל  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ אֶל-תְּחִנַּת עַבְדְּךָ, וְעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יִתְפַּלְלוּ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה; וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע אֶל-מְקוֹם שִׁבְתְּךָ, אֶל-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְשָׁמַעְתָּ, וְסָלָחְתָּ.	30 And hearken Thou to the supplication of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place; yea, hear Thou in heaven Thy dwelling-place; and when Thou hearest, forgive.
8.31 לא  אֵת אֲשֶׁר יֶחֱטָא אִישׁ לְרֵעֵהוּ, וְנָשָׁא-בוֹ אָלָה לְהַאֲלֹתוֹ; וּבָא, אָלָה לִפְנֵי מִזְבַּחֲךָ--בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	31 If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be exacted of him to cause him to swear, and he come and swear before Thine altar in this house;
8.32 לב  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְעָשִׂיתָ וְשָׁפַטְתָּ אֶת-עֲבָדֶיךָ--לְהַרְשִׁיעַ רָשָׁע, לָתֵת דַּרְכּוֹ בְּרֹאשׁוֹ; וּלְהַצְדִּיק צַדִּיק, לָתֶת לוֹ כְּצִדְקָתוֹ.	32 then hear Thou in heaven, and do, and judge Thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
8.33 לג  בְּהִנָּגֵף עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי אוֹיֵב--אֲשֶׁר יֶחֶטְאוּ-לָךְ; וְשָׁבוּ אֵלֶיךָ וְהוֹדוּ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ, וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ וְהִתְחַנְּנוּ אֵלֶיךָ בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	33 When Thy people Israel are smitten down before the enemy, when they do sin against Thee, if they turn again to Thee, and confess Thy name, and pray and make supplication unto Thee in this house;
8.34 לד  וְאַתָּה, תִּשְׁמַע הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְסָלַחְתָּ, לְחַטַּאת עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַהֲשֵׁבֹתָם, אֶל-הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתָּ, לַאֲבוֹתָם.  {ס}	34 then hear Thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy people Israel, and bring them back unto the land which Thou gavest unto their fathers. {S}
8.35 לה  בְּהֵעָצֵר שָׁמַיִם וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה מָטָר, כִּי יֶחֶטְאוּ-לָךְ; וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וְהוֹדוּ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ, וּמֵחַטָּאתָם יְשׁוּבוּן, כִּי תַעֲנֵם.	35 When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, when they do sin against Thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess Thy name, and turn from their sin, when Thou dost afflict them;
8.36 לו  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְסָלַחְתָּ לְחַטַּאת עֲבָדֶיךָ וְעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי תוֹרֵם אֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ הַטּוֹבָה, אֲשֶׁר יֵלְכוּ-בָהּ; וְנָתַתָּה מָטָר עַל-אַרְצְךָ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּה לְעַמְּךָ לְנַחֲלָה.  {ס}	36 then hear Thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy servants, and of Thy people Israel, when Thou teachest them the good way wherein they should walk; and send rain upon Thy land, which Thou hast given to Thy people for an inheritance. {S}
8.37 לז  רָעָב כִּי-יִהְיֶה בָאָרֶץ, דֶּבֶר כִּי-יִהְיֶה שִׁדָּפוֹן יֵרָקוֹן אַרְבֶּה חָסִיל כִּי יִהְיֶה, כִּי יָצַר-לוֹ אֹיְבוֹ, בְּאֶרֶץ שְׁעָרָיו--כָּל-נֶגַע, כָּל-מַחֲלָה.	37 If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be;
8.38 לח  כָּל-תְּפִלָּה כָל-תְּחִנָּה, אֲשֶׁר תִהְיֶה לְכָל-הָאָדָם, לְכֹל, עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֲשֶׁר יֵדְעוּן, אִישׁ נֶגַע לְבָבוֹ, וּפָרַשׂ כַּפָּיו, אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	38 what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man of all Thy people Israel, who shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house;
8.39 לט  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע הַשָּׁמַיִם מְכוֹן שִׁבְתֶּךָ, וְסָלַחְתָּ וְעָשִׂיתָ, וְנָתַתָּ לָאִישׁ כְּכָל-דְּרָכָיו, אֲשֶׁר תֵּדַע אֶת-לְבָבוֹ:  כִּי-אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ לְבַדְּךָ, אֶת-לְבַב כָּל-בְּנֵי הָאָדָם.	39 then hear Thou in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and forgive, and do, and render unto every man according to all his ways, whose heart Thou knowest--for Thou, even Thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of men--
8.40 מ  לְמַעַן, יִרָאוּךָ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר-הֵם חַיִּים עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה--אֲשֶׁר נָתַתָּה, לַאֲבֹתֵינוּ.	40 that they may fear Thee all the days that they live in the land which Thou gavest unto our fathers.
8.41 מא  וְגַם, אֶל-הַנָּכְרִי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מֵעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוּא; וּבָא מֵאֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה, לְמַעַן שְׁמֶךָ.	41 Moreover concerning the stranger that is not of Thy people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country for Thy name's sake--
8.42 מב  כִּי יִשְׁמְעוּן, אֶת-שִׁמְךָ הַגָּדוֹל, וְאֶת-יָדְךָ הַחֲזָקָה, וּזְרֹעֲךָ הַנְּטוּיָה; וּבָא וְהִתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	42 for they shall hear of Thy great name, and of Thy mighty hand, and of Thine outstretched arm--when he shall come and pray toward this house;
8.43 מג  אַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע הַשָּׁמַיִם, מְכוֹן שִׁבְתֶּךָ, וְעָשִׂיתָ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרָא אֵלֶיךָ הַנָּכְרִי--לְמַעַן יֵדְעוּן כָּל-עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ, לְיִרְאָה אֹתְךָ כְּעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלָדַעַת, כִּי-שִׁמְךָ נִקְרָא עַל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר בָּנִיתִי.	43 hear Thou in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to Thee for; that all the peoples of the earth may know Thy name, to fear Thee, as doth Thy people Israel, and that they may know that Thy name is called upon this house which I have built.
8.44 מד  כִּי-יֵצֵא עַמְּךָ לַמִּלְחָמָה עַל-אֹיְבוֹ, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁלָחֵם; וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, דֶּרֶךְ הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתָּ בָּהּ, וְהַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר-בָּנִתִי לִשְׁמֶךָ.	44 If Thy people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatsoever way Thou shalt send them, and they pray unto the LORD toward the city which Thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for Thy name;
8.45 מה  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ, הַשָּׁמַיִם, אֶת-תְּפִלָּתָם, וְאֶת-תְּחִנָּתָם; וְעָשִׂיתָ, מִשְׁפָּטָם.	45 then hear Thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.
8.46 מו  כִּי יֶחֶטְאוּ-לָךְ, כִּי אֵין אָדָם אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֶחֱטָא, וְאָנַפְתָּ בָם, וּנְתַתָּם לִפְנֵי אוֹיֵב; וְשָׁבוּם שֹׁבֵיהֶם אֶל-אֶרֶץ הָאוֹיֵב, רְחוֹקָה אוֹ קְרוֹבָה.	46 If they sin against Thee--for there is no man that sinneth not--and Thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive unto the land of the enemy, far off or near;
8.47 מז  וְהֵשִׁיבוּ, אֶל-לִבָּם, בָּאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבּוּ-שָׁם; וְשָׁבוּ וְהִתְחַנְּנוּ אֵלֶיךָ, בְּאֶרֶץ שֹׁבֵיהֶם לֵאמֹר, חָטָאנוּ וְהֶעֱוִינוּ, רָשָׁעְנוּ.	47 yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried captive, and turn back, and make supplication unto Thee in the land of them that carried them captive, saying: We have sinned, and have done iniquitously, we have dealt wickedly;
8.48 מח  וְשָׁבוּ אֵלֶיךָ, בְּכָל-לְבָבָם וּבְכָל-נַפְשָׁם, בְּאֶרֶץ אֹיְבֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁבוּ אֹתָם; וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ אֵלֶיךָ, דֶּרֶךְ אַרְצָם אֲשֶׁר נָתַתָּה לַאֲבוֹתָם, הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתָּ, וְהַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-בנית (בָּנִיתִי) לִשְׁמֶךָ.	48 if they return unto Thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies, who carried them captive, and pray unto Thee toward their land, which Thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which Thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for Thy name;
8.49 מט  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ הַשָּׁמַיִם מְכוֹן שִׁבְתְּךָ, אֶת-תְּפִלָּתָם וְאֶת-תְּחִנָּתָם; וְעָשִׂיתָ, מִשְׁפָּטָם.	49 then hear Thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and maintain their cause;
8.50 נ  וְסָלַחְתָּ לְעַמְּךָ אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ-לָךְ, וּלְכָל-פִּשְׁעֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר פָּשְׁעוּ-בָךְ; וּנְתַתָּם לְרַחֲמִים לִפְנֵי שֹׁבֵיהֶם, וְרִחֲמוּם.	50 and forgive Thy people who have sinned against Thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have transgressed against Thee; and give them compassion before those who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them;
8.51 נא  כִּי-עַמְּךָ וְנַחֲלָתְךָ, הֵם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתָ מִמִּצְרַיִם, מִתּוֹךְ כּוּר הַבַּרְזֶל.	51 for they are Thy people, and Thine inheritance, which Thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron;
8.52 נב  לִהְיוֹת עֵינֶיךָ פְתֻחֹת אֶל-תְּחִנַּת עַבְדְּךָ, וְאֶל-תְּחִנַּת עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִשְׁמֹעַ אֲלֵיהֶם, בְּכֹל קָרְאָם אֵלֶיךָ.	52 that Thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of Thy servant, and unto the supplication of Thy people Israel, to hearken unto them whensoever they cry unto Thee.
8.53 נג  כִּי-אַתָּה הִבְדַּלְתָּם לְךָ, לְנַחֲלָה, מִכֹּל, עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ בְּיַד מֹשֶׁה עַבְדֶּךָ, בְּהוֹצִיאֲךָ אֶת-אֲבֹתֵינוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם--אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}	53 For Thou didst set them apart from among all the peoples of the earth, to be Thine inheritance, as Thou didst speak by the hand of Moses Thy servant, when Thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord GOD.' {P}
8.54 נד  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת שְׁלֹמֹה, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל אֶל-יְהוָה, אֵת כָּל-הַתְּפִלָּה וְהַתְּחִנָּה, הַזֹּאת; קָם מִלִּפְנֵי מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, מִכְּרֹעַ עַל-בִּרְכָּיו, וְכַפָּיו, פְּרֻשׂוֹת הַשָּׁמָיִם.	54 And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the LORD, he arose from before the altar of the LORD, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread forth toward heaven.
8.55 נה  וַיַּעֲמֹד--וַיְבָרֶךְ, אֵת כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל:  קוֹל גָּדוֹל, לֵאמֹר.	55 And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying:
8.56 נו  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן מְנוּחָה לְעַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּכֹל, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר:  לֹא-נָפַל דָּבָר אֶחָד, מִכֹּל דְּבָרוֹ הַטּוֹב, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד מֹשֶׁה עַבְדּוֹ.	56 'Blessed be the LORD, that hath given rest unto His people Israel, according to all that He promised; there hath not failed one word of all His good promise, which He promised by the hand of Moses His servant.
8.57 נז  יְהִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ עִמָּנוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיָה עִם-אֲבֹתֵינוּ:  אַל-יַעַזְבֵנוּ, וְאַל-יִטְּשֵׁנוּ.	57 The LORD our God be with us, as He was with our fathers; let Him not leave us, nor forsake us;
8.58 נח  לְהַטּוֹת לְבָבֵנוּ, אֵלָיו--לָלֶכֶת בְּכָל-דְּרָכָיו, וְלִשְׁמֹר מִצְוֺתָיו וְחֻקָּיו וּמִשְׁפָּטָיו, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה, אֶת-אֲבֹתֵינוּ.	58 that He may incline our hearts unto Him, to walk in all His ways, and to keep His commandments, and His statutes, and His ordinances, which He commanded our fathers.
8.59 נט  וְיִהְיוּ דְבָרַי אֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר הִתְחַנַּנְתִּי לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, קְרֹבִים אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, יוֹמָם וָלָיְלָה:  לַעֲשׂוֹת מִשְׁפַּט עַבְדּוֹ, וּמִשְׁפַּט עַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל--דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ.	59 And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD our God day and night, that He maintain the cause of His servant, and the cause of His people Israel, as every day shall require;
8.60 ס  לְמַעַן, דַּעַת כָּל-עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ, כִּי יְהוָה, הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים:  אֵין, עוֹד.	60 that all the peoples of the earth may know that the LORD, He is God; there is none else.
8.61 סא  וְהָיָה לְבַבְכֶם שָׁלֵם, עִם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, לָלֶכֶת בְּחֻקָּיו וְלִשְׁמֹר מִצְוֺתָיו, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	61 Let your heart therefore be whole with the LORD our God, to walk in His statutes, and to keep His commandments, as at this day.'
8.62 סב  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, זֹבְחִים זֶבַח, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	62 And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the LORD.
8.63 סג  וַיִּזְבַּח שְׁלֹמֹה, אֵת זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים אֲשֶׁר זָבַח לַיהוָה, בָּקָר עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף, וְצֹאן מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף; וַיַּחְנְכוּ אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, הַמֶּלֶךְ וְכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	63 And Solomon offered for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which he offered unto the LORD, two and twenty thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the LORD.
8.64 סד  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, קִדַּשׁ הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-תּוֹךְ הֶחָצֵר אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי בֵית-יְהוָה--כִּי-עָשָׂה שָׁם אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וְאֵת חֶלְבֵי הַשְּׁלָמִים:  כִּי-מִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, קָטֹן מֵהָכִיל אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וְאֵת חֶלְבֵי הַשְּׁלָמִים.	64 The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was before the house of the LORD; for there he offered the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering, and the fat of the peace-offerings; because the brazen altar that was before the LORD was too little to receive the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering, and the fat of the peace-offerings.
8.65 סה  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלֹמֹה בָעֵת-הַהִיא אֶת-הֶחָג וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ קָהָל גָּדוֹל מִלְּבוֹא חֲמָת עַד-נַחַל מִצְרַיִם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וְשִׁבְעַת יָמִים--אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, יוֹם.	65 So Solomon held the feast at that time, and all Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entrance Hamath unto the Brook of Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and seven days, even fourteen days.
8.66 סו  בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי שִׁלַּח אֶת-הָעָם, וַיְבָרְכוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֵּלְכוּ לְאָהֳלֵיהֶם, שְׂמֵחִים וְטוֹבֵי לֵב, עַל כָּל-הַטּוֹבָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוָה לְדָוִד עַבְדּוֹ, וּלְיִשְׂרָאֵל עַמּוֹ.	66 On the eighth day he sent the people away, and they blessed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that the LORD had shown unto David His servant, and to Israel His people.
9.1 א  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת שְׁלֹמֹה, לִבְנוֹת אֶת-בֵּית-יְהוָה וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֵת כָּל-חֵשֶׁק שְׁלֹמֹה, אֲשֶׁר חָפֵץ לַעֲשׂוֹת.  {פ}	1 And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the LORD, and the king's house, and all Solomon's delight which he was pleased to do, {P}
9.2 ב  וַיֵּרָא יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה, שֵׁנִית, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִרְאָה אֵלָיו, בְּגִבְעוֹן.	2 that the LORD appeared to Solomon the second time, as He had appeared unto him at Gibeon.
9.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, שָׁמַעְתִּי אֶת-תְּפִלָּתְךָ וְאֶת-תְּחִנָּתְךָ אֲשֶׁר הִתְחַנַּנְתָּה לְפָנַי--הִקְדַּשְׁתִּי אֶת-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר בָּנִתָה, לָשׂוּם-שְׁמִי שָׁם עַד-עוֹלָם; וְהָיוּ עֵינַי וְלִבִּי שָׁם, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	3 And the LORD said unto him: 'I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before Me: I have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put My name there for ever; and Mine eyes and My heart shall be there perpetually.
9.4 ד  וְאַתָּה אִם-תֵּלֵךְ לְפָנַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ דָּוִד אָבִיךָ בְּתָם-לֵבָב וּבְיֹשֶׁר, לַעֲשׂוֹת, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִיךָ--חֻקַּי וּמִשְׁפָּטַי, תִּשְׁמֹר.	4 And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before Me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep My statutes and Mine ordinances;
9.5 ה  וַהֲקִמֹתִי אֶת-כִּסֵּא מַמְלַכְתְּךָ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְעֹלָם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי, עַל-דָּוִד אָבִיךָ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יִכָּרֵת לְךָ אִישׁ, מֵעַל כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom over Israel for ever; according as I promised to David thy father, saying: There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.
9.6 ו  אִם-שׁוֹב תְּשֻׁבוּן אַתֶּם וּבְנֵיכֶם, מֵאַחֲרַי, וְלֹא תִשְׁמְרוּ מִצְוֺתַי חֻקֹּתַי, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לִפְנֵיכֶם; וַהֲלַכְתֶּם, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוִיתֶם, לָהֶם.	6 But if ye shall turn away from following Me, ye or your children, and not keep My commandments and My statutes which I have set before you, but shall go and serve other gods, and worship them;
9.7 ז  וְהִכְרַתִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעַל פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָהֶם, וְאֶת-הַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר הִקְדַּשְׁתִּי לִשְׁמִי, אֲשַׁלַּח מֵעַל פָּנָי; וְהָיָה יִשְׂרָאֵל לְמָשָׁל וְלִשְׁנִינָה, בְּכָל-הָעַמִּים.	7 then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed for My name, will I cast out of My sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a by word among all peoples;
9.8 ח  וְהַבַּיִת הַזֶּה יִהְיֶה עֶלְיוֹן, כָּל-עֹבֵר עָלָיו יִשֹּׁם וְשָׁרָק; וְאָמְרוּ, עַל-מֶה עָשָׂה יְהוָה כָּכָה, לָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, וְלַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	8 and this house which is so high [shall become desolate], and every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and when they shall say: Why hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and to this house?
9.9 ט  וְאָמְרוּ, עַל אֲשֶׁר עָזְבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר הוֹצִיא אֶת-אֲבֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וַיַּחֲזִקוּ בֵּאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וישתחו (וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ) לָהֶם וַיַּעַבְדֻם; עַל-כֵּן, הֵבִיא יְהוָה עֲלֵיהֶם, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה, הַזֹּאת.  {פ}	9 they shall be answered: Because they forsook the LORD their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them; therefore hath the LORD brought all this evil upon them.' {P}
9.10 י  וַיְהִי, מִקְצֵה עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, אֲשֶׁר-בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-שְׁנֵי הַבָּתִּים--אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ.	10 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the two houses, the house of the LORD and the king's house--
9.11 יא  חִירָם מֶלֶךְ-צֹר נִשָּׂא אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה בַּעֲצֵי אֲרָזִים וּבַעֲצֵי בְרוֹשִׁים, וּבַזָּהָב--לְכָל-חֶפְצוֹ; אָז יִתֵּן הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה לְחִירָם, עֶשְׂרִים עִיר, בְּאֶרֶץ, הַגָּלִיל.	11 now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar-trees and cypress-trees, and with gold, according to all his desire--that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
9.12 יב  וַיֵּצֵא חִירָם, מִצֹּר, לִרְאוֹת אֶת-הֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן-לוֹ שְׁלֹמֹה; וְלֹא יָשְׁרוּ, בְּעֵינָיו.	12 And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him: and they pleased him not.
9.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר--מָה הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּה לִּי אָחִי; וַיִּקְרָא לָהֶם אֶרֶץ כָּבוּל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	13 And he said: 'What cities are these which thou hast given me, my brother?' And they were called the land of Cabul, unto this day. {P}
9.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִירָם, לַמֶּלֶךְ, מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים, כִּכַּר זָהָב.	14 And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.
9.15 טו  וְזֶה דְבַר-הַמַּס אֲשֶׁר-הֶעֱלָה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, לִבְנוֹת אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה וְאֶת-בֵּיתוֹ וְאֶת-הַמִּלּוֹא, וְאֵת, חוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְאֶת-חָצֹר וְאֶת-מְגִדּוֹ, וְאֶת-גָּזֶר.	15 And this is the account of the levy which king Solomon raised; to build the house of the LORD, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.
9.16 טז  פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם עָלָה, וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-גֶּזֶר וַיִּשְׂרְפָהּ בָּאֵשׁ, וְאֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַיֹּשֵׁב בָּעִיר, הָרָג; וַיִּתְּנָהּ, שִׁלֻּחִים, לְבִתּוֹ, אֵשֶׁת שְׁלֹמֹה.	16 Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and given it for a portion unto his daughter, Solomon's wife.
9.17 יז  וַיִּבֶן שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-גָּזֶר, וְאֶת-בֵּית חֹרֹן תַּחְתּוֹן.	17 And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon the nether,
9.18 יח  וְאֶת-בַּעֲלָת וְאֶת-תמר (תַּדְמֹר) בַּמִּדְבָּר, בָּאָרֶץ.	18 and Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land,
9.19 יט  וְאֵת כָּל-עָרֵי הַמִּסְכְּנוֹת, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ לִשְׁלֹמֹה, וְאֵת עָרֵי הָרֶכֶב, וְאֵת עָרֵי הַפָּרָשִׁים; וְאֵת חֵשֶׁק שְׁלֹמֹה, אֲשֶׁר חָשַׁק לִבְנוֹת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם וּבַלְּבָנוֹן, וּבְכֹל, אֶרֶץ מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ.	19 and all the store-cities that Solomon had, and the cities for his chariots, and the cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
9.20 כ  כָּל-הָעָם הַנּוֹתָר מִן-הָאֱמֹרִי הַחִתִּי הַפְּרִזִּי, הַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֵמָּה.	20 All the people that were left of the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of the children of Israel;
9.21 כא  בְּנֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר נֹתְרוּ אַחֲרֵיהֶם בָּאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָכְלוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַחֲרִימָם; וַיַּעֲלֵם שְׁלֹמֹה לְמַס-עֹבֵד, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	21 even their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel were not able utterly to destroy, of them did Solomon raise a levy of bondservants, unto this day.
9.22 כב  וּמִבְּנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא-נָתַן שְׁלֹמֹה, עָבֶד:  כִּי-הֵם אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, וַעֲבָדָיו וְשָׂרָיו וְשָׁלִישָׁיו, וְשָׂרֵי רִכְבּוֹ, וּפָרָשָׁיו.  {ס}	22 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondservants; but they were the men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen. {S}
9.23 כג  אֵלֶּה שָׂרֵי הַנִּצָּבִים, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמְּלָאכָה לִשְׁלֹמֹה, חֲמִשִּׁים, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת--הָרֹדִים בָּעָם, הָעֹשִׂים בַּמְּלָאכָה.	23 These were the chief officers that were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, who bore rule over the people that wrought in the work.
9.24 כד  אַךְ בַּת-פַּרְעֹה, עָלְתָה מֵעִיר דָּוִד, אֶל-בֵּיתָהּ, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה-לָהּ; אָז, בָּנָה אֶת-הַמִּלּוֹא.	24 But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David unto her house which [Solomon] had built for her; then did he build Millo.
9.25 כה  וְהֶעֱלָה שְׁלֹמֹה שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים בַּשָּׁנָה עֹלוֹת וּשְׁלָמִים, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה לַיהוָה, וְהַקְטֵיר אִתּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְשִׁלַּם, אֶת-הַבָּיִת.	25 And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt-offerings and peace-offerings upon the altar which he built unto the LORD, offering thereby, upon the altar that was before the LORD. So he finished the house.
9.26 כו  וָאֳנִי עָשָׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה בְּעֶצְיוֹן-גֶּבֶר אֲשֶׁר אֶת-אֵלוֹת, עַל-שְׂפַת יַם-סוּף--בְּאֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם.	26 And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.
9.27 כז  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִירָם בָּאֳנִי, אֶת-עֲבָדָיו, אַנְשֵׁי אֳנִיּוֹת, יֹדְעֵי הַיָּם--עִם, עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה.	27 And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.
9.28 כח  וַיָּבֹאוּ אוֹפִירָה--וַיִּקְחוּ מִשָּׁם זָהָב, אַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת וְעֶשְׂרִים כִּכָּר; וַיָּבִאוּ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה.  {פ}	28 And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon. {P}
10.1 א  וּמַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא, שֹׁמַעַת אֶת-שֵׁמַע שְׁלֹמֹה--לְשֵׁם יְהוָה; וַתָּבֹא לְנַסֹּתוֹ, בְּחִידוֹת.	1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon because of the name of the LORD, she came to prove him with hard questions.
10.2 ב  וַתָּבֹא יְרוּשָׁלְַמָה, בְּחַיִל כָּבֵד מְאֹד, גְּמַלִּים נֹשְׂאִים בְּשָׂמִים וְזָהָב רַב-מְאֹד, וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה; וַתָּבֹא, אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה, וַתְּדַבֵּר אֵלָיו, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר הָיָה עִם-לְבָבָהּ.	2 And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bore spices and gold very much, and precious stones; and when she was come to Solomon, she spoke with him of all that was in her heart.
10.3 ג  וַיַּגֶּד-לָהּ שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-כָּל-דְּבָרֶיהָ:  לֹא-הָיָה דָבָר נֶעְלָם מִן-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא הִגִּיד לָהּ.	3 And Solomon told her all her questions; there was not any thing hid from the king which he told her not.
10.4 ד  וַתֵּרֶא, מַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא, אֵת, כָּל-חָכְמַת שְׁלֹמֹה; וְהַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה.	4 And when the queen of Sheba had seen all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,
10.5 ה  וּמַאֲכַל שֻׁלְחָנוֹ וּמוֹשַׁב עֲבָדָיו וּמַעֲמַד מְשָׁרְתָו וּמַלְבֻּשֵׁיהֶם, וּמַשְׁקָיו, וְעֹלָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲלֶה בֵּית יְהוָה; וְלֹא-הָיָה בָהּ עוֹד, רוּחַ.	5 and the food of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his burnt-offering which he offered in the house of the LORD, there was no more spirit in her.
10.6 ו  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֱמֶת הָיָה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתִּי בְּאַרְצִי--עַל-דְּבָרֶיךָ, וְעַל-חָכְמָתֶךָ.	6 And she said to the king: 'It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom.
10.7 ז  וְלֹא-הֶאֱמַנְתִּי לַדְּבָרִים, עַד אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתִי וַתִּרְאֶינָה עֵינַי, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-הֻגַּד-לִי, הַחֵצִי:  הוֹסַפְתָּ חָכְמָה וָטוֹב, אֶל-הַשְּׁמוּעָה אֲשֶׁר שָׁמָעְתִּי.	7 Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and, behold, the half was not told me; thou hast wisdom and prosperity exceeding the fame which I heard.
10.8 ח  אַשְׁרֵי אֲנָשֶׁיךָ, אַשְׁרֵי עֲבָדֶיךָ אֵלֶּה, הָעֹמְדִים לְפָנֶיךָ תָּמִיד, הַשֹּׁמְעִים אֶת-חָכְמָתֶךָ.	8 Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, that stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.
10.9 ט  יְהִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, בָּרוּךְ, אֲשֶׁר חָפֵץ בְּךָ, לְתִתְּךָ עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּאַהֲבַת יְהוָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְעֹלָם, וַיְשִׂימְךָ לְמֶלֶךְ, לַעֲשׂוֹת מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה.	9 Blessed be the LORD thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel; because the LORD loved Israel for ever, therefore made He thee king, to do justice and righteousness.'
10.10 י  וַתִּתֵּן לַמֶּלֶךְ מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים כִּכַּר זָהָב, וּבְשָׂמִים הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד--וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה; לֹא בָא כַבֹּשֶׂם הַהוּא עוֹד לָרֹב, אֲשֶׁר-נָתְנָה מַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה.	10 And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious stones; there came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
10.11 יא  וְגַם אֳנִי חִירָם, אֲשֶׁר-נָשָׂא זָהָב מֵאוֹפִיר:  הֵבִיא מֵאֹפִיר עֲצֵי אַלְמֻגִּים, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד--וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה.	11 And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of sandal-wood and precious stones.
10.12 יב  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-עֲצֵי הָאַלְמֻגִּים מִסְעָד לְבֵית-יְהוָה, וּלְבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכִנֹּרוֹת וּנְבָלִים, לַשָּׁרִים; לֹא בָא-כֵן עֲצֵי אַלְמֻגִּים, וְלֹא נִרְאָה, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	12 And the king made of the sandal-wood pillars for the house of the LORD, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for the singers; there came no such sandal-wood, nor was seen, unto this day.
10.13 יג  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה נָתַן לְמַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא, אֶת-כָּל-חֶפְצָהּ אֲשֶׁר שָׁאָלָה, מִלְּבַד אֲשֶׁר נָתַן-לָהּ, כְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה; וַתֵּפֶן וַתֵּלֶךְ לְאַרְצָהּ, הִיא וַעֲבָדֶיהָ.  {פ}	13 And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and her servants. {P}
10.14 יד  וַיְהִי מִשְׁקַל הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא לִשְׁלֹמֹה בְּשָׁנָה אֶחָת--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת שִׁשִּׁים וָשֵׁשׁ, כִּכַּר זָהָב.	14 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred threescore and six talents of gold,
10.15 טו  לְבַד מֵאַנְשֵׁי הַתָּרִים, וּמִסְחַר הָרֹכְלִים, וְכָל-מַלְכֵי הָעֶרֶב, וּפַחוֹת הָאָרֶץ.	15 beside that which came of the merchants, and of the traffic of the traders, and of all the kings of the mingled people and of the governors of the country.
10.16 טז  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה מָאתַיִם צִנָּה, זָהָב שָׁחוּט; שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת זָהָב, יַעֲלֶה עַל-הַצִּנָּה הָאֶחָת.	16 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of gold went to one target.
10.17 יז  וּשְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת מָגִנִּים, זָהָב שָׁחוּט--שְׁלֹשֶׁת מָנִים זָהָב, יַעֲלֶה עַל-הַמָּגֵן הָאֶחָת; וַיִּתְּנֵם הַמֶּלֶךְ, בֵּית יַעַר הַלְּבָנוֹן.  {פ}	17 And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold: three pounds of gold went to one shield; and the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon. {P}
10.18 יח  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ כִּסֵּא-שֵׁן, גָּדוֹל; וַיְצַפֵּהוּ, זָהָב מוּפָז.	18 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the finest gold.
10.19 יט  שֵׁשׁ מַעֲלוֹת לַכִּסֵּה, וְרֹאשׁ-עָגֹל לַכִּסֵּה מֵאַחֲרָיו, וְיָדֹת מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה, אֶל-מְקוֹם הַשָּׁבֶת; וּשְׁנַיִם אֲרָיוֹת, עֹמְדִים אֵצֶל הַיָּדוֹת.	19 There were six steps to the throne, and the top of the throne was round behind; and there were arms on either side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the arms.
10.20 כ  וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר אֲרָיִים, עֹמְדִים שָׁם עַל-שֵׁשׁ הַמַּעֲלוֹת--מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה; לֹא-נַעֲשָׂה כֵן, לְכָל-מַמְלָכוֹת.	20 And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps; there was not the like made in any kingdom.
10.21 כא  וְכֹל כְּלֵי מַשְׁקֵה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, זָהָב, וְכֹל כְּלֵי בֵּית-יַעַר הַלְּבָנוֹן, זָהָב סָגוּר:  אֵין כֶּסֶף, לֹא נֶחְשָׁב בִּימֵי שְׁלֹמֹה--לִמְאוּמָה.	21 And all king Solomon's drinking-vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver; it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.
10.22 כב  כִּי אֳנִי תַרְשִׁישׁ לַמֶּלֶךְ בַּיָּם, עִם אֳנִי חִירָם; אַחַת לְשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים תָּבוֹא אֳנִי תַרְשִׁישׁ, נֹשְׂאֵת זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, שֶׁנְהַבִּים וְקֹפִים, וְתֻכִּיִּים.	22 For the king had at sea a navy of Tarshish with the navy of Hiram; once every three years came the navy of Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
10.23 כג  וַיִּגְדַּל הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, מִכֹּל מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ--לְעֹשֶׁר, וּלְחָכְמָה.	23 So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and in wisdom.
10.24 כד  וְכָל-הָאָרֶץ--מְבַקְשִׁים, אֶת-פְּנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה:  לִשְׁמֹעַ, אֶת-חָכְמָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן אֱלֹהִים, בְּלִבּוֹ.	24 And all the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
10.25 כה  וְהֵמָּה מְבִאִים אִישׁ מִנְחָתוֹ כְּלֵי כֶסֶף וּכְלֵי זָהָב וּשְׂלָמוֹת, וְנֵשֶׁק וּבְשָׂמִים, סוּסִים, וּפְרָדִים--דְּבַר-שָׁנָה, בְּשָׁנָה.  {ס}	25 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, and armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year. {S}
10.26 כו  וַיֶּאֱסֹף שְׁלֹמֹה, רֶכֶב וּפָרָשִׁים, וַיְהִי-לוֹ אֶלֶף וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת רֶכֶב, וּשְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף פָּרָשִׁים; וַיַּנְחֵם בְּעָרֵי הָרֶכֶב, וְעִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	26 And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen; and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.
10.27 כז  וַיִּתֵּן הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, כָּאֲבָנִים; וְאֵת הָאֲרָזִים, נָתַן כַּשִּׁקְמִים אֲשֶׁר-בַּשְּׁפֵלָה--לָרֹב.	27 And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycamore-trees that are in the Lowland, for abundance.
10.28 כח  וּמוֹצָא הַסּוּסִים אֲשֶׁר לִשְׁלֹמֹה, מִמִּצְרָיִם; וּמִקְוֵה--סֹחֲרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, יִקְחוּ מִקְוֵה בִּמְחִיר.	28 And the horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt; also out of Keveh, the king's merchants buying them of the men of Keveh at a price.
10.29 כט  וַתַּעֲלֶה וַתֵּצֵא מֶרְכָּבָה מִמִּצְרַיִם, בְּשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת כֶּסֶף, וְסוּס, בַּחֲמִשִּׁים וּמֵאָה; וְכֵן לְכָל-מַלְכֵי הַחִתִּים, וּלְמַלְכֵי אֲרָם--בְּיָדָם יֹצִאוּ.  {פ}	29 And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty; and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Aram, did they bring them out by their means. {P}
11.1 א  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, אָהַב נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת רַבּוֹת--וְאֶת-בַּת-פַּרְעֹה:  מוֹאֲבִיּוֹת עַמֳּנִיּוֹת אֲדֹמִיֹּת, צֵדְנִיֹּת חִתִּיֹּת.	1 Now king Solomon loved many foreign women, besides the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites;
11.2 ב  מִן-הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר-יְהוָה אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא-תָבֹאוּ בָהֶם וְהֵם לֹא-יָבֹאוּ בָכֶם, אָכֵן יַטּוּ אֶת-לְבַבְכֶם, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהֵיהֶם--בָּהֶם דָּבַק שְׁלֹמֹה, לְאַהֲבָה.	2 of the nations concerning which the LORD said unto the children of Israel: 'Ye shall not go among them, neither shall they come among you; for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods'; Solomon did cleave unto these in love.
11.3 ג  וַיְהִי-לוֹ נָשִׁים, שָׂרוֹת שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת, וּפִלַגְשִׁים, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת; וַיַּטּוּ נָשָׁיו, אֶת-לִבּוֹ.	3 And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines; and his wives turned away his heart.
11.4 ד  וַיְהִי, לְעֵת זִקְנַת שְׁלֹמֹה, נָשָׁיו הִטּוּ אֶת-לְבָבוֹ, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים; וְלֹא-הָיָה לְבָבוֹ שָׁלֵם עִם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, כִּלְבַב דָּוִיד אָבִיו.	4 For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods; and his heart was not whole with the LORD his God, as was the heart of David his father.
11.5 ה  וַיֵּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה--אַחֲרֵי עַשְׁתֹּרֶת, אֱלֹהֵי צִדֹנִים; וְאַחֲרֵי מִלְכֹּם, שִׁקֻּץ עַמֹּנִים.	5 For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the detestation of the Ammonites.
11.6 ו  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלֹמֹה הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וְלֹא מִלֵּא אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה, כְּדָוִד אָבִיו.  {ס}	6 And Solomon did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and went not fully after the LORD, as did David his father. {S}
11.7 ז  אָז יִבְנֶה שְׁלֹמֹה בָּמָה, לִכְמוֹשׁ שִׁקֻּץ מוֹאָב, בָּהָר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וּלְמֹלֶךְ, שִׁקֻּץ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	7 Then did Solomon build a high place for Chemosh the detestation of Moab, in the mount that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech the detestation of the children of Ammon.
11.8 ח  וְכֵן עָשָׂה, לְכָל-נָשָׁיו הַנָּכְרִיּוֹת, מַקְטִירוֹת וּמְזַבְּחוֹת, לֵאלֹהֵיהֶן.	8 And so did he for all his foreign wives, who offered and sacrificed unto their gods.
11.9 ט  וַיִּתְאַנַּף יְהוָה, בִּשְׁלֹמֹה:  כִּי-נָטָה לְבָבוֹ, מֵעִם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַנִּרְאָה אֵלָיו, פַּעֲמָיִם.	9 And the LORD was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away from the LORD, the God of Israel, who had appeared unto him twice,
11.10 י  וְצִוָּה אֵלָיו, עַל-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לְבִלְתִּי-לֶכֶת, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים; וְלֹא שָׁמַר, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה.  {פ}	10 and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods; but he kept not that which the LORD commanded. {P}
11.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה לִשְׁלֹמֹה, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה-זֹּאת עִמָּךְ, וְלֹא שָׁמַרְתָּ בְּרִיתִי וְחֻקֹּתַי, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי עָלֶיךָ--קָרֹעַ אֶקְרַע אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה מֵעָלֶיךָ, וּנְתַתִּיהָ לְעַבְדֶּךָ.	11 Wherefore the LORD said unto Solomon: 'Forasmuch as this hath been in thy mind, and thou hast not kept My covenant and My statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.
11.12 יב  אַךְ-בְּיָמֶיךָ לֹא אֶעֱשֶׂנָּה, לְמַעַן דָּוִד אָבִיךָ:  מִיַּד בִּנְךָ, אֶקְרָעֶנָּה.	12 Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, for David thy father's sake; but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
11.13 יג  רַק אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּמְלָכָה לֹא אֶקְרָע, שֵׁבֶט אֶחָד אֶתֵּן לִבְנֶךָ:  לְמַעַן דָּוִד עַבְדִּי, וּלְמַעַן יְרוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר בָּחָרְתִּי.  {ס}	13 Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but I will give one tribe to thy son; for David My servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen.' {S}
11.14 יד  וַיָּקֶם יְהוָה שָׂטָן לִשְׁלֹמֹה, אֵת הֲדַד הָאֲדֹמִי:  מִזֶּרַע הַמֶּלֶךְ הוּא, בֶּאֱדוֹם.	14 And the LORD raised up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite; he was of the king's seed in Edom.
11.15 טו  וַיְהִי, בִּהְיוֹת דָּוִד אֶת-אֱדוֹם, בַּעֲלוֹת יוֹאָב שַׂר הַצָּבָא, לְקַבֵּר אֶת-הַחֲלָלִים; וַיַּךְ כָּל-זָכָר, בֶּאֱדוֹם.	15 For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, and had smitten every male in Edom--
11.16 טז  כִּי שֵׁשֶׁת חֳדָשִׁים יָשַׁב-שָׁם יוֹאָב, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד-הִכְרִית כָּל-זָכָר, בֶּאֱדוֹם.	16 for Joab and all Israel remained there six months, until he had cut off every male in Edom--
11.17 יז  וַיִּבְרַח אֲדַד הוּא וַאֲנָשִׁים אֲדֹמִיִּים מֵעַבְדֵי אָבִיו, אִתּוֹ--לָבוֹא מִצְרָיִם; וַהֲדַד, נַעַר קָטָן.	17 that Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a little child.
11.18 יח  וַיָּקֻמוּ, מִמִּדְיָן, וַיָּבֹאוּ, פָּארָן; וַיִּקְחוּ אֲנָשִׁים עִמָּם מִפָּארָן, וַיָּבֹאוּ מִצְרַיִם אֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ בַיִת וְלֶחֶם אָמַר לוֹ, וְאֶרֶץ נָתַן לוֹ.	18 And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran; and they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, and appointed him victuals, and gave him land.
11.19 יט  וַיִּמְצָא הֲדַד חֵן בְּעֵינֵי פַרְעֹה, מְאֹד; וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ אִשָּׁה אֶת-אֲחוֹת אִשְׁתּוֹ, אֲחוֹת תַּחְפְּנֵיס הַגְּבִירָה.	19 And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.
11.20 כ  וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ אֲחוֹת תַּחְפְּנֵיס, אֵת גְּנֻבַת בְּנוֹ, וַתִּגְמְלֵהוּ תַחְפְּנֵס, בְּתוֹךְ בֵּית פַּרְעֹה; וַיְהִי גְנֻבַת בֵּית פַּרְעֹה, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי פַרְעֹה.	20 And the sister of Tahpenes bore him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house; and Genubath was in Pharaoh's house among the sons of Pharaoh.
11.21 כא  וַהֲדַד שָׁמַע בְּמִצְרַיִם, כִּי-שָׁכַב דָּוִד עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וְכִי-מֵת, יוֹאָב שַׂר-הַצָּבָא; וַיֹּאמֶר הֲדַד אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, שַׁלְּחֵנִי וְאֵלֵךְ אֶל-אַרְצִי.	21 And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh: 'Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.'
11.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ פַרְעֹה, כִּי מָה-אַתָּה חָסֵר עִמִּי, וְהִנְּךָ מְבַקֵּשׁ, לָלֶכֶת אֶל-אַרְצֶךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא, כִּי שַׁלֵּחַ תְּשַׁלְּחֵנִי.	22 Then Pharaoh said unto him: 'But what hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country?' And he answered: 'Nothing; howbeit let me depart in any wise.'
11.23 כג  וַיָּקֶם אֱלֹהִים לוֹ שָׂטָן, אֶת-רְזוֹן בֶּן-אֶלְיָדָע:  אֲשֶׁר בָּרַח, מֵאֵת הֲדַדְעֶזֶר מֶלֶךְ-צוֹבָה--אֲדֹנָיו.	23 And God raised up another adversary unto him, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah.
11.24 כד  וַיִּקְבֹּץ עָלָיו, אֲנָשִׁים, וַיְהִי שַׂר-גְּדוּד, בַּהֲרֹג דָּוִד אֹתָם; וַיֵּלְכוּ דַמֶּשֶׂק וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָהּ, וַיִּמְלְכוּ בְּדַמָּשֶׂק.	24 And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a troop, when David slew them [of Zobah]; and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus.
11.25 כה  וַיְהִי שָׂטָן לְיִשְׂרָאֵל כָּל-יְמֵי שְׁלֹמֹה, וְאֶת-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר הֲדָד; וַיָּקָץ, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּמְלֹךְ, עַל-אֲרָם.  {פ}	25 And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, beside the mischief that Hadad did; and he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Aram. {P}
11.26 כו  וְיָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט אֶפְרָתִי מִן-הַצְּרֵדָה, וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ צְרוּעָה אִשָּׁה אַלְמָנָה, עֶבֶד, לִשְׁלֹמֹה; וַיָּרֶם יָד, בַּמֶּלֶךְ.	26 And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of Solomon, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his hand against the king.
11.27 כז  וְזֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-הֵרִים יָד בַּמֶּלֶךְ:  שְׁלֹמֹה, בָּנָה אֶת-הַמִּלּוֹא--סָגַר, אֶת-פֶּרֶץ עִיר דָּוִד אָבִיו.	27 And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breach of the city of David his father.
11.28 כח  וְהָאִישׁ יָרָבְעָם, גִּבּוֹר חָיִל; וַיַּרְא שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-הַנַּעַר, כִּי-עֹשֵׂה מְלָאכָה הוּא, וַיַּפְקֵד אֹתוֹ, לְכָל-סֵבֶל בֵּית יוֹסֵף.  {ס}	28 And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour; and Solomon saw the young man that he was industrious, and he gave him charge over all the labour of the house of Joseph. {S}
11.29 כט  וַיְהִי בָּעֵת הַהִיא, וְיָרָבְעָם יָצָא מִירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיִּמְצָא אֹתוֹ אֲחִיָּה הַשִּׁילֹנִי הַנָּבִיא בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וְהוּא מִתְכַּסֶּה בְּשַׂלְמָה חֲדָשָׁה, וּשְׁנֵיהֶם לְבַדָּם, בַּשָּׂדֶה.	29 And it came to pass at that time, when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; now Ahijah had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in the field.
11.30 ל  וַיִּתְפֹּשׂ אֲחִיָּה, בַּשַּׂלְמָה הַחֲדָשָׁה אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו; וַיִּקְרָעֶהָ--שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, קְרָעִים.	30 And Ahijah laid hold of the new garment that was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces.
11.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר, לְיָרָבְעָם, קַח-לְךָ, עֲשָׂרָה קְרָעִים:  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי קֹרֵעַ אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה מִיַּד שְׁלֹמֹה, וְנָתַתִּי לְךָ, אֵת עֲשָׂרָה הַשְּׁבָטִים.	31 And he said to Jeroboam: 'Take thee ten pieces; for thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee--
11.32 לב  וְהַשֵּׁבֶט הָאֶחָד, יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ--לְמַעַן עַבְדִּי דָוִד, וּלְמַעַן יְרוּשָׁלִַם, הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתִּי בָהּ, מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	32 but he shall have one tribe, for My servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel--
11.33 לג  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר עֲזָבוּנִי, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לְעַשְׁתֹּרֶת אֱלֹהֵי צִדֹנִין, לִכְמוֹשׁ אֱלֹהֵי מוֹאָב, וּלְמִלְכֹּם אֱלֹהֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן; וְלֹא-הָלְכוּ בִדְרָכַי, לַעֲשׂוֹת הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינַי וְחֻקֹּתַי וּמִשְׁפָּטַי--כְּדָוִד אָבִיו.	33 because that they have forsaken Me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon; and they have not walked in My ways, to do that which is right in Mine eyes, and to keep My statutes and Mine ordinances, as did David his father.
11.34 לד  וְלֹא-אֶקַּח אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּמְלָכָה, מִיָּדוֹ:  כִּי נָשִׂיא אֲשִׁתֶנּוּ, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיָּיו, לְמַעַן דָּוִד עַבְדִּי אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתִּי אֹתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַר מִצְוֺתַי וְחֻקֹּתָי.	34 Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand; but I will make him prince all the days of his life, for David My servant's sake, whom I chose, because he kept My commandments and My statutes;
11.35 לה  וְלָקַחְתִּי הַמְּלוּכָה, מִיַּד בְּנוֹ; וּנְתַתִּיהָ לְּךָ, אֵת עֲשֶׂרֶת הַשְּׁבָטִים.	35 but I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give it unto thee, even ten tribes.
11.36 לו  וְלִבְנוֹ, אֶתֵּן שֵׁבֶט-אֶחָד--לְמַעַן הֱיוֹת-נִיר לְדָוִיד-עַבְדִּי כָּל-הַיָּמִים לְפָנַי, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתִּי לִי, לָשׂוּם שְׁמִי שָׁם.	36 And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David My servant may have a lamp alway before Me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen Me to put My name there.
11.37 לז  וְאֹתְךָ אֶקַּח--וּמָלַכְתָּ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תְּאַוֶּה נַפְשֶׁךָ; וְהָיִיתָ מֶּלֶךְ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	37 And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign over all that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.
11.38 לח  וְהָיָה, אִם-תִּשְׁמַע אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֲצַוֶּךָ, וְהָלַכְתָּ בִדְרָכַי וְעָשִׂיתָ הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינַי לִשְׁמוֹר חֻקּוֹתַי וּמִצְוֺתַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה דָּוִד עַבְדִּי--וְהָיִיתִי עִמָּךְ, וּבָנִיתִי לְךָ בַיִת-נֶאֱמָן כַּאֲשֶׁר בָּנִיתִי לְדָוִד, וְנָתַתִּי לְךָ, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	38 And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in My ways, and do that which is right in Mine eyes, to keep My statutes and My commandments, as David My servant did, that I will be with thee, and will build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.
11.39 לט  וַאעַנֶּה אֶת-זֶרַע דָּוִד, לְמַעַן זֹאת--אַךְ, לֹא כָל-הַיָּמִים.  {ס}	39 And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.' {S}
11.40 מ  וַיְבַקֵּשׁ שְׁלֹמֹה, לְהָמִית אֶת-יָרָבְעָם; וַיָּקָם יָרָבְעָם, וַיִּבְרַח מִצְרַיִם אֶל-שִׁישַׁק מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, וַיְהִי בְמִצְרַיִם, עַד-מוֹת שְׁלֹמֹה.  {ס}	40 Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam; but Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon. {S}
11.41 מא  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי שְׁלֹמֹה וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וְחָכְמָתוֹ--הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתֻבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי שְׁלֹמֹה.	41 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
11.42 מב  וְהַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ שְׁלֹמֹה בִירוּשָׁלִַם עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--אַרְבָּעִים, שָׁנָה.	42 And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.
11.43 מג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב שְׁלֹמֹה, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר, בְּעִיר דָּוִד אָבִיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ רְחַבְעָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {ס}	43 And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father; and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead. {S}
12.1 א  וַיֵּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, שְׁכֶם:  כִּי שְׁכֶם בָּא כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַמְלִיךְ אֹתוֹ.	1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem; for all Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.
12.2 ב  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, וְהוּא עוֹדֶנּוּ בְמִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר בָּרַח, מִפְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה; וַיֵּשֶׁב יָרָבְעָם, בְּמִצְרָיִם.	2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it--for he was yet in Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt,
12.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ, וַיִּקְרְאוּ-לוֹ, ויבאו (וַיָּבֹא) יָרָבְעָם, וְכָל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְדַבְּרוּ, אֶל-רְחַבְעָם לֵאמֹר.	3 and they sent and called him--that Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and spoke unto Rehoboam, saying:
12.4 ד  אָבִיךָ, הִקְשָׁה אֶת-עֻלֵּנוּ; וְאַתָּה עַתָּה הָקֵל מֵעֲבֹדַת אָבִיךָ הַקָּשָׁה, וּמֵעֻלּוֹ הַכָּבֵד אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן עָלֵינוּ--וְנַעַבְדֶךָּ.	4 'Thy father made our yoke grievous; now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.'
12.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, לְכוּ-עֹד שְׁלֹשָׁה יָמִים--וְשׁוּבוּ אֵלָי; וַיֵּלְכוּ, הָעָם.	5 And he said unto them: 'Depart yet for three days, then come again to me.' And the people departed.
12.6 ו  וַיִּוָּעַץ הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, אֶת-הַזְּקֵנִים אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ עֹמְדִים אֶת-פְּנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה אָבִיו, בִּהְיֹתוֹ חַי, לֵאמֹר:  אֵיךְ אַתֶּם נוֹעָצִים, לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-הָעָם-הַזֶּה דָּבָר.	6 And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men, that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying: 'What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?'
12.7 ז  וידבר (וַיְדַבְּרוּ) אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, אִם-הַיּוֹם תִּהְיֶה-עֶבֶד לָעָם הַזֶּה וַעֲבַדְתָּם, וַעֲנִיתָם, וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם דְּבָרִים טוֹבִים--וְהָיוּ לְךָ עֲבָדִים, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	7 And they spoke unto him, saying: 'If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.'
12.8 ח  וַיַּעֲזֹב אֶת-עֲצַת הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר יְעָצֻהוּ; וַיִּוָּעַץ, אֶת-הַיְלָדִים אֲשֶׁר גָּדְלוּ אִתּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר הָעֹמְדִים, לְפָנָיו.	8 But he forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men that were grown up with him, that stood before him.
12.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, מָה אַתֶּם נוֹעָצִים, וְנָשִׁיב דָּבָר, אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה--אֲשֶׁר דִּבְּרוּ אֵלַי, לֵאמֹר, הָקֵל מִן-הָעֹל, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן אָבִיךָ עָלֵינוּ.	9 And he said unto them: 'What counsel give ye, that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me, saying: Make the yoke that thy father did put upon us lighter?'
12.10 י  וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֵלָיו, הַיְלָדִים אֲשֶׁר גָּדְלוּ אִתּוֹ לֵאמֹר, כֹּה-תֹאמַר לָעָם הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר דִּבְּרוּ אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר אָבִיךָ הִכְבִּיד אֶת-עֻלֵּנוּ, וְאַתָּה הָקֵל מֵעָלֵינוּ:  כֹּה תְּדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם, קָטָנִּי עָבָה מִמָּתְנֵי אָבִי.	10 And the young men that were grown up with him spoke unto him, saying: 'Thus shalt thou say unto this people that spoke unto thee, saying: Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou speak unto them: My little finger is thicker than my father's loins.
12.11 יא  וְעַתָּה, אָבִי הֶעְמִיס עֲלֵיכֶם עֹל כָּבֵד, וַאֲנִי, אוֹסִיף עַל-עֻלְּכֶם; אָבִי, יִסַּר אֶתְכֶם בַּשּׁוֹטִים, וַאֲנִי, אֲיַסֵּר אֶתְכֶם בָּעַקְרַבִּים.	11 And now whereas my father did burden you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.'
12.12 יב  וַיָּבוֹ יָרָבְעָם וְכָל-הָעָם אֶל-רְחַבְעָם, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר הַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, שׁוּבוּ אֵלַי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי.	12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying: 'Come to me again the third day.'
12.13 יג  וַיַּעַן הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-הָעָם, קָשָׁה; וַיַּעֲזֹב אֶת-עֲצַת הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר יְעָצֻהוּ.	13 And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him;
12.14 יד  וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם, כַּעֲצַת הַיְלָדִים לֵאמֹר, אָבִי הִכְבִּיד אֶת-עֻלְּכֶם, וַאֲנִי אֹסִיף עַל-עֻלְּכֶם; אָבִי, יִסַּר אֶתְכֶם בַּשּׁוֹטִים, וַאֲנִי, אֲיַסֵּר אֶתְכֶם בָּעַקְרַבִּים.	14 and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying: 'My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.'
12.15 טו  וְלֹא-שָׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-הָעָם:  כִּי-הָיְתָה סִבָּה, מֵעִם יְהוָה, לְמַעַן הָקִים אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה בְּיַד אֲחִיָּה הַשִּׁילֹנִי, אֶל-יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט.	15 So the king hearkened not unto the people; for it was a thing brought about of the LORD, that He might establish His word, which the LORD spoke by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
12.16 טז  וַיַּרְא כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי לֹא-שָׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲלֵהֶם, וַיָּשִׁבוּ הָעָם אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּבָר לֵאמֹר מַה-לָּנוּ חֵלֶק בְּדָוִד וְלֹא-נַחֲלָה בְּבֶן-יִשַׁי לְאֹהָלֶיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַתָּה רְאֵה בֵיתְךָ דָּוִד; וַיֵּלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְאֹהָלָיו.	16 And when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying: 'What portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse; to your tents, O Israel; now see to thine own house, David.' So Israel departed unto their tents.
12.17 יז  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה--וַיִּמְלֹךְ עֲלֵיהֶם, רְחַבְעָם.  {פ}	17 But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them. {P}
12.18 יח  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, אֶת-אֲדֹרָם אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמַּס, וַיִּרְגְּמוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל בּוֹ אֶבֶן, וַיָּמֹת; וְהַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, הִתְאַמֵּץ לַעֲלוֹת בַּמֶּרְכָּבָה, לָנוּס, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	18 Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the levy; and all Israel stoned him with stones, so that he died. And king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
12.19 יט  וַיִּפְשְׁעוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּבֵית דָּוִד, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	19 So Israel rebelled against the house of David, unto this day. {S}
12.20 כ  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי-שָׁב יָרָבְעָם, וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ וַיִּקְרְאוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-הָעֵדָה, וַיַּמְלִיכוּ אֹתוֹ עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  לֹא הָיָה אַחֲרֵי בֵית-דָּוִד, זוּלָתִי שֵׁבֶט-יְהוּדָה לְבַדּוֹ.	20 And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was returned, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and made him king over all Israel; there was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only.
12.21 כא  ויבאו (וַיָּבֹא) רְחַבְעָם, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּקְהֵל אֶת-כָּל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-שֵׁבֶט בִּנְיָמִן מֵאָה וּשְׁמֹנִים אֶלֶף בָּחוּר, עֹשֵׂה מִלְחָמָה--לְהִלָּחֵם, עִם-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-הַמְּלוּכָה, לִרְחַבְעָם בֶּן-שְׁלֹמֹה.  {פ}	21 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, be assembled all the house of Judah, and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men that were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom back to Rehoboam the son of Solomon. {P}
12.22 כב  וַיְהִי דְּבַר הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶל-שְׁמַעְיָה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים לֵאמֹר.	22 But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying:
12.23 כג  אֱמֹר, אֶל-רְחַבְעָם בֶּן-שְׁלֹמֹה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, וְאֶל-כָּל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה, וּבִנְיָמִין; וְיֶתֶר הָעָם, לֵאמֹר.	23 'Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the rest of the people, saying:
12.24 כד  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה לֹא-תַעֲלוּ וְלֹא-תִלָּחֲמוּן עִם-אֲחֵיכֶם בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שׁוּבוּ אִישׁ לְבֵיתוֹ--כִּי מֵאִתִּי נִהְיָה, הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ לָלֶכֶת כִּדְבַר יְהוָה.  {ס}	24 Thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel; return every man to his house; for this thing is of Me.' So they hearkened unto the word of the LORD, and returned and went their way, according to the word of the LORD. {S}
12.25 כה  וַיִּבֶן יָרָבְעָם אֶת-שְׁכֶם בְּהַר אֶפְרַיִם, וַיֵּשֶׁב בָּהּ; וַיֵּצֵא מִשָּׁם, וַיִּבֶן אֶת-פְּנוּאֵל.	25 Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and he went out from thence, and built Penuel.
12.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר יָרָבְעָם, בְּלִבּוֹ:  עַתָּה תָּשׁוּב הַמַּמְלָכָה, לְבֵית דָּוִד.	26 And Jeroboam said in his heart: 'Now will the kingdom return to the house of David.
12.27 כז  אִם-יַעֲלֶה הָעָם הַזֶּה, לַעֲשׂוֹת זְבָחִים בְּבֵית-יְהוָה בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְשָׁב לֵב הָעָם הַזֶּה אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיהֶם, אֶל-רְחַבְעָם מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַהֲרָגֻנִי, וְשָׁבוּ אֶל-רְחַבְעָם מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה.	27 If this people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then will the heart of this people turn back unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah; and they will kill me, and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.'
12.28 כח  וַיִּוָּעַץ הַמֶּלֶךְ--וַיַּעַשׂ, שְׁנֵי עֶגְלֵי זָהָב; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, רַב-לָכֶם מֵעֲלוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם--הִנֵּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלוּךָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	28 Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold; and he said unto them: 'Ye have gone up long enough to Jerusalem; behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'
12.29 כט  וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הָאֶחָד, בְּבֵית-אֵל; וְאֶת-הָאֶחָד, נָתַן בְּדָן.	29 And he set the one in Beth-el, and the other put he in Dan.
12.30 ל  וַיְהִי הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לְחַטָּאת; וַיֵּלְכוּ הָעָם לִפְנֵי הָאֶחָד, עַד-דָּן.	30 And this thing became a sin; for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan.
12.31 לא  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-בֵּית בָּמוֹת; וַיַּעַשׂ כֹּהֲנִים מִקְצוֹת הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיוּ מִבְּנֵי לֵוִי.	31 And he made houses of high places, and made priests from among all the people, that were not of the sons of Levi.
12.32 לב  וַיַּעַשׂ יָרָבְעָם חָג בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁמִינִי בַחֲמִשָּׁה-עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ כֶּחָג אֲשֶׁר בִּיהוּדָה, וַיַּעַל עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--כֵּן עָשָׂה בְּבֵית-אֵל, לְזַבֵּחַ לָעֲגָלִים אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה; וְהֶעֱמִיד בְּבֵית אֵל, אֶת-כֹּהֲנֵי הַבָּמוֹת אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה.	32 And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and he went up unto the altar; so did he in Beth-el, to sacrifice unto the calves that he had made; and he placed in Beth-el the priests of the high places that he had made.
12.33 לג  וַיַּעַל עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה בְּבֵית-אֵל, בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁמִינִי--בַּחֹדֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר-בָּדָא מלבד (מִלִּבּוֹ); וַיַּעַשׂ חָג לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעַל עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ לְהַקְטִיר.  {פ}	33 And he went up unto the altar which he had made in Beth-el on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart; and he ordained a feast for the children of Israel, and went up unto the altar, to offer. {P}
13.1 א  וְהִנֵּה אִישׁ אֱלֹהִים, בָּא מִיהוּדָה בִּדְבַר יְהוָה--אֶל-בֵּית-אֵל; וְיָרָבְעָם עֹמֵד עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, לְהַקְטִיר.	1 And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the LORD unto Beth-el; and Jeroboam was standing by the altar to offer.
13.2 ב  וַיִּקְרָא עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, בִּדְבַר יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר מִזְבֵּחַ מִזְבֵּחַ, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  הִנֵּה-בֵן נוֹלָד לְבֵית-דָּוִד, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ שְׁמוֹ, וְזָבַח עָלֶיךָ אֶת-כֹּהֲנֵי הַבָּמוֹת הַמַּקְטִרִים עָלֶיךָ, וְעַצְמוֹת אָדָם יִשְׂרְפוּ עָלֶיךָ.	2 And he cried against the altar by the word of the LORD, and said: 'O altar, altar, thus saith the LORD: Behold, a son shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he sacrifice the priests of the high places that offer upon thee, and men's bones shall they burn upon thee.'
13.3 ג  וְנָתַן בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא מוֹפֵת, לֵאמֹר, זֶה הַמּוֹפֵת, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה:  הִנֵּה הַמִּזְבֵּחַ נִקְרָע, וְנִשְׁפַּךְ הַדֶּשֶׁן אֲשֶׁר-עָלָיו.	3 And he gave a sign the same day saying: 'This is the sign which the LORD hath spoken: Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.'
13.4 ד  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-דְּבַר אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר קָרָא עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ בְּבֵית-אֵל, וַיִּשְׁלַח יָרָבְעָם אֶת-יָדוֹ מֵעַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, לֵאמֹר תִּפְשֻׂהוּ; וַתִּיבַשׁ יָדוֹ אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַח עָלָיו, וְלֹא יָכֹל לַהֲשִׁיבָהּ אֵלָיו.	4 And it came to pass, when the king heard the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in Beth-el, that Jeroboam put forth his hand from the altar, saying: 'Lay hold on him.' And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not draw it back to him.
13.5 ה  וְהַמִּזְבֵּחַ נִקְרָע, וַיִּשָּׁפֵךְ הַדֶּשֶׁן מִן-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  כַּמּוֹפֵת, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים--בִּדְבַר יְהוָה.	5 The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the LORD.
13.6 ו  וַיַּעַן הַמֶּלֶךְ וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, חַל-נָא אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ וְהִתְפַּלֵּל בַּעֲדִי, וְתָשֹׁב יָדִי, אֵלָי; וַיְחַל אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה, וַתָּשָׁב יַד-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵלָיו, וַתְּהִי כְּבָרִאשֹׁנָה.	6 And the king answered and said unto the man of God: 'Entreat now the favour of the LORD thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me.' And the man of God entreated the LORD, and the king's hand was restored him, and became as it was before.
13.7 ז  וַיְדַבֵּר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, בֹּאָה-אִתִּי הַבַּיְתָה וּסְעָדָה; וְאֶתְּנָה לְךָ, מַתָּת.	7 And the king said unto the man of God: 'Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.'
13.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אִם-תִּתֶּן-לִי אֶת-חֲצִי בֵיתֶךָ, לֹא אָבֹא עִמָּךְ; וְלֹא-אֹכַל לֶחֶם וְלֹא אֶשְׁתֶּה-מַּיִם, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	8 And the man of God said unto the king: 'If thou wilt give me half thy house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this place.
13.9 ט  כִּי-כֵן צִוָּה אֹתִי, בִּדְבַר יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, לֹא-תֹאכַל לֶחֶם, וְלֹא תִשְׁתֶּה-מָּיִם; וְלֹא תָשׁוּב, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר הָלָכְתָּ.	9 For it so was charged me by the word of the LORD, saying: Thou shalt eat no bread, nor drink water, neither return by the way that thou camest.'
13.10 י  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ אַחֵר; וְלֹא-שָׁב בַּדֶּרֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר בָּא בָהּ אֶל-בֵּית-אֵל.  {פ}	10 So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to Beth-el. {P}
13.11 יא  וְנָבִיא אֶחָד זָקֵן, יֹשֵׁב בְּבֵית-אֵל; וַיָּבוֹא בְנוֹ וַיְסַפֶּר-לוֹ אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּעֲשֶׂה אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים הַיּוֹם בְּבֵית-אֵל, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיְסַפְּרוּם, לַאֲבִיהֶם.	11 Now there dwelt an old prophet in Beth-el; and one of his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Beth-el, and the words which he had spoken unto the king, and they told them unto their father.
13.12 יב  וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם אֲבִיהֶם, אֵי-זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ הָלָךְ; וַיִּרְאוּ בָנָיו, אֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא, מִיהוּדָה.	12 And their father said unto them: 'What way went he?' For his sons had seen what way the man of God went, that came from Judah.
13.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-בָּנָיו, חִבְשׁוּ-לִי, הַחֲמוֹר; וַיַּחְבְּשׁוּ-לוֹ הַחֲמוֹר, וַיִּרְכַּב עָלָיו.	13 And he said unto his sons: 'Saddle me the ass.' So they saddled him the ass; and he rode thereon.
13.14 יד  וַיֵּלֶךְ, אַחֲרֵי אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיִּמְצָאֵהוּ, יֹשֵׁב תַּחַת הָאֵלָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, הַאַתָּה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתָ מִיהוּדָה--וַיֹּאמֶר אָנִי.	14 And he went after the man of God, and found him sitting under a terebinth; and he said unto him: 'Art thou the man of God that camest from Judah?' And he said: 'I am.'
13.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, לֵךְ אִתִּי הַבָּיְתָה; וֶאֱכֹל, לָחֶם.	15 Then he said unto him: 'Come home with me, and eat bread.'
13.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא אוּכַל לָשׁוּב אִתָּךְ--וְלָבוֹא אִתָּךְ; וְלֹא-אֹכַל לֶחֶם, וְלֹא-אֶשְׁתֶּה אִתְּךָ מַיִם, בַּמָּקוֹם, הַזֶּה.	16 And he said: 'I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place.
13.17 יז  כִּי-דָבָר אֵלַי, בִּדְבַר יְהוָה, לֹא-תֹאכַל לֶחֶם, וְלֹא-תִשְׁתֶּה שָׁם מָיִם; לֹא-תָשׁוּב לָלֶכֶת, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-הָלַכְתָּ בָּהּ.	17 For it was said to me by the word of the LORD: Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn back to go by the way that thou camest.'
13.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, גַּם-אֲנִי נָבִיא כָּמוֹךָ, וּמַלְאָךְ דִּבֶּר אֵלַי בִּדְבַר יְהוָה לֵאמֹר הֲשִׁבֵהוּ אִתְּךָ אֶל-בֵּיתֶךָ, וְיֹאכַל לֶחֶם וְיֵשְׁתְּ מָיִם; כִּחֵשׁ, לוֹ.	18 And he said unto him: 'I also am a prophet as thou art; and an angel spoke unto me by the word of the LORD, saying: Bring him back with thee into thy house, that he may eat bread and drink water.'--He lied unto him.--
13.19 יט  וַיָּשָׁב אִתּוֹ, וַיֹּאכַל לֶחֶם בְּבֵיתוֹ--וַיֵּשְׁתְּ מָיִם.	19 So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water.
13.20 כ  וַיְהִי, הֵם יֹשְׁבִים אֶל-הַשֻּׁלְחָן;  {פ} וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר הֱשִׁיבוֹ.	20 And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, {P} that the word of the LORD came unto the prophet that brought him back.
13.21 כא  וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא מִיהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה:  יַעַן, כִּי מָרִיתָ פִּי יְהוָה, וְלֹא שָׁמַרְתָּ אֶת-הַמִּצְוָה, אֲשֶׁר צִוְּךָ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ.	21 And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying: 'Thus saith the LORD: Forasmuch as thou hast rebelled against the word of the LORD, and hast not kept the commandment which the LORD thy God commanded thee,
13.22 כב  וַתָּשָׁב, וַתֹּאכַל לֶחֶם וַתֵּשְׁתְּ מַיִם, בַּמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֵלֶיךָ, אַל-תֹּאכַל לֶחֶם וְאַל-תֵּשְׁתְּ מָיִם--לֹא-תָבוֹא נִבְלָתְךָ, אֶל-קֶבֶר אֲבֹתֶיךָ.	22 but camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place of which He said to thee: Eat no bread, and drink no water; thy carcass shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.'
13.23 כג  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי אָכְלוֹ לֶחֶם--וְאַחֲרֵי שְׁתוֹתוֹ; וַיַּחֲבָשׁ-לוֹ הַחֲמוֹר, לַנָּבִיא אֲשֶׁר הֱשִׁיבוֹ.	23 And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, namely, for the prophet whom he had brought back.
13.24 כד  וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיִּמְצָאֵהוּ אַרְיֵה בַּדֶּרֶךְ וַיְמִיתֵהוּ; וַתְּהִי נִבְלָתוֹ, מֻשְׁלֶכֶת בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וְהַחֲמוֹר עֹמֵד אֶצְלָהּ, וְהָאַרְיֵה עֹמֵד אֵצֶל הַנְּבֵלָה.	24 And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him; and his carcass was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it; the lion also stood by the carcass.
13.25 כה  וְהִנֵּה אֲנָשִׁים עֹבְרִים, וַיִּרְאוּ אֶת-הַנְּבֵלָה מֻשְׁלֶכֶת בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וְאֶת-הָאַרְיֵה, עֹמֵד אֵצֶל הַנְּבֵלָה; וַיָּבֹאוּ וַיְדַבְּרוּ בָעִיר, אֲשֶׁר הַנָּבִיא הַזָּקֵן יֹשֵׁב בָּהּ.	25 And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcass cast in the way, and the lion standing by the carcass; and they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.
13.26 כו  וַיִּשְׁמַע הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר הֱשִׁיבוֹ מִן-הַדֶּרֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים הוּא, אֲשֶׁר מָרָה אֶת-פִּי יְהוָה; וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ יְהוָה לָאַרְיֵה, וַיִּשְׁבְּרֵהוּ וַיְמִתֵהוּ, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר-לוֹ.	26 And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard thereof, he said: 'It is the man of God, who rebelled against the word of the LORD; therefore the LORD hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke unto him.'
13.27 כז  וַיְדַבֵּר אֶל-בָּנָיו לֵאמֹר, חִבְשׁוּ-לִי אֶת-הַחֲמוֹר; וַיַּחֲבֹשׁוּ.	27 And he spoke to his sons, saying: 'Saddle me the ass.' And they saddled it.
13.28 כח  וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיִּמְצָא אֶת-נִבְלָתוֹ מֻשְׁלֶכֶת בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וַחֲמוֹר וְהָאַרְיֵה, עֹמְדִים אֵצֶל הַנְּבֵלָה:  לֹא-אָכַל הָאַרְיֵה אֶת-הַנְּבֵלָה, וְלֹא שָׁבַר אֶת-הַחֲמוֹר.	28 And he went and found his carcass cast in the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the carcass; the lion had not eaten the carcass, nor torn the ass.
13.29 כט  וַיִּשָּׂא הַנָּבִיא אֶת-נִבְלַת אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיַּנִּחֵהוּ אֶל-הַחֲמוֹר--וַיְשִׁיבֵהוּ; וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-עִיר הַנָּבִיא הַזָּקֵן, לִסְפֹּד, וּלְקָבְרוֹ.	29 And the prophet took up the carcass of the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back; and he came to the city of the old prophet, to lament, and to bury him.
13.30 ל  וַיַּנַּח אֶת-נִבְלָתוֹ, בְּקִבְרוֹ; וַיִּסְפְּדוּ עָלָיו, הוֹי אָחִי.	30 And he laid his carcass in his own grave; and they made lamentation for him: 'Alas, my brother!'
13.31 לא  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי קָבְרוֹ אֹתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-בָּנָיו לֵאמֹר, בְּמוֹתִי וּקְבַרְתֶּם אֹתִי בַּקֶּבֶר אֲשֶׁר אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים קָבוּר בּוֹ:  אֵצֶל, עַצְמֹתָיו, הַנִּיחוּ, אֶת-עַצְמֹתָי.	31 And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spoke to his sons, saying: 'When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones.
13.32 לב  כִּי הָיֹה יִהְיֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר קָרָא בִּדְבַר יְהוָה, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית-אֵל; וְעַל כָּל-בָּתֵּי הַבָּמוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בְּעָרֵי שֹׁמְרוֹן.  {פ}	32 For the saying which he cried by the word of the LORD against the altar in Beth-el, and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass.' {P}
13.33 לג  אַחַר הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לֹא-שָׁב יָרָבְעָם מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה; וַיָּשָׁב וַיַּעַשׂ מִקְצוֹת הָעָם, כֹּהֲנֵי בָמוֹת--הֶחָפֵץ יְמַלֵּא אֶת-יָדוֹ, וִיהִי כֹּהֲנֵי בָמוֹת.	33 After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again from among all the people priests of the high places; whosoever would, he consecrated him, that he might be one of the priests of the high places.
13.34 לד  וַיְהִי בַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לְחַטַּאת בֵּית יָרָבְעָם; וּלְהַכְחִיד, וּלְהַשְׁמִיד, מֵעַל, פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.  {פ}	34 And by this thing there was sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth. {P}
14.1 א  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, חָלָה אֲבִיָּה בֶן-יָרָבְעָם.	1 At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.
14.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יָרָבְעָם לְאִשְׁתּוֹ, קוּמִי נָא וְהִשְׁתַּנִּית, וְלֹא יֵדְעוּ, כִּי-אתי (אַתְּ) אֵשֶׁת יָרָבְעָם; וְהָלַכְתְּ שִׁלֹה, הִנֵּה-שָׁם אֲחִיָּה הַנָּבִיא--הוּא-דִבֶּר עָלַי לְמֶלֶךְ, עַל-הָעָם הַזֶּה.	2 And Jeroboam said to his wife: 'Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh; behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, who spoke concerning me that I should be king over this people.
14.3 ג  וְלָקַחַתְּ בְּיָדֵךְ עֲשָׂרָה לֶחֶם וְנִקֻּדִים, וּבַקְבֻּק דְּבַשׁ--וּבָאת אֵלָיו; הוּא יַגִּיד לָךְ, מַה-יִּהְיֶה לַנָּעַר.	3 And take with thee ten loaves, and biscuits, and a cruse of honey, and go to him; he will tell thee what shall become of the child.'
14.4 ד  וַתַּעַשׂ כֵּן, אֵשֶׁת יָרָבְעָם, וַתָּקָם וַתֵּלֶךְ שִׁלֹה, וַתָּבֹא בֵּית אֲחִיָּה; וַאֲחִיָּהוּ לֹא-יָכֹל לִרְאוֹת, כִּי קָמוּ עֵינָיו מִשֵּׂיבוֹ.  {פ}	4 And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age. {P}
14.5 ה  וַיהוָה אָמַר אֶל-אֲחִיָּהוּ, הִנֵּה אֵשֶׁת יָרָבְעָם בָּאָה לִדְרֹשׁ דָּבָר מֵעִמְּךָ אֶל-בְּנָהּ כִּי-חֹלֶה הוּא--כָּזֹה וְכָזֶה, תְּדַבֵּר אֵלֶיהָ; וִיהִי כְבֹאָהּ, וְהִיא מִתְנַכֵּרָה.	5 Now the LORD had said unto Ahijah: 'Behold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to inquire of thee concerning her son; for he is sick; thus and thus shalt thou say unto her; for it will be, when she cometh in, that she will feign herself to be another woman.'
14.6 ו  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ אֲחִיָּהוּ אֶת-קוֹל רַגְלֶיהָ, בָּאָה בַפֶּתַח, וַיֹּאמֶר, בֹּאִי אֵשֶׁת יָרָבְעָם; לָמָּה זֶּה, אַתְּ מִתְנַכֵּרָה, וְאָנֹכִי, שָׁלוּחַ אֵלַיִךְ קָשָׁה.	6 And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said: 'Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy tidings.
14.7 ז  לְכִי אִמְרִי לְיָרָבְעָם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר הֲרִמֹתִיךָ, מִתּוֹךְ הָעָם; וָאֶתֶּנְךָ נָגִיד, עַל עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 Go, tell Jeroboam: Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over My people Israel,
14.8 ח  וָאֶקְרַע אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה מִבֵּית דָּוִד, וָאֶתְּנֶהָ לָךְ; וְלֹא-הָיִיתָ כְּעַבְדִּי דָוִד, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַר מִצְוֺתַי וַאֲשֶׁר-הָלַךְ אַחֲרַי בְּכָל-לְבָבוֹ, לַעֲשׂוֹת, רַק הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינָי.	8 and rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thee; and yet thou hast not been as My servant David, who kept My commandments, and who followed Me with all his heart, to do that only which was right in Mine eyes;
14.9 ט  וַתָּרַע לַעֲשׂוֹת, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ לְפָנֶיךָ; וַתֵּלֶךְ וַתַּעֲשֶׂה-לְּךָ אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים וּמַסֵּכוֹת, לְהַכְעִיסֵנִי, וְאֹתִי הִשְׁלַכְתָּ, אַחֲרֵי גַוֶּךָ.	9 but hast done evil above all that were before thee, and hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to provoke Me, and hast cast Me behind thy back;
14.10 י  לָכֵן, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא רָעָה אֶל-בֵּית יָרָבְעָם, וְהִכְרַתִּי לְיָרָבְעָם מַשְׁתִּין בְּקִיר, עָצוּר וְעָזוּב בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבִעַרְתִּי אַחֲרֵי בֵית-יָרָבְעָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר יְבַעֵר הַגָּלָל עַד-תֻּמּוֹ.	10 therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam every man-child, and him that is shut up and him that is left at large in Israel, and will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam, as a man sweepeth away dung, till it be all gone.
14.11 יא  הַמֵּת לְיָרָבְעָם בָּעִיר, יֹאכְלוּ הַכְּלָבִים, וְהַמֵּת בַּשָּׂדֶה, יֹאכְלוּ עוֹף הַשָּׁמָיִם:  כִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֵּר.	11 Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat; for the LORD hath spoken it.
14.12 יב  וְאַתְּ קוּמִי, לְכִי לְבֵיתֵךְ; בְּבֹאָה רַגְלַיִךְ הָעִירָה, וּמֵת הַיָּלֶד.	12 Arise thou therefore, get thee to thy house; and when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.
14.13 יג  וְסָפְדוּ-לוֹ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְקָבְרוּ אֹתוֹ--כִּי-זֶה לְבַדּוֹ, יָבֹא לְיָרָבְעָם אֶל-קָבֶר:  יַעַן נִמְצָא-בוֹ דָּבָר טוֹב, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּבֵית יָרָבְעָם.	13 And all Israel shall make lamentation for him, and bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave; because in him there is found some good thing toward the LORD, the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.
14.14 יד  וְהֵקִים יְהוָה לוֹ מֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יַכְרִית אֶת-בֵּית יָרָבְעָם זֶה הַיּוֹם; וּמֶה, גַּם-עָתָּה.	14 Moreover the LORD will raise Him up a king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day. But what is it even then?
14.15 טו  וְהִכָּה יְהוָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָנוּד הַקָּנֶה בַּמַּיִם, וְנָתַשׁ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵעַל הָאֲדָמָה הַטּוֹבָה הַזֹּאת אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לַאֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, וְזֵרָם מֵעֵבֶר לַנָּהָר:  יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֶת-אֲשֵׁרֵיהֶם--מַכְעִיסִים, אֶת-יְהוָה.	15 for the LORD will smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water; and He will root up Israel out of this good land, which He gave to their fathers, and will scatter them beyond the River; because they have made their Asherim, provoking the LORD.
14.16 טז  וְיִתֵּן, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בִּגְלַל חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם, אֲשֶׁר חָטָא, וַאֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	16 And He will give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he hath sinned, and wherewith he hath made Israel to sin.'
14.17 יז  וַתָּקָם אֵשֶׁת יָרָבְעָם, וַתֵּלֶךְ וַתָּבֹא תִרְצָתָה; הִיא בָּאָה בְסַף-הַבַּיִת, וְהַנַּעַר מֵת.	17 And Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah; and as she came to the threshold of the house, the child died.
14.18 יח  וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ וַיִּסְפְּדוּ-לוֹ, כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּדְבַר יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד-עַבְדּוֹ אֲחִיָּהוּ הַנָּבִיא.	18 And all Israel buried him, and made lamentation for him; according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by the hand of His servant Ahijah the prophet.
14.19 יט  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יָרָבְעָם, אֲשֶׁר נִלְחַם וַאֲשֶׁר מָלָךְ:  הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	19 And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
14.20 כ  וְהַיָּמִים אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ יָרָבְעָם, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה; וַיִּשְׁכַּב, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּמְלֹךְ נָדָב בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	20 And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years; and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead. {P}
14.21 כא  וּרְחַבְעָם, בֶּן-שְׁלֹמֹה, מָלַךְ, בִּיהוּדָה; בֶּן-אַרְבָּעִים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה רְחַבְעָם בְּמָלְכוֹ וּשְׁבַע עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר-בָּחַר יְהוָה לָשׂוּם אֶת-שְׁמוֹ שָׁם מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, נַעֲמָה הָעַמֹּנִית.	21 And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put His name there; and his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.
14.22 כב  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוּדָה הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיְקַנְאוּ אֹתוֹ, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֲבֹתָם, בְּחַטֹּאתָם, אֲשֶׁר חָטָאוּ.	22 And Judah did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; and they moved Him to jealousy with their sins which they committed, above all that their fathers had done.
14.23 כג  וַיִּבְנוּ גַם-הֵמָּה לָהֶם בָּמוֹת וּמַצֵּבוֹת, וַאֲשֵׁרִים, עַל כָּל-גִּבְעָה גְבֹהָה, וְתַחַת כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן.	23 For they also built them high places, and pillars, and Asherim, on every high hill, and under every leafy tree;
14.24 כד  וְגַם-קָדֵשׁ, הָיָה בָאָרֶץ:  עָשׂוּ, כְּכֹל הַתּוֹעֲבֹת הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	24 and there were also sodomites in the land; they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the LORD drove out before the children of Israel. {P}
14.25 כה  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַחֲמִישִׁית, לַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם; עָלָה שושק (שִׁישַׁק) מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	25 And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem;
14.26 כו  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-אֹצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-אוֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֶת-הַכֹּל, לָקָח; וַיִּקַּח אֶת-כָּל-מָגִנֵּי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה.	26 and he took away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took away all; and he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
14.27 כז  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם תַּחְתָּם, מָגִנֵּי נְחֹשֶׁת; וְהִפְקִיד, עַל-יַד שָׂרֵי הָרָצִים, הַשֹּׁמְרִים, פֶּתַח בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ.	27 And king Rehoboam made in their stead shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard, who kept the door of the king's house.
14.28 כח  וַיְהִי מִדֵּי-בֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ, בֵּית יְהוָה--יִשָּׂאוּם, הָרָצִים, וֶהֱשִׁיבוּם, אֶל-תָּא הָרָצִים.	28 And it was so, that as oft as the king went into the house of the LORD, the guard bore them, and brought them back into the guard-chamber.
14.29 כט  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי רְחַבְעָם, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵמָּה כְתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.	29 Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
14.30 ל  וּמִלְחָמָה הָיְתָה בֵין-רְחַבְעָם וּבֵין יָרָבְעָם, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	30 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
14.31 לא  וַיִּשְׁכַּב רְחַבְעָם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו בְּעִיר דָּוִד, וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, נַעֲמָה הָעַמֹּנִית; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲבִיָּם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	31 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David; and his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead. {P}
15.1 א  וּבִשְׁנַת שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה, לַמֶּלֶךְ יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, מָלַךְ אֲבִיָּם, עַל-יְהוּדָה.	1 Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat began Abijam to reign over Judah.
15.2 ב  שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, מַעֲכָה בַּת-אֲבִישָׁלוֹם.	2 Three years reigned he in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
15.3 ג  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּכָל-חַטֹּאות אָבִיו אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה לְפָנָיו; וְלֹא-הָיָה לְבָבוֹ שָׁלֵם עִם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, כִּלְבַב דָּוִד אָבִיו.	3 And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him; and his heart was not whole with the LORD his God, as the heart of David his father.
15.4 ד  כִּי לְמַעַן דָּוִד, נָתַן יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו לוֹ נִיר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם, לְהָקִים אֶת-בְּנוֹ אַחֲרָיו, וּלְהַעֲמִיד אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	4 Nevertheless for David's sake did the LORD his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem;
15.5 ה  אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה דָוִד אֶת-הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וְלֹא-סָר מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּהוּ, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיָּיו--רַק, בִּדְבַר אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי.	5 because David did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, and turned not aside from any thing that He commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
15.6 ו  וּמִלְחָמָה הָיְתָה בֵין-רְחַבְעָם וּבֵין יָרָבְעָם, כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּיו.	6 Now there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.
15.7 ז  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אֲבִיָּם, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה--הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים, לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה; וּמִלְחָמָה הָיְתָה בֵּין אֲבִיָּם, וּבֵין יָרָבְעָם.	7 And the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.
15.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אֲבִיָּם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ בְּעִיר דָּוִד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אָסָא בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	8 And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David; and Asa his son reigned in his stead. {P}
15.9 ט  וּבִשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים, לְיָרָבְעָם מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָלַךְ אָסָא, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	9 And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel began Asa to reign over Judah.
15.10 י  וְאַרְבָּעִים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, מַעֲכָה בַּת-אֲבִישָׁלוֹם.	10 And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
15.11 יא  וַיַּעַשׂ אָסָא הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּדָוִד, אָבִיו.	11 And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did David his father.
15.12 יב  וַיַּעֲבֵר הַקְּדֵשִׁים, מִן-הָאָרֶץ; וַיָּסַר, אֶת-כָּל-הַגִּלֻּלִים, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ, אֲבֹתָיו.	12 And he put away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
15.13 יג  וְגַם אֶת-מַעֲכָה אִמּוֹ, וַיְסִרֶהָ מִגְּבִירָה, אֲשֶׁר-עָשְׂתָה מִפְלֶצֶת, לָאֲשֵׁרָה; וַיִּכְרֹת אָסָא אֶת-מִפְלַצְתָּהּ, וַיִּשְׂרֹף בְּנַחַל קִדְרוֹן.	13 And also Maacah his mother he removed from being queen, because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah; and Asa cut down her image, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.
15.14 יד  וְהַבָּמוֹת, לֹא-סָרוּ; רַק לְבַב-אָסָא, הָיָה שָׁלֵם עִם-יְהוָה--כָּל-יָמָיו.  {ס}	14 But the high places were not taken away; nevertheless the heart of Asa was whole with the LORD all his days. {S}
15.15 טו  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-קָדְשֵׁי אָבִיו, וקדשו (וְקָדְשֵׁי) בֵּית יְהוָה, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, וְכֵלִים.	15 And he brought into the house of the LORD the things that his father had hallowed, and the things that himself had hallowed, silver, and gold, and vessels.
15.16 טז  וּמִלְחָמָה הָיְתָה בֵּין אָסָא, וּבֵין בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל--כָּל-יְמֵיהֶם.	16 And there was war between Asa and Baasa king of Israel all their days.
15.17 יז  וַיַּעַל בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל עַל-יְהוּדָה, וַיִּבֶן אֶת-הָרָמָה--לְבִלְתִּי, תֵּת יֹצֵא וָבָא, לְאָסָא, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	17 And Baasa king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
15.18 יח  וַיִּקַּח אָסָא אֶת-כָּל-הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב הַנּוֹתָרִים בְּאוֹצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-אוֹצְרוֹת בֵּית מלך (הַמֶּלֶךְ), וַיִּתְּנֵם, בְּיַד-עֲבָדָיו; וַיִּשְׁלָחֵם הַמֶּלֶךְ אָסָא, אֶל-בֶּן-הֲדַד בֶּן-טַבְרִמֹּן בֶּן-חֶזְיוֹן מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, הַיֹּשֵׁב בְּדַמֶּשֶׂק, לֵאמֹר.	18 Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants; and king Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Aram, that dwelt at Damascus, saying:
15.19 יט  בְּרִית בֵּינִי וּבֵינֶךָ, בֵּין אָבִי וּבֵין אָבִיךָ; הִנֵּה שָׁלַחְתִּי לְךָ שֹׁחַד, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב--לֵךְ הָפֵרָה אֶת-בְּרִיתְךָ אֶת-בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיַעֲלֶה מֵעָלָי.	19 'There is a league between me and thee, between my father and thy father; behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasa king of Israel, that he may depart from me.'
15.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁמַע בֶּן-הֲדַד אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אָסָא, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ עַל-עָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּךְ אֶת-עִיּוֹן וְאֶת-דָּן, וְאֵת אָבֵל בֵּית-מַעֲכָה; וְאֵת, כָּל-כִּנְרוֹת, עַל, כָּל-אֶרֶץ נַפְתָּלִי.	20 And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.
15.21 כא  וַיְהִי, כִּשְׁמֹעַ בַּעְשָׁא, וַיֶּחְדַּל, מִבְּנוֹת אֶת-הָרָמָה; וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּתִרְצָה.	21 And it came to pass, when Baasa heard thereof, that he left off building Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.
15.22 כב  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ אָסָא הִשְׁמִיעַ אֶת-כָּל-יְהוּדָה, אֵין נָקִי, וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-אַבְנֵי הָרָמָה וְאֶת-עֵצֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה בַּעְשָׁא; וַיִּבֶן בָּם הַמֶּלֶךְ אָסָא, אֶת-גֶּבַע בִּנְיָמִן וְאֶת-הַמִּצְפָּה.	22 Then king Asa made a proclamation unto all Judah; none was exempted; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasa had builded; and king Asa built therewith Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
15.23 כג  וְיֶתֶר כָּל-דִּבְרֵי-אָסָא וְכָל-גְּבוּרָתוֹ וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וְהֶעָרִים אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה--הֲלֹא-הֵמָּה כְתוּבִים עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים, לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה; רַק לְעֵת זִקְנָתוֹ, חָלָה אֶת-רַגְלָיו.	23 Now the rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? But in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.
15.24 כד  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אָסָא, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר דָּוִד אָבִיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹשָׁפָט בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	24 And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead. {P}
15.25 כה  וְנָדָב בֶּן-יָרָבְעָם, מָלַךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּשְׁנַת שְׁתַּיִם, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁנָתָיִם.	25 And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and he reigned over Israel two years.
15.26 כו  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ אָבִיו, וּבְחַטָּאתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	26 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.
15.27 כז  וַיִּקְשֹׁר עָלָיו בַּעְשָׁא בֶן-אֲחִיָּה, לְבֵית יִשָּׂשכָר, וַיַּכֵּהוּ בַעְשָׁא, בְּגִבְּתוֹן אֲשֶׁר לַפְּלִשְׁתִּים; וְנָדָב, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, צָרִים, עַל-גִּבְּתוֹן.	27 And Baasa the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasa smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel were laying siege to Gibbethon.
15.28 כח  וַיְמִתֵהוּ בַעְשָׁא--בִּשְׁנַת שָׁלֹשׁ, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ, תַּחְתָּיו.	28 Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasa slay him, and reigned in his stead.
15.29 כט  וַיְהִי כְמָלְכוֹ, הִכָּה אֶת-כָּל-בֵּית יָרָבְעָם--לֹא-הִשְׁאִיר כָּל-נְשָׁמָה לְיָרָבְעָם, עַד-הִשְׁמִדוֹ:  כִּדְבַר יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד-עַבְדּוֹ אֲחִיָּה הַשִּׁילֹנִי.	29 And it came to pass that, as soon as he was king, he smote all the house of Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had destroyed him; according unto the saying of the LORD, which He spoke by the hand of His servant Ahijah the Shilonite;
15.30 ל  עַל-חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם אֲשֶׁר חָטָא, וַאֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  בְּכַעְסוֹ--אֲשֶׁר הִכְעִיס, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	30 for the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and wherewith he made Israel to sin; because of his provocation wherewith he provoked the LORD, the God of Israel.
15.31 לא  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי נָדָב, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	31 Now the rest of the acts of Nadab and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
15.32 לב  וּמִלְחָמָה הָיְתָה בֵּין אָסָא, וּבֵין בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל--כָּל-יְמֵיהֶם.  {פ}	32 And there was war between Asa and Baasa king of Israel all their days. {P}
15.33 לג  בִּשְׁנַת שָׁלֹשׁ, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--מָלַךְ בַּעְשָׁא בֶן-אֲחִיָּה עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּתִרְצָה, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבַּע, שָׁנָה.	33 In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasa the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, and reigned twenty and four years.
15.34 לד  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ יָרָבְעָם, וּבְחַטָּאתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	34 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. {S}
16.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יֵהוּא בֶן-חֲנָנִי, עַל-בַּעְשָׁא לֵאמֹר.	1 And the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasa, saying:
16.2 ב  יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר הֲרִימֹתִיךָ מִן-הֶעָפָר, וָאֶתֶּנְךָ נָגִיד, עַל עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַתֵּלֶךְ בְּדֶרֶךְ יָרָבְעָם, וַתַּחֲטִא אֶת-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַכְעִיסֵנִי, בְּחַטֹּאתָם.	2 'Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over My people Israel; and thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made My people Israel to sin, to provoke Me with their sins;
16.3 ג  הִנְנִי מַבְעִיר אַחֲרֵי בַעְשָׁא, וְאַחֲרֵי בֵיתוֹ; וְנָתַתִּי, אֶת-בֵּיתְךָ, כְּבֵית, יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט.	3 behold, I will utterly sweep away Baasa and his house; and I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
16.4 ד  הַמֵּת לְבַעְשָׁא בָּעִיר, יֹאכְלוּ הַכְּלָבִים; וְהַמֵּת לוֹ בַּשָּׂדֶה, יֹאכְלוּ עוֹף הַשָּׁמָיִם.	4 Him that dieth of Baasa in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.'
16.5 ה  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי בַעְשָׁא וַאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 Now the rest of the acts of Baasa, and what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
16.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁכַּב בַּעְשָׁא עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּתִרְצָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֵלָה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.	6 And Baasa slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah; and Elah his son reigned in his stead.
16.7 ז  וְגַם בְּיַד-יֵהוּא בֶן-חֲנָנִי הַנָּבִיא, דְּבַר-יְהוָה הָיָה אֶל-בַּעְשָׁא וְאֶל-בֵּיתוֹ וְעַל כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה לְהַכְעִיסוֹ בְּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו, לִהְיוֹת, כְּבֵית יָרָבְעָם; וְעַל אֲשֶׁר-הִכָּה, אֹתוֹ.  {פ}	7 And moreover by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of the LORD against Baasa, and against his house, both because of all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, to provoke Him with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam, and because he smote him. {P}
16.8 ח  בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וָשֵׁשׁ שָׁנָה, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  מָלַךְ אֵלָה בֶן-בַּעְשָׁא עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּתִרְצָה--שְׁנָתָיִם.	8 In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son of Baasa to reign over Israel in Tirzah, and reigned two years.
16.9 ט  וַיִּקְשֹׁר עָלָיו עַבְדּוֹ זִמְרִי, שַׂר מַחֲצִית הָרָכֶב; וְהוּא בְתִרְצָה, שֹׁתֶה שִׁכּוֹר, בֵּית אַרְצָא, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַבַּיִת בְּתִרְצָה.	9 And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him; now he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the household in Tirzah;
16.10 י  וַיָּבֹא זִמְרִי, וַיַּכֵּהוּ וַיְמִיתֵהוּ, בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וָשֶׁבַע, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ, תַּחְתָּיו.	10 and Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.
16.11 יא  וַיְהִי בְמָלְכוֹ כְּשִׁבְתּוֹ עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, הִכָּה אֶת-כָּל-בֵּית בַּעְשָׁא--לֹא-הִשְׁאִיר לוֹ, מַשְׁתִּין בְּקִיר; וְגֹאֲלָיו, וְרֵעֵהוּ.	11 And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he smote all the house of Baasa; he left him not a single man-child, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends.
16.12 יב  וַיַּשְׁמֵד זִמְרִי, אֵת כָּל-בֵּית בַּעְשָׁא, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֶל-בַּעְשָׁא, בְּיַד יֵהוּא הַנָּבִיא.	12 Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasa, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke against Baasa by Jehu the prophet,
16.13 יג  אֶל כָּל-חַטֹּאות בַּעְשָׁא, וְחַטֹּאות אֵלָה בְנוֹ--אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ, וַאֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיאוּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַכְעִיס אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּהַבְלֵיהֶם.	13 for all the sins of Baasa, and the sins of Elah his son, which they sinned, and wherewith they made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, with their vanities.
16.14 יד  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אֵלָה, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	14 Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? {P}
16.15 טו  בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וָשֶׁבַע שָׁנָה, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, מָלַךְ זִמְרִי שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, בְּתִרְצָה; וְהָעָם חֹנִים, עַל-גִּבְּתוֹן אֲשֶׁר לַפְּלִשְׁתִּים.	15 In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.
16.16 טז  וַיִּשְׁמַע הָעָם, הַחֹנִים לֵאמֹר, קָשַׁר זִמְרִי, וְגַם הִכָּה אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיַּמְלִכוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-עָמְרִי שַׂר-צָבָא עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--בַּמַּחֲנֶה.	16 And the people that were encamped heard say: 'Zimri hath conspired, and hath also smitten the king'; wherefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.
16.17 יז  וַיַּעֲלֶה עָמְרִי וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, מִגִּבְּתוֹן; וַיָּצֻרוּ, עַל-תִּרְצָה.	17 And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.
16.18 יח  וַיְהִי כִּרְאוֹת זִמְרִי, כִּי-נִלְכְּדָה הָעִיר, וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-אַרְמוֹן בֵּית-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּשְׂרֹף עָלָיו אֶת-בֵּית-מֶלֶךְ בָּאֵשׁ, וַיָּמֹת.	18 And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the castle of the king's house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died;
16.19 יט  עַל-חַטֹּאתָיו אֲשֶׁר חָטָא, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--לָלֶכֶת, בְּדֶרֶךְ יָרָבְעָם, וּבְחַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, לְהַחֲטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	19 for his sins which he sinned in doing that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin.
16.20 כ  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי זִמְרִי, וְקִשְׁרוֹ אֲשֶׁר קָשָׁר:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	20 Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? {P}
16.21 כא  אָז יֵחָלֵק הָעָם יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַחֵצִי:  חֲצִי הָעָם הָיָה אַחֲרֵי תִבְנִי בֶן-גִּינַת, לְהַמְלִיכוֹ, וְהַחֲצִי, אַחֲרֵי עָמְרִי.	21 Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half followed Omri.
16.22 כב  וַיֶּחֱזַק הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר אַחֲרֵי עָמְרִי, אֶת-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר אַחֲרֵי תִּבְנִי בֶן-גִּינַת; וַיָּמָת תִּבְנִי, וַיִּמְלֹךְ עָמְרִי.  {פ}	22 But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath; so Tibni died, and Omri reigned. {P}
16.23 כג  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, מָלַךְ עָמְרִי עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה; בְּתִרְצָה, מָלַךְ שֵׁשׁ-שָׁנִים.	23 In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, and reigned twelve years; six years reigned he in Tirzah.
16.24 כד  וַיִּקֶן אֶת-הָהָר שֹׁמְרוֹן, מֵאֶת שֶׁמֶר--בְּכִכְּרַיִם כָּסֶף; וַיִּבֶן, אֶת-הָהָר, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שֵׁם הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה, עַל שֶׁם-שֶׁמֶר אֲדֹנֵי הָהָר שֹׁמְרוֹן.	24 And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver; and he built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria.
16.25 כה  וַיַּעֲשֶׂה עָמְרִי הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיָּרַע, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר לְפָנָיו.	25 And Omri did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and dealt wickedly above all that were before him.
16.26 כו  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּכָל-דֶּרֶךְ יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, ובחטאתיו (וּבְחַטָּאתוֹ), אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  לְהַכְעִיס, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּהַבְלֵיהֶם.	26 For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sins wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, with their vanities.
16.27 כז  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי עָמְרִי אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	27 Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he showed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
16.28 כח  וַיִּשְׁכַּב עָמְרִי עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אַחְאָב בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	28 And Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria; and Ahab his son reigned in his stead. {P}
16.29 כט  וְאַחְאָב בֶּן-עָמְרִי, מָלַךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנָה, לְאָסָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אַחְאָב בֶּן-עָמְרִי עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם, שָׁנָה.	29 And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel; and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.
16.30 ל  וַיַּעַשׂ אַחְאָב בֶּן-עָמְרִי הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--מִכֹּל, אֲשֶׁר לְפָנָיו.	30 And Ahab the son of Omri did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD above all that were before him.
16.31 לא  וַיְהִי הֲנָקֵל לֶכְתּוֹ, בְּחַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט; וַיִּקַּח אִשָּׁה אֶת-אִיזֶבֶל, בַּת-אֶתְבַּעַל מֶלֶךְ צִידֹנִים, וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיַּעֲבֹד אֶת-הַבַּעַל, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לוֹ.	31 And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him.
16.32 לב  וַיָּקֶם מִזְבֵּחַ, לַבָּעַל, בֵּית הַבַּעַל, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.	32 And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.
16.33 לג  וַיַּעַשׂ אַחְאָב, אֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרָה; וַיּוֹסֶף אַחְאָב לַעֲשׂוֹת, לְהַכְעִיס אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִכֹּל מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ לְפָנָיו.	33 And Ahab made the Asherah; and Ahab did yet more to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, than all the kings of Israel that were before him.
16.34 לד  בְּיָמָיו בָּנָה חִיאֵל, בֵּית הָאֱלִי--אֶת-יְרִיחֹה:  בַּאֲבִירָם בְּכֹרוֹ יִסְּדָהּ, ובשגיב (וּבִשְׂגוּב) צְעִירוֹ הִצִּיב דְּלָתֶיהָ, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּיַד יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן.  {ס}	34 In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho; with Abiram his first-born he laid the foundation thereof, and with his youngest son Segub he set up the gates thereof; according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by the hand of Joshua the son of Nun. {S}
17.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי מִתֹּשָׁבֵי גִלְעָד, אֶל-אַחְאָב, חַי-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר עָמַדְתִּי לְפָנָיו, אִם-יִהְיֶה הַשָּׁנִים הָאֵלֶּה טַל וּמָטָר--כִּי, אִם-לְפִי דְבָרִי.  {ס}	1 And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the settlers of Gilead, said unto Ahab: 'As the LORD, the God of Israel, liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.' {S}
17.2 ב  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר.	2 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying:
17.3 ג  לֵךְ מִזֶּה, וּפָנִיתָ לְּךָ קֵדְמָה; וְנִסְתַּרְתָּ בְּנַחַל כְּרִית, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן.	3 'Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is before the Jordan.
17.4 ד  וְהָיָה, מֵהַנַּחַל תִּשְׁתֶּה; וְאֶת-הָעֹרְבִים צִוִּיתִי, לְכַלְכֶּלְךָ שָׁם.	4 And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.'
17.5 ה  וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיַּעַשׂ, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיֵּשֶׁב בְּנַחַל כְּרִית, אֲשֶׁר, עַל-פְּנֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן.	5 So he went and did according unto the word of the LORD; for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before the Jordan.
17.6 ו  וְהָעֹרְבִים, מְבִאִים לוֹ לֶחֶם וּבָשָׂר בַּבֹּקֶר, וְלֶחֶם וּבָשָׂר, בָּעָרֶב; וּמִן-הַנַּחַל, יִשְׁתֶּה.	6 And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.
17.7 ז  וַיְהִי מִקֵּץ יָמִים, וַיִּיבַשׁ הַנָּחַל:  כִּי לֹא-הָיָה גֶשֶׁם, בָּאָרֶץ.  {ס}	7 And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up, because there was no rain in the land. {S}
17.8 ח  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר.	8 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying:
17.9 ט  קוּם לֵךְ צָרְפַתָה אֲשֶׁר לְצִידוֹן, וְיָשַׁבְתָּ שָׁם; הִנֵּה צִוִּיתִי שָׁם אִשָּׁה אַלְמָנָה, לְכַלְכְּלֶךָ.	9 'Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there; behold, I have commanded a widow there to sustain thee.'
17.10 י  וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ צָרְפַתָה, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-פֶּתַח הָעִיר, וְהִנֵּה-שָׁם אִשָּׁה אַלְמָנָה, מְקֹשֶׁשֶׁת עֵצִים; וַיִּקְרָא אֵלֶיהָ וַיֹּאמַר, קְחִי-נָא לִי מְעַט-מַיִם בַּכְּלִי וְאֶשְׁתֶּה.	10 So he arose and went to Zarephath; and when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks; and he called to her, and said: 'Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.'
17.11 יא  וַתֵּלֶךְ, לָקַחַת; וַיִּקְרָא אֵלֶיהָ וַיֹּאמַר, לִקְחִי-נָא לִי פַּת-לֶחֶם בְּיָדֵךְ.	11 And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said: 'Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand.'
17.12 יב  וַתֹּאמֶר, חַי-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אִם-יֶשׁ-לִי מָעוֹג, כִּי אִם-מְלֹא כַף-קֶמַח בַּכַּד, וּמְעַט-שֶׁמֶן בַּצַּפָּחַת; וְהִנְנִי מְקֹשֶׁשֶׁת שְׁנַיִם עֵצִים, וּבָאתִי וַעֲשִׂיתִיהוּ לִי וְלִבְנִי, וַאֲכַלְנֻהוּ, וָמָתְנוּ.	12 And she said: 'As the LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, only a handful of meal in the jar, and a little oil in the cruse; and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.'
17.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ אֵלִיָּהוּ אַל-תִּירְאִי, בֹּאִי עֲשִׂי כִדְבָרֵךְ; אַךְ עֲשִׂי-לִי מִשָּׁם עֻגָה קְטַנָּה בָרִאשֹׁנָה, וְהוֹצֵאת לִי, וְלָךְ וְלִבְנֵךְ, תַּעֲשִׂי בָּאַחֲרֹנָה.	13 And Elijah said unto her: 'Fear not; go and do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it forth unto me, and afterward make for thee and for thy son.
17.14 יד  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּד הַקֶּמַח לֹא תִכְלָה, וְצַפַּחַת הַשֶּׁמֶן, לֹא תֶחְסָר:  עַד יוֹם תתן- (תֵּת-) יְהוָה, גֶּשֶׁם--עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.	14 For thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: The jar of meal shall not be spent, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the LORD sendeth rain upon the land.'
17.15 טו  וַתֵּלֶךְ וַתַּעֲשֶׂה, כִּדְבַר אֵלִיָּהוּ; וַתֹּאכַל הוא-והיא (הִיא-וָהוּא) וּבֵיתָהּ, יָמִים.	15 And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah; and she, and he, and her house, did eat many days.
17.16 טז  כַּד הַקֶּמַח לֹא כָלָתָה, וְצַפַּחַת הַשֶּׁמֶן לֹא חָסֵר--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּיַד אֵלִיָּהוּ.  {פ}	16 The jar of meal was not spent, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by Elijah. {P}
17.17 יז  וַיְהִי, אַחַר הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, חָלָה, בֶּן-הָאִשָּׁה בַּעֲלַת הַבָּיִת; וַיְהִי חָלְיוֹ חָזָק מְאֹד, עַד אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נוֹתְרָה-בּוֹ נְשָׁמָה.	17 And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.
17.18 יח  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ, מַה-לִּי וָלָךְ, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים:  בָּאתָ אֵלַי לְהַזְכִּיר אֶת-עֲוֺנִי, וּלְהָמִית אֶת-בְּנִי.	18 And she said unto Elijah: 'What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to bring my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?'
17.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ, תְּנִי-לִי אֶת-בְּנֵךְ; וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ מֵחֵיקָהּ, וַיַּעֲלֵהוּ אֶל-הָעֲלִיָּה אֲשֶׁר-הוּא יֹשֵׁב שָׁם, וַיַּשְׁכִּבֵהוּ, עַל-מִטָּתוֹ.	19 And he said unto her: 'Give me thy son.' And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the upper chamber, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.
17.20 כ  וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי--הֲגַם עַל-הָאַלְמָנָה אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי מִתְגּוֹרֵר עִמָּהּ הֲרֵעוֹתָ, לְהָמִית אֶת-בְּנָהּ.	20 And he cried unto the LORD, and said: 'O LORD my God, hast Thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?'
17.21 כא  וַיִּתְמֹדֵד עַל-הַיֶּלֶד שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים, וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-יְהוָה וַיֹּאמַר:  יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי, תָּשָׁב נָא נֶפֶשׁ-הַיֶּלֶד הַזֶּה עַל-קִרְבּוֹ.	21 And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the LORD, and said: 'O LORD my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come back into him.'
17.22 כב  וַיִּשְׁמַע יְהוָה, בְּקוֹל אֵלִיָּהוּ; וַתָּשָׁב נֶפֶשׁ-הַיֶּלֶד עַל-קִרְבּוֹ, וַיֶּחִי.	22 And the LORD hearkened unto the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came back into him, and he revived.
17.23 כג  וַיִּקַּח אֵלִיָּהוּ אֶת-הַיֶּלֶד, וַיֹּרִדֵהוּ מִן-הָעֲלִיָּה הַבַּיְתָה, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ, לְאִמּוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלִיָּהוּ, רְאִי, חַי בְּנֵךְ.	23 And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the upper chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother; and Elijah said: 'See, thy son liveth.'
17.24 כד  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה, אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ, עַתָּה זֶה יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי אִישׁ אֱלֹהִים אָתָּה; וּדְבַר-יְהוָה בְּפִיךָ, אֱמֶת.  {פ}	24 And the woman said to Elijah: 'Now I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the LORD in thy mouth is truth.' {P}
18.1 א  וַיְהִי, יָמִים רַבִּים, וּדְבַר-יְהוָה הָיָה אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ, בַּשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁלִישִׁית לֵאמֹר:  לֵךְ הֵרָאֵה אֶל-אַחְאָב, וְאֶתְּנָה מָטָר עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.	1 And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the LORD came to Elijah, in the third year, saying: 'Go, show thyself unto Ahab, and I will send rain upon the land.'
18.2 ב  וַיֵּלֶךְ, אֵלִיָּהוּ, לְהֵרָאוֹת, אֶל-אַחְאָב; וְהָרָעָב חָזָק, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.	2 And Elijah went to show himself unto Ahab. And the famine was sore in Samaria.
18.3 ג  וַיִּקְרָא אַחְאָב, אֶל-עֹבַדְיָהוּ אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַבָּיִת; וְעֹבַדְיָהוּ, הָיָה יָרֵא אֶת-יְהוָה--מְאֹד.	3 And Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the household.--Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly;
18.4 ד  וַיְהִי בְּהַכְרִית אִיזֶבֶל, אֵת נְבִיאֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּקַּח עֹבַדְיָהוּ מֵאָה נְבִיאִים, וַיַּחְבִּיאֵם חֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ בַּמְּעָרָה, וְכִלְכְּלָם, לֶחֶם וָמָיִם.	4 for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.--
18.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר אַחְאָב, אֶל-עֹבַדְיָהוּ, לֵךְ בָּאָרֶץ אֶל-כָּל-מַעְיְנֵי הַמַּיִם, וְאֶל כָּל-הַנְּחָלִים; אוּלַי נִמְצָא חָצִיר, וּנְחַיֶּה סוּס וָפֶרֶד, וְלוֹא נַכְרִית, מֵהַבְּהֵמָה.	5 And Ahab said unto Obadiah: 'Go through the land, unto all the springs of water, and unto all the brooks; peradventure we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the beasts.'
18.6 ו  וַיְחַלְּקוּ לָהֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, לַעֲבָר-בָּהּ:  אַחְאָב הָלַךְ בְּדֶרֶךְ אֶחָד, לְבַדּוֹ, וְעֹבַדְיָהוּ הָלַךְ בְּדֶרֶךְ-אֶחָד, לְבַדּוֹ.	6 So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.
18.7 ז  וַיְהִי עֹבַדְיָהוּ בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וְהִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ לִקְרָאתוֹ; וַיַּכִּרֵהוּ, וַיִּפֹּל עַל-פָּנָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר, הַאַתָּה זֶה אֲדֹנִי אֵלִיָּהוּ.	7 And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him; and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said: 'Is it thou, my lord Elijah?'
18.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, אָנִי; לֵךְ אֱמֹר לַאדֹנֶיךָ, הִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ.	8 And he answered him: 'It is I; go, tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah is here.'
18.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר, מֶה חָטָאתִי:  כִּי-אַתָּה נֹתֵן אֶת-עַבְדְּךָ, בְּיַד-אַחְאָב--לַהֲמִיתֵנִי.	9 And he said: 'Wherein have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?
18.10 י  חַי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אִם-יֶשׁ-גּוֹי וּמַמְלָכָה אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁלַח אֲדֹנִי שָׁם לְבַקֶּשְׁךָ, וְאָמְרוּ, אָיִן; וְהִשְׁבִּיעַ אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה וְאֶת-הַגּוֹי, כִּי לֹא יִמְצָאֶכָּה.	10 As the LORD thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee; and when they said: He is not here, he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.
18.11 יא  וְעַתָּה, אַתָּה אֹמֵר:  לֵךְ אֱמֹר לַאדֹנֶיךָ, הִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ.	11 And now thou sayest: Go, tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah is here.
18.12 יב  וְהָיָה אֲנִי אֵלֵךְ מֵאִתָּךְ, וְרוּחַ יְהוָה יִשָּׂאֲךָ עַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-אֵדָע, וּבָאתִי לְהַגִּיד לְאַחְאָב וְלֹא יִמְצָאֲךָ, וַהֲרָגָנִי; וְעַבְדְּךָ יָרֵא אֶת-יְהוָה, מִנְּעֻרָי.	12 And it will come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that the spirit of the LORD will carry thee whither I know not; and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he will slay me; but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth.
18.13 יג  הֲלֹא-הֻגַּד לַאדֹנִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי, בַּהֲרֹג אִיזֶבֶל, אֵת נְבִיאֵי יְהוָה; וָאַחְבִּא מִנְּבִיאֵי יְהוָה מֵאָה אִישׁ, חֲמִשִּׁים חֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ בַּמְּעָרָה, וָאֲכַלְכְּלֵם, לֶחֶם וָמָיִם.	13 Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a hundred men of the LORD'S prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
18.14 יד  וְעַתָּה אַתָּה אֹמֵר, לֵךְ אֱמֹר לַאדֹנֶיךָ הִנֵּה אֵלִיָּהוּ; וַהֲרָגָנִי.  {ס}	14 And now thou sayest: Go, tell thy lord: Behold, Elijah is here; and he will slay me.' {S}
18.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלִיָּהוּ, חַי יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֲשֶׁר עָמַדְתִּי לְפָנָיו:  כִּי הַיּוֹם, אֵרָאֶה אֵלָיו.	15 And Elijah said: 'As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself unto him to-day.'
18.16 טז  וַיֵּלֶךְ עֹבַדְיָהוּ לִקְרַאת אַחְאָב, וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ; וַיֵּלֶךְ אַחְאָב, לִקְרַאת אֵלִיָּהוּ.	16 So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah.
18.17 יז  וַיְהִי כִּרְאוֹת אַחְאָב, אֶת-אֵלִיָּהוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אַחְאָב אֵלָיו, הַאַתָּה זֶה עֹכֵר יִשְׂרָאֵל.	17 And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him: 'Is it thou, thou troubler of Israel?'
18.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא עָכַרְתִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי אִם-אַתָּה, וּבֵית אָבִיךָ--בַּעֲזָבְכֶם אֶת-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה, וַתֵּלֶךְ אַחֲרֵי הַבְּעָלִים.	18 And he answered: 'I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the LORD, and thou hast followed the Baalim.
18.19 יט  וְעַתָּה, שְׁלַח קְבֹץ אֵלַי אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶל-הַר הַכַּרְמֶל; וְאֶת-נְבִיאֵי הַבַּעַל אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים, וּנְבִיאֵי הָאֲשֵׁרָה אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת, אֹכְלֵי, שֻׁלְחַן אִיזָבֶל.	19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the Asherah four hundred, that eat at Jezebel's table.'
18.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁלַח אַחְאָב, בְּכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּקְבֹּץ אֶת-הַנְּבִיאִים, אֶל-הַר הַכַּרְמֶל.	20 And Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel.
18.21 כא  וַיִּגַּשׁ אֵלִיָּהוּ אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר עַד-מָתַי אַתֶּם פֹּסְחִים עַל-שְׁתֵּי הַסְּעִפִּים--אִם-יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים לְכוּ אַחֲרָיו, וְאִם-הַבַּעַל לְכוּ אַחֲרָיו; וְלֹא-עָנוּ הָעָם אֹתוֹ, דָּבָר.	21 And Elijah came near unto all the people, and said: 'How long halt ye between two opinions? if the LORD be God, follow Him; but if Baal, follow him.' And the people answered him not a word.
18.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ, אֶל-הָעָם, אֲנִי נוֹתַרְתִּי נָבִיא לַיהוָה, לְבַדִּי; וּנְבִיאֵי הַבַּעַל, אַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ.	22 Then said Elijah unto the people: 'I, even I only, am left a prophet of the LORD; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.
18.23 כג  וְיִתְּנוּ-לָנוּ שְׁנַיִם פָּרִים, וְיִבְחֲרוּ לָהֶם הַפָּר הָאֶחָד וִינַתְּחֻהוּ וְיָשִׂימוּ עַל-הָעֵצִים, וְאֵשׁ, לֹא יָשִׂימוּ; וַאֲנִי אֶעֱשֶׂה אֶת-הַפָּר הָאֶחָד, וְנָתַתִּי עַל-הָעֵצִים, וְאֵשׁ, לֹא אָשִׂים.	23 Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under; and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under.
18.24 כד  וּקְרָאתֶם בְּשֵׁם אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וַאֲנִי אֶקְרָא בְשֵׁם-יְהוָה, וְהָיָה הָאֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲנֶה בָאֵשׁ, הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיַּעַן כָּל-הָעָם וַיֹּאמְרוּ, טוֹב הַדָּבָר.	24 And call ye on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of the LORD; and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God.' And all the people answered and said: 'It is well spoken.'
18.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ לִנְבִיאֵי הַבַּעַל, בַּחֲרוּ לָכֶם הַפָּר הָאֶחָד וַעֲשׂוּ רִאשֹׁנָה, כִּי אַתֶּם, הָרַבִּים; וְקִרְאוּ בְּשֵׁם אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְאֵשׁ לֹא תָשִׂימוּ.	25 And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal: 'Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under.'
18.26 כו  וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-הַפָּר אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן לָהֶם, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, וַיִּקְרְאוּ בְשֵׁם-הַבַּעַל מֵהַבֹּקֶר וְעַד-הַצָּהֳרַיִם לֵאמֹר הַבַּעַל עֲנֵנוּ, וְאֵין קוֹל וְאֵין עֹנֶה; וַיְפַסְּחוּ, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה.	26 And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying: 'O Baal, answer us.' But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they danced in halting wise about the altar which was made.
18.27 כז  וַיְהִי בַצָּהֳרַיִם וַיְהַתֵּל בָּהֶם אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר קִרְאוּ בְקוֹל-גָּדוֹל כִּי-אֱלֹהִים הוּא--כִּי שִׂיחַ וְכִי-שִׂיג לוֹ, וְכִי-דֶרֶךְ לוֹ; אוּלַי יָשֵׁן הוּא, וְיִקָץ.	27 And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said: 'Cry aloud; for he is a god; either he is musing, or he is gone aside, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.'
18.28 כח  וַיִּקְרְאוּ, בְּקוֹל גָּדוֹל, וַיִּתְגֹּדְדוּ כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם, בַּחֲרָבוֹת וּבָרְמָחִים--עַד-שְׁפָךְ-דָּם, עֲלֵיהֶם.	28 And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with swords and lances, till the blood gushed out upon them.
18.29 כט  וַיְהִי, כַּעֲבֹר הַצָּהֳרַיִם, וַיִּתְנַבְּאוּ, עַד לַעֲלוֹת הַמִּנְחָה; וְאֵין-קוֹל וְאֵין-עֹנֶה, וְאֵין קָשֶׁב.	29 And it was so, when midday was past, that they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening offering; but their was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.
18.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ לְכָל-הָעָם גְּשׁוּ אֵלַי, וַיִּגְּשׁוּ כָל-הָעָם אֵלָיו; וַיְרַפֵּא אֶת-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, הֶהָרוּס.	30 And Elijah said unto all the people: 'Come near unto me'; and all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD that was thrown down.
18.31 לא  וַיִּקַּח אֵלִיָּהוּ, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה אֲבָנִים, כְּמִסְפַּר, שִׁבְטֵי בְנֵי-יַעֲקֹב--אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, יִשְׂרָאֵל יִהְיֶה שְׁמֶךָ.	31 And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the LORD came, saying: 'Israel shall be thy name.'
18.32 לב  וַיִּבְנֶה אֶת-הָאֲבָנִים מִזְבֵּחַ, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה; וַיַּעַשׂ תְּעָלָה, כְּבֵית סָאתַיִם זֶרַע, סָבִיב, לַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	32 And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the LORD; and he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.
18.33 לג  וַיַּעֲרֹךְ, אֶת-הָעֵצִים; וַיְנַתַּח, אֶת-הַפָּר, וַיָּשֶׂם, עַל-הָעֵצִים.	33 And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid it on the wood.
18.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר, מִלְאוּ אַרְבָּעָה כַדִּים מַיִם, וְיִצְקוּ עַל-הָעֹלָה, וְעַל-הָעֵצִים; וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁנוּ וַיִּשְׁנוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר שַׁלֵּשׁוּ וַיְשַׁלֵּשׁוּ.	34 And he said: 'Fill four jars with water, and pour it on the burnt-offering, and on the wood.' And he said: 'Do it the second time'; and they did it the second time. And he said: 'Do it the third time'; and they did it the third time.
18.35 לה  וַיֵּלְכוּ הַמַּיִם, סָבִיב לַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְגַם אֶת-הַתְּעָלָה, מִלֵּא-מָיִם.	35 And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water.
18.36 לו  וַיְהִי בַּעֲלוֹת הַמִּנְחָה, וַיִּגַּשׁ אֵלִיָּהוּ הַנָּבִיא וַיֹּאמַר, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם יִצְחָק וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, הַיּוֹם יִוָּדַע כִּי-אַתָּה אֱלֹהִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל וַאֲנִי עַבְדֶּךָ; ובדבריך (וּבִדְבָרְךָ) עָשִׂיתִי, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	36 And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening offering, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said: 'O LORD, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that Thou art God in Israel, and that I am Thy servant, and that I have done all these things at Thy word.
18.37 לז  עֲנֵנִי יְהוָה, עֲנֵנִי, וְיֵדְעוּ הָעָם הַזֶּה, כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים; וְאַתָּה הֲסִבֹּתָ אֶת-לִבָּם, אֲחֹרַנִּית.	37 Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people may know that Thou, LORD, art God, for Thou didst turn their heart backward.'
18.38 לח  וַתִּפֹּל אֵשׁ-יְהוָה, וַתֹּאכַל אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הָעֵצִים, וְאֶת-הָאֲבָנִים, וְאֶת-הֶעָפָר; וְאֶת-הַמַּיִם אֲשֶׁר-בַּתְּעָלָה, לִחֵכָה.	38 Then the fire of the LORD fell, and consumed the burnt-offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.
18.39 לט  וַיַּרְא, כָּל-הָעָם, וַיִּפְּלוּ, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ--יְהוָה הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים, יְהוָה הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים.	39 And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces; and they said: 'The LORD, He is God; the LORD, He is God.'
18.40 מ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ לָהֶם תִּפְשׂוּ אֶת-נְבִיאֵי הַבַּעַל, אִישׁ אַל-יִמָּלֵט מֵהֶם--וַיִּתְפְּשׂוּם; וַיּוֹרִדֵם אֵלִיָּהוּ אֶל-נַחַל קִישׁוֹן, וַיִּשְׁחָטֵם שָׁם.	40 And Elijah said unto them: 'Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape.' And they took them; and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.
18.41 מא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ לְאַחְאָב, עֲלֵה אֱכֹל וּשְׁתֵה:  כִּי-קוֹל, הֲמוֹן הַגָּשֶׁם.	41 And Elijah said unto Ahab: 'Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is the sound of abundance of rain.'
18.42 מב  וַיַּעֲלֶה אַחְאָב, לֶאֱכֹל וְלִשְׁתּוֹת; וְאֵלִיָּהוּ עָלָה אֶל-רֹאשׁ הַכַּרְמֶל, וַיִּגְהַר אַרְצָה, וַיָּשֶׂם פָּנָיו, בֵּין בִּרְכָּו.	42 So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he bowed himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees.
18.43 מג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-נַעֲרוֹ, עֲלֵה-נָא הַבֵּט דֶּרֶךְ-יָם, וַיַּעַל וַיַּבֵּט, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵין מְאוּמָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, שֻׁב שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים.	43 And he said to his servant: 'Go up now, look toward the sea.' And he went up, and looked, and said: 'There is nothing.' And he said: 'Go again seven times.'
18.44 מד  וַיְהִי, בַּשְּׁבִעִית, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה-עָב קְטַנָּה כְּכַף-אִישׁ, עֹלָה מִיָּם; וַיֹּאמֶר, עֲלֵה אֱמֹר אֶל-אַחְאָב אֱסֹר וָרֵד, וְלֹא יַעֲצָרְכָה, הַגָּשֶׁם.	44 And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said: 'Behold, there ariseth a cloud out of the sea, as small as a man's hand.' And he said: 'Go up, say unto Ahab: Make ready thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.'
18.45 מה  וַיְהִי עַד-כֹּה וְעַד-כֹּה, וְהַשָּׁמַיִם הִתְקַדְּרוּ עָבִים וְרוּחַ, וַיְהִי, גֶּשֶׁם גָּדוֹל; וַיִּרְכַּב אַחְאָב, וַיֵּלֶךְ יִזְרְעֶאלָה.	45 And it came to pass in a little while, that the heaven grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel.
18.46 מו  וְיַד-יְהוָה, הָיְתָה אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיְשַׁנֵּס, מָתְנָיו; וַיָּרָץ לִפְנֵי אַחְאָב, עַד-בֹּאֲכָה יִזְרְעֶאלָה.	46 And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.
19.1 א  וַיַּגֵּד אַחְאָב לְאִיזֶבֶל, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֵלִיָּהוּ, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר הָרַג אֶת-כָּל-הַנְּבִיאִים, בֶּחָרֶב.	1 And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
19.2 ב  וַתִּשְׁלַח אִיזֶבֶל מַלְאָךְ, אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה-יַעֲשׂוּן אֱלֹהִים, וְכֹה יוֹסִפוּן, כִּי-כָעֵת מָחָר אָשִׂים אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ, כְּנֶפֶשׁ אַחַד מֵהֶם.	2 Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying: 'So let the gods do [to me], and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to-morrow about this time.'
19.3 ג  וַיַּרְא, וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-נַפְשׁוֹ, וַיָּבֹא, בְּאֵר שֶׁבַע אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה; וַיַּנַּח אֶת-נַעֲרוֹ, שָׁם.	3 And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there.
19.4 ד  וְהוּא-הָלַךְ בַּמִּדְבָּר, דֶּרֶךְ יוֹם, וַיָּבֹא, וַיֵּשֶׁב תַּחַת רֹתֶם אחת (אֶחָד); וַיִּשְׁאַל אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ, לָמוּת, וַיֹּאמֶר רַב עַתָּה יְהוָה קַח נַפְשִׁי, כִּי-לֹא-טוֹב אָנֹכִי מֵאֲבֹתָי.	4 But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a broom-tree; and he requested for himself that he might die; and said: 'It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers.'
19.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁכַּב, וַיִּישַׁן, תַּחַת, רֹתֶם אֶחָד; וְהִנֵּה-זֶה מַלְאָךְ נֹגֵעַ בּוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ קוּם אֱכוֹל.	5 And he lay down and slept under a broom-tree; and, behold, an angel touched him, and said unto him: 'Arise and eat.'
19.6 ו  וַיַּבֵּט, וְהִנֵּה מְרַאֲשֹׁתָיו עֻגַת רְצָפִים וְצַפַּחַת מָיִם; וַיֹּאכַל וַיֵּשְׁתְּ, וַיָּשָׁב וַיִּשְׁכָּב.	6 And he looked, and, behold, there was at his head a cake baked on the hot stones, and a cruse of water. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again.
19.7 ז  וַיָּשָׁב מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה שֵׁנִית וַיִּגַּע-בּוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר קוּם אֱכֹל:  כִּי רַב מִמְּךָ, הַדָּרֶךְ.	7 And the angel of the LORD came again the second time, and touched him, and said: 'Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee.'
19.8 ח  וַיָּקָם, וַיֹּאכַל וַיִּשְׁתֶּה; וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּכֹחַ הָאֲכִילָה הַהִיא, אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם וְאַרְבָּעִים לַיְלָה, עַד הַר הָאֱלֹהִים, חֹרֵב.	8 And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meal forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.
19.9 ט  וַיָּבֹא-שָׁם אֶל-הַמְּעָרָה, וַיָּלֶן שָׁם; וְהִנֵּה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, מַה-לְּךָ פֹה אֵלִיָּהוּ.	9 And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the LORD came to him, and He said unto him: 'What doest thou here, Elijah?'
19.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר קַנֹּא קִנֵּאתִי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת, כִּי-עָזְבוּ בְרִיתְךָ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתֶיךָ הָרָסוּ, וְאֶת-נְבִיאֶיךָ הָרְגוּ בֶחָרֶב; וָאִוָּתֵר אֲנִי לְבַדִּי, וַיְבַקְשׁוּ אֶת-נַפְשִׁי לְקַחְתָּהּ.	10 And he said: 'I have been very jealous for the LORD, the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.'
19.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר, צֵא וְעָמַדְתָּ בָהָר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְהִנֵּה יְהוָה עֹבֵר וְרוּחַ גְּדוֹלָה וְחָזָק מְפָרֵק הָרִים וּמְשַׁבֵּר סְלָעִים לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לֹא בָרוּחַ יְהוָה; וְאַחַר הָרוּחַ רַעַשׁ, לֹא בָרַעַשׁ יְהוָה.	11 And He said: 'Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the LORD.' And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake;
19.12 יב  וְאַחַר הָרַעַשׁ אֵשׁ, לֹא בָאֵשׁ יְהוָה; וְאַחַר הָאֵשׁ, קוֹל דְּמָמָה דַקָּה.	12 and after the earthquake a fire; but the LORD was not in the fire; and after the fire a still small voice.
19.13 יג  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיָּלֶט פָּנָיו בְּאַדַּרְתּוֹ, וַיֵּצֵא, וַיַּעֲמֹד פֶּתַח הַמְּעָרָה; וְהִנֵּה אֵלָיו, קוֹל, וַיֹּאמֶר, מַה-לְּךָ פֹה אֵלִיָּהוּ.	13 And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entrance of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said: 'What doest thou here, Elijah?'
19.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר קַנֹּא קִנֵּאתִי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת, כִּי-עָזְבוּ בְרִיתְךָ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתֶיךָ הָרָסוּ, וְאֶת-נְבִיאֶיךָ הָרְגוּ בֶחָרֶב; וָאִוָּתֵר אֲנִי לְבַדִּי, וַיְבַקְשׁוּ אֶת-נַפְשִׁי לְקַחְתָּהּ.  {ס}	14 And he said: 'I have been very jealous for the LORD, the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.' {S}
19.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, לֵךְ שׁוּב לְדַרְכְּךָ מִדְבַּרָה דַמָּשֶׂק; וּבָאתָ, וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֶת-חֲזָאֵל לְמֶלֶךְ--עַל-אֲרָם.	15 And the LORD said unto him: 'Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus; and when thou comest, thou shalt anoint Hazael to be king over Aram;
19.16 טז  וְאֵת יֵהוּא בֶן-נִמְשִׁי, תִּמְשַׁח לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאֶת-אֱלִישָׁע בֶּן-שָׁפָט מֵאָבֵל מְחוֹלָה, תִּמְשַׁח לְנָבִיא תַּחְתֶּיךָ.	16 and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.
19.17 יז  וְהָיָה, הַנִּמְלָט מֵחֶרֶב חֲזָאֵל--יָמִית יֵהוּא; וְהַנִּמְלָט מֵחֶרֶב יֵהוּא, יָמִית אֱלִישָׁע.	17 And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay.
19.18 יח  וְהִשְׁאַרְתִּי בְיִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים:  כָּל-הַבִּרְכַּיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-כָרְעוּ לַבַּעַל, וְכָל-הַפֶּה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נָשַׁק לוֹ.	18 Yet will I leave seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.'
19.19 יט  וַיֵּלֶךְ מִשָּׁם וַיִּמְצָא אֶת-אֱלִישָׁע בֶּן-שָׁפָט, וְהוּא חֹרֵשׁ, שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר צְמָדִים לְפָנָיו, וְהוּא בִּשְׁנֵים הֶעָשָׂר; וַיַּעֲבֹר אֵלִיָּהוּ אֵלָיו, וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ אַדַּרְתּוֹ אֵלָיו.	19 So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing, with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth; and Elijah passed over unto him, and cast his mantle upon him.
19.20 כ  וַיַּעֲזֹב אֶת-הַבָּקָר, וַיָּרָץ אַחֲרֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶשְּׁקָה-נָּא לְאָבִי וּלְאִמִּי, וְאֵלְכָה אַחֲרֶיךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ לֵךְ שׁוּב, כִּי מֶה-עָשִׂיתִי לָךְ.	20 And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said: 'Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee.' And he said unto him: 'Go back; for what have I done to thee?'
19.21 כא  וַיָּשָׁב מֵאַחֲרָיו וַיִּקַּח אֶת-צֶמֶד הַבָּקָר וַיִּזְבָּחֵהוּ, וּבִכְלִי הַבָּקָר בִּשְּׁלָם הַבָּשָׂר, וַיִּתֵּן לָעָם, וַיֹּאכֵלוּ; וַיָּקָם, וַיֵּלֶךְ אַחֲרֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ--וַיְשָׁרְתֵהוּ.  {פ}	21 And he returned from following him, and took the yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him. {P}
20.1 א  וּבֶן-הֲדַד מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, קָבַץ אֶת-כָּל-חֵילוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁנַיִם מֶלֶךְ אִתּוֹ, וְסוּס וָרָכֶב; וַיַּעַל, וַיָּצַר עַל-שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיִּלָּחֶם, בָּהּ.	1 And Ben-hadad the king of Aram gathered all his host together; and there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses and chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought against it.
20.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אֶל-אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָעִירָה.	2 And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel, into the city,
20.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, כֹּה אָמַר בֶּן-הֲדַד, כַּסְפְּךָ וּזְהָבְךָ, לִי-הוּא; וְנָשֶׁיךָ וּבָנֶיךָ הַטּוֹבִים, לִי-הֵם.	3 and said unto him: 'Thus saith Ben-hadad: Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.'
20.4 ד  וַיַּעַן מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיֹּאמֶר, כִּדְבָרְךָ אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ:  לְךָ אֲנִי, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-לִי.	4 And the king of Israel answered and said: 'It is according to thy saying, my lord, O king: I am thine, and all that I have.'
20.5 ה  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, הַמַּלְאָכִים, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כֹּה-אָמַר בֶּן-הֲדַד לֵאמֹר:  כִּי-שָׁלַחְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר, כַּסְפְּךָ וּזְהָבְךָ וְנָשֶׁיךָ וּבָנֶיךָ לִי תִתֵּן.	5 And the messengers came again, and said: 'Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, saying: I sent indeed unto thee, saying: Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children;
20.6 ו  כִּי אִם-כָּעֵת מָחָר, אֶשְׁלַח אֶת-עֲבָדַי אֵלֶיךָ, וְחִפְּשׂוּ אֶת-בֵּיתְךָ, וְאֵת בָּתֵּי עֲבָדֶיךָ; וְהָיָה כָּל-מַחְמַד עֵינֶיךָ, יָשִׂימוּ בְיָדָם וְלָקָחוּ.	6 but I will send my servants unto thee tomorrow about this time, and they shall search thy house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it away.'
20.7 ז  וַיִּקְרָא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְכָל-זִקְנֵי הָאָרֶץ, וַיֹּאמֶר דְּעוּ-נָא וּרְאוּ, כִּי רָעָה זֶה מְבַקֵּשׁ:  כִּי-שָׁלַח אֵלַי לְנָשַׁי וּלְבָנַי, וּלְכַסְפִּי וְלִזְהָבִי, וְלֹא מָנַעְתִּי, מִמֶּנּוּ.	7 Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said: 'Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief; for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not.'
20.8 ח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו כָּל-הַזְּקֵנִים, וְכָל-הָעָם:  אַל-תִּשְׁמַע, וְלוֹא תֹאבֶה.	8 And all the elders and all the people said unto him: 'Hearken thou not, neither consent.'
20.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר לְמַלְאֲכֵי בֶן-הֲדַד, אִמְרוּ לַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַחְתָּ אֶל-עַבְדְּךָ בָרִאשֹׁנָה אֶעֱשֶׂה, וְהַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לֹא אוּכַל לַעֲשׂוֹת; וַיֵּלְכוּ, הַמַּלְאָכִים, וַיְשִׁבֻהוּ, דָּבָר.	9 Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Ben-hadad: 'Tell my lord the king: All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I will do; but this thing I may not do.' And the messengers departed, and brought him back word.
20.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלָיו, בֶּן-הֲדַד, וַיֹּאמֶר, כֹּה-יַעֲשׂוּן לִי אֱלֹהִים וְכֹה יוֹסִפוּ:  אִם-יִשְׂפֹּק, עֲפַר שֹׁמְרוֹן, לִשְׁעָלִים, לְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר בְּרַגְלָי.	10 And Ben-hadad sent unto him, and said: 'The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.'
20.11 יא  וַיַּעַן מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיֹּאמֶר דַּבְּרוּ, אַל-יִתְהַלֵּל חֹגֵר כִּמְפַתֵּחַ.	11 And the king of Israel answered and said: 'Tell him: Let not him that girdeth on his armour boast himself as he that putteth it off.'
20.12 יב  וַיְהִי, כִּשְׁמֹעַ אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, וְהוּא שֹׁתֶה הוּא וְהַמְּלָכִים, בַּסֻּכּוֹת; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-עֲבָדָיו שִׂימוּ, וַיָּשִׂימוּ עַל-הָעִיר.	12 And it came to pass, when [Ben-hadad] heard this message, as he was drinking, he and the kings, in the booths, that he said unto his servants: 'Set yourselves in array.' And they set themselves in array against the city.
20.13 יג  וְהִנֵּה נָבִיא אֶחָד, נִגַּשׁ אֶל-אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הֲרָאִיתָ אֵת כָּל-הֶהָמוֹן הַגָּדוֹל הַזֶּה; הִנְנִי נֹתְנוֹ בְיָדְךָ הַיּוֹם, וְיָדַעְתָּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.	13 And, behold, a prophet came near unto Ahab king of Israel, and said: 'Thus saith the LORD: Hast thou seen all this great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thy hand this day; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.'
20.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אַחְאָב, בְּמִי, וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, בְּנַעֲרֵי שָׂרֵי הַמְּדִינוֹת; וַיֹּאמֶר מִי-יֶאְסֹר הַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיֹּאמֶר אָתָּה.	14 And Ahab said: 'By whom?' And he said: 'Thus saith the LORD: By the young men of the princes of the provinces.' Then he said: 'Who shall begin the battle?' And he answered: 'Thou.'
20.15 טו  וַיִּפְקֹד, אֶת-נַעֲרֵי שָׂרֵי הַמְּדִינוֹת, וַיִּהְיוּ, מָאתַיִם שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים; וְאַחֲרֵיהֶם, פָּקַד אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים.	15 Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty-two; and after them he numbered all the people, even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.
20.16 טז  וַיֵּצְאוּ, בַּצָּהֳרָיִם; וּבֶן-הֲדַד שֹׁתֶה שִׁכּוֹר בַּסֻּכּוֹת, הוּא וְהַמְּלָכִים שְׁלֹשִׁים-וּשְׁנַיִם מֶלֶךְ--עֹזֵר אֹתוֹ.	16 And they went out at noon. But Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk in the booths, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings that helped him.
20.17 יז  וַיֵּצְאוּ, נַעֲרֵי שָׂרֵי הַמְּדִינוֹת--בָּרִאשֹׁנָה; וַיִּשְׁלַח בֶּן-הֲדַד, וַיַּגִּידוּ לוֹ לֵאמֹר, אֲנָשִׁים, יָצְאוּ מִשֹּׁמְרוֹן.	17 And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first; and Ben-hadad sent out, and they told him, saying: 'There are men come out from Samaria.'
20.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר אִם-לְשָׁלוֹם יָצָאוּ, תִּפְשׂוּם חַיִּים; וְאִם לְמִלְחָמָה יָצָאוּ, חַיִּים תִּפְשׂוּם.	18 And he said: 'Whether they are come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they are come out for war, take them alive.'
20.19 יט  וְאֵלֶּה יָצְאוּ מִן-הָעִיר, נַעֲרֵי שָׂרֵי הַמְּדִינוֹת, וְהַחַיִל, אֲשֶׁר אַחֲרֵיהֶם.	19 So these went out of the city, the young men of the princes of the provinces, and the army which followed them.
20.20 כ  וַיַּכּוּ, אִישׁ אִישׁוֹ, וַיָּנֻסוּ אֲרָם, וַיִּרְדְּפֵם יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּמָּלֵט, בֶּן-הֲדַד מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, עַל-סוּס, וּפָרָשִׁים.	20 And they slew every one his man; and the Arameans fled, and Israel pursued them; and Ben-hadad the king of Aram escaped on a horse with horsemen.
20.21 כא  וַיֵּצֵא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַסּוּס וְאֶת-הָרָכֶב, וְהִכָּה בַאֲרָם, מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה.	21 And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Arameans with a great slaughter.
20.22 כב  וַיִּגַּשׁ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ לֵךְ הִתְחַזַּק, וְדַע וּרְאֵה אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תַּעֲשֶׂה:  כִּי לִתְשׁוּבַת הַשָּׁנָה, מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם עֹלֶה עָלֶיךָ.  {פ}	22 And the prophet came near to the king of Israel, and said unto him: 'Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest; for at the return of the year the king of Aram will come up against thee.' {P}
20.23 כג  וְעַבְדֵי מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם אָמְרוּ אֵלָיו, אֱלֹהֵי הָרִים אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, עַל-כֵּן, חָזְקוּ מִמֶּנּוּ; וְאוּלָם, נִלָּחֵם אִתָּם בַּמִּישׁוֹר--אִם-לֹא נֶחֱזַק, מֵהֶם.	23 And the servants of the king of Aram said unto him: 'Their God is a God of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.
20.24 כד  וְאֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, עֲשֵׂה:  הָסֵר הַמְּלָכִים אִישׁ מִמְּקֹמוֹ, וְשִׂים פַּחוֹת תַּחְתֵּיהֶם.	24 And do this thing: take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put governors in their room:
20.25 כה  וְאַתָּה תִמְנֶה-לְךָ חַיִל כַּחַיִל הַנֹּפֵל מֵאוֹתָךְ וְסוּס כַּסּוּס וְרֶכֶב כָּרֶכֶב, וְנִלָּחֲמָה אוֹתָם בַּמִּישׁוֹר--אִם-לֹא נֶחֱזַק, מֵהֶם; וַיִּשְׁמַע לְקֹלָם, וַיַּעַשׂ כֵּן.  {פ}	25 and number thee an army, like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot; and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.' And he hearkened unto their voice, and did so. {P}
20.26 כו  וַיְהִי לִתְשׁוּבַת הַשָּׁנָה, וַיִּפְקֹד בֶּן-הֲדַד אֶת-אֲרָם; וַיַּעַל אֲפֵקָה, לַמִּלְחָמָה עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	26 And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Ben-hadad mustered the Arameans, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel.
20.27 כז  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָתְפָּקְדוּ וְכָלְכְּלוּ, וַיֵּלְכוּ, לִקְרָאתָם; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל נֶגְדָּם, כִּשְׁנֵי חֲשִׂפֵי עִזִּים, וַאֲרָם, מִלְאוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	27 And the children of Israel were mustered, and were victualled, and went against them; and the children of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of kids; but the Arameans filled the country.
20.28 כח  וַיִּגַּשׁ אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה יַעַן אֲשֶׁר אָמְרוּ אֲרָם אֱלֹהֵי הָרִים יְהוָה, וְלֹא-אֱלֹהֵי עֲמָקִים הוּא--וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-כָּל-הֶהָמוֹן הַגָּדוֹל הַזֶּה, בְּיָדֶךָ, וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.	28 And a man of God came near and spoke unto the king of Israel, and said: 'Thus saith the LORD: Because the Arameans have said: The LORD is a God of the hills, but he is not a God of the valleys; therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into thy hand, and ye shall know that I am the LORD.'
20.29 כט  וַיַּחֲנוּ אֵלֶּה נֹכַח-אֵלֶּה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וַתִּקְרַב הַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיַּכּוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-אֲרָם מֵאָה-אֶלֶף רַגְלִי, בְּיוֹם אֶחָד.	29 And they encamped one over against the other seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined; and the children of Israel slew of the Arameans a hundred thousand footmen in one day.
20.30 ל  וַיָּנֻסוּ הַנּוֹתָרִים אֲפֵקָה, אֶל-הָעִיר, וַתִּפֹּל הַחוֹמָה, עַל-עֶשְׂרִים וְשִׁבְעָה אֶלֶף אִישׁ הַנּוֹתָרִים; וּבֶן-הֲדַד נָס, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-הָעִיר חֶדֶר בְּחָדֶר.	30 But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and the wall fell upon twenty and seven thousand men that were left. And Ben-hadad fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.
20.31 לא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, עֲבָדָיו, הִנֵּה-נָא שָׁמַעְנוּ, כִּי מַלְכֵי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי-מַלְכֵי חֶסֶד הֵם; נָשִׂימָה נָּא שַׂקִּים בְּמָתְנֵינוּ וַחֲבָלִים בְּרֹאשֵׁנוּ, וְנֵצֵא אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל--אוּלַי, יְחַיֶּה אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ.	31 And his servants said unto him: 'Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings; let us, we pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the king of Israel; peradventure he will save thy life.'
20.32 לב  וַיַּחְגְּרוּ שַׂקִּים בְּמָתְנֵיהֶם וַחֲבָלִים בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶם, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, עַבְדְּךָ בֶן-הֲדַד אָמַר תְּחִי-נָא נַפְשִׁי; וַיֹּאמֶר הַעוֹדֶנּוּ חַי, אָחִי הוּא.	32 So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said: 'Thy servant Ben-hadad saith: I pray thee, let me live.' And he said: 'Is he yet alive? he is my brother.'
20.33 לג  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים יְנַחֲשׁוּ וַיְמַהֲרוּ וַיַּחְלְטוּ הֲמִמֶּנּוּ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אָחִיךָ בֶן-הֲדַד, וַיֹּאמֶר, בֹּאוּ קָחֻהוּ; וַיֵּצֵא אֵלָיו בֶּן-הֲדַד, וַיַּעֲלֵהוּ עַל-הַמֶּרְכָּבָה.	33 Now the men took it for a sign, and hastened to catch it from him; and they said: 'Thy brother Ben-hadad.' Then he said: 'Go ye, bring him.' Then Ben-hadad came forth to him; and he caused him to come up into his chariot.
20.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הֶעָרִים אֲשֶׁר-לָקַח-אָבִי מֵאֵת אָבִיךָ אָשִׁיב, וְחֻצוֹת תָּשִׂים לְךָ בְדַמֶּשֶׂק כַּאֲשֶׁר-שָׂם אָבִי בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, וַאֲנִי, בַּבְּרִית אֲשַׁלְּחֶךָּ; וַיִּכְרָת-לוֹ בְרִית, וַיְשַׁלְּחֵהוּ.  {ס}	34 And [Ben-hadad] said unto him: 'The cities which my father took from thy father I will restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria.' 'And I[, said Ahab,] will let thee go with this covenant.' So he made a covenant with him, and let him go. {S}
20.35 לה  וְאִישׁ אֶחָד מִבְּנֵי הַנְּבִיאִים, אָמַר אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ בִּדְבַר יְהוָה--הַכֵּינִי נָא; וַיְמָאֵן הָאִישׁ, לְהַכֹּתוֹ.	35 And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his fellow by the word of the LORD: 'Smite me, I pray thee.' And the man refused to smite him.
20.36 לו  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ בְּקוֹל יְהוָה, הִנְּךָ הוֹלֵךְ מֵאִתִּי, וְהִכְּךָ הָאַרְיֵה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, מֵאֶצְלוֹ, וַיִּמְצָאֵהוּ הָאַרְיֵה, וַיַּכֵּהוּ.	36 Then said he unto him: 'Because thou hast not hearkened to the voice of the LORD, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay thee.' And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him; and slew him.
20.37 לז  וַיִּמְצָא אִישׁ אַחֵר, וַיֹּאמֶר הַכֵּינִי נָא; וַיַּכֵּהוּ הָאִישׁ, הַכֵּה וּפָצֹעַ.	37 Then he found another man, and said: 'Smite me, I pray thee.' And the man smote him, smiting and wounding him.
20.38 לח  וַיֵּלֶךְ, הַנָּבִיא, וַיַּעֲמֹד לַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-הַדָּרֶךְ; וַיִּתְחַפֵּשׂ בָּאֲפֵר, עַל-עֵינָיו.	38 So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and disguised himself with his headband over his eyes.
20.39 לט  וַיְהִי הַמֶּלֶךְ עֹבֵר, וְהוּא צָעַק אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר עַבְדְּךָ יָצָא בְקֶרֶב-הַמִּלְחָמָה, וְהִנֵּה-אִישׁ סָר וַיָּבֵא אֵלַי אִישׁ וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמֹר אֶת-הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה--אִם-הִפָּקֵד יִפָּקֵד, וְהָיְתָה נַפְשְׁךָ תַּחַת נַפְשׁוֹ אוֹ כִכַּר-כֶּסֶף תִּשְׁקוֹל.	39 And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king; and he said: 'Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said: Keep this man; if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else thou shalt pay a talent of silver.
20.40 מ  וַיְהִי עַבְדְּךָ, עֹשֵׂה הֵנָּה וָהֵנָּה--וְהוּא אֵינֶנּוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל כֵּן מִשְׁפָּטֶךָ, אַתָּה חָרָצְתָּ.	40 And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone.' And the king of Israel said unto him: 'So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast decided it.'
20.41 מא  וַיְמַהֵר--וַיָּסַר אֶת-הָאֲפֵר, מעל (מֵעֲלֵי) עֵינָיו; וַיַּכֵּר אֹתוֹ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי מֵהַנְּבִיאִים הוּא.	41 And he hastened, and took the headband away from his eyes; and the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.
20.42 מב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, יַעַן שִׁלַּחְתָּ אֶת-אִישׁ-חֶרְמִי, מִיָּד--וְהָיְתָה נַפְשְׁךָ תַּחַת נַפְשׁוֹ, וְעַמְּךָ תַּחַת עַמּוֹ.	42 And he said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD: Because thou hast let go out of thy hand the man whom I had devoted to destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people.'
20.43 מג  וַיֵּלֶךְ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל עַל-בֵּיתוֹ, סַר וְזָעֵף; וַיָּבֹא, שֹׁמְרוֹנָה.  {פ}	43 And the king of Israel went to his house sullen and displeased, and came to Samaria. {P}
21.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחַר הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, כֶּרֶם הָיָה לְנָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי, אֲשֶׁר בְּיִזְרְעֶאל--אֵצֶל הֵיכַל אַחְאָב, מֶלֶךְ שֹׁמְרוֹן.	1 And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab, king of Samaria.
21.2 ב  וַיְדַבֵּר אַחְאָב אֶל-נָבוֹת לֵאמֹר תְּנָה-לִּי אֶת-כַּרְמְךָ וִיהִי-לִי לְגַן-יָרָק, כִּי הוּא קָרוֹב אֵצֶל בֵּיתִי, וְאֶתְּנָה לְךָ תַּחְתָּיו, כֶּרֶם טוֹב מִמֶּנּוּ; אִם טוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ, אֶתְּנָה-לְךָ כֶסֶף מְחִיר זֶה.	2 And Ahab spoke unto Naboth, saying: 'Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house; and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.'
21.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר נָבוֹת, אֶל-אַחְאָב:  חָלִילָה לִּי מֵיְהוָה, מִתִּתִּי אֶת-נַחֲלַת אֲבֹתַי לָךְ.	3 And Naboth said to Ahab: 'The LORD forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.'
21.4 ד  וַיָּבֹא אַחְאָב אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ סַר וְזָעֵף, עַל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֵלָיו נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי, וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא-אֶתֵּן לְךָ אֶת-נַחֲלַת אֲבוֹתָי; וַיִּשְׁכַּב, עַל-מִטָּתוֹ, וַיַּסֵּב אֶת-פָּנָיו, וְלֹא-אָכַל לָחֶם.	4 And Ahab came into his house sullen and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him; for he had said: 'I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers.' And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.
21.5 ה  וַתָּבֹא אֵלָיו, אִיזֶבֶל אִשְׁתּוֹ; וַתְּדַבֵּר אֵלָיו, מַה-זֶּה רוּחֲךָ סָרָה, וְאֵינְךָ, אֹכֵל לָחֶם.	5 But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him: 'Why is thy spirit so sullen, that thou eatest no bread?'
21.6 ו  וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלֶיהָ, כִּי-אֲדַבֵּר אֶל-נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי וָאֹמַר לוֹ תְּנָה-לִּי אֶת-כַּרְמְךָ בְּכֶסֶף, אוֹ אִם-חָפֵץ אַתָּה, אֶתְּנָה-לְךָ כֶרֶם תַּחְתָּיו; וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא-אֶתֵּן לְךָ אֶת-כַּרְמִי.	6 And he said unto her: 'Because I spoke unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him: Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it; and he answered: I will not give thee my vineyard.'
21.7 ז  וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אִיזֶבֶל אִשְׁתּוֹ, אַתָּה, עַתָּה תַּעֲשֶׂה מְלוּכָה עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; קוּם אֱכָל-לֶחֶם, וְיִטַב לִבֶּךָ--אֲנִי אֶתֵּן לְךָ, אֶת-כֶּרֶם נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי.	7 And Jezebel his wife said unto him: 'Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thy heart be merry; I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.'
21.8 ח  וַתִּכְתֹּב סְפָרִים בְּשֵׁם אַחְאָב, וַתַּחְתֹּם בְּחֹתָמוֹ; וַתִּשְׁלַח הספרים (סְפָרִים), אֶל-הַזְּקֵנִים וְאֶל-הַחֹרִים אֲשֶׁר בְּעִירוֹ, הַיֹּשְׁבִים, אֶת-נָבוֹת.	8 So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his city, and that dwelt with Naboth.
21.9 ט  וַתִּכְתֹּב בַּסְּפָרִים, לֵאמֹר:  קִרְאוּ-צוֹם, וְהֹשִׁיבוּ אֶת-נָבוֹת בְּרֹאשׁ הָעָם.	9 And she wrote in the letters, saying: 'Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth at the head of the people;
21.10 י  וְהוֹשִׁיבוּ שְׁנַיִם אֲנָשִׁים בְּנֵי-בְלִיַּעַל, נֶגְדּוֹ, וִיעִדֻהוּ לֵאמֹר, בֵּרַכְתָּ אֱלֹהִים וָמֶלֶךְ; וְהוֹצִיאֻהוּ וְסִקְלֻהוּ, וְיָמֹת.	10 and set two men, base fellows, before him, and let them bear witness against him, saying: Thou didst curse God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him, that he die.'
21.11 יא  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אַנְשֵׁי עִירוֹ הַזְּקֵנִים וְהַחֹרִים, אֲשֶׁר הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּעִירוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁלְחָה אֲלֵיהֶם, אִיזָבֶל--כַּאֲשֶׁר כָּתוּב בַּסְּפָרִים, אֲשֶׁר שָׁלְחָה אֲלֵיהֶם.	11 And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who dwelt in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, according as it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.
21.12 יב  קָרְאוּ, צוֹם; וְהֹשִׁיבוּ אֶת-נָבוֹת, בְּרֹאשׁ הָעָם.	12 They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth at the head of the people.
21.13 יג  וַיָּבֹאוּ שְׁנֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים בְּנֵי-בְלִיַּעַל, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ נֶגְדּוֹ, וַיְעִדֻהוּ אַנְשֵׁי הַבְּלִיַּעַל אֶת-נָבוֹת נֶגֶד הָעָם לֵאמֹר, בֵּרַךְ נָבוֹת אֱלֹהִים וָמֶלֶךְ; וַיֹּצִאֻהוּ מִחוּץ לָעִיר, וַיִּסְקְלֻהוּ בָאֲבָנִים וַיָּמֹת.	13 And the two men, the base fellows, came in and sat before him; and the base fellows bore witness against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying: 'Naboth did curse God and the king.' Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died.
21.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ, אֶל-אִיזֶבֶל לֵאמֹר:  סֻקַּל נָבוֹת, וַיָּמֹת.	14 Then they sent to Jezebel, saying: 'Naboth is stoned, and is dead.'
21.15 טו  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ אִיזֶבֶל, כִּי-סֻקַּל נָבוֹת וַיָּמֹת; וַתֹּאמֶר אִיזֶבֶל אֶל-אַחְאָב, קוּם רֵשׁ אֶת-כֶּרֶם נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי אֲשֶׁר מֵאֵן לָתֶת-לְךָ בְכֶסֶף--כִּי אֵין נָבוֹת חַי, כִּי-מֵת.	15 And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab: 'Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money; for Naboth is not alive, but dead.'
21.16 טז  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ אַחְאָב, כִּי מֵת נָבוֹת; וַיָּקָם אַחְאָב, לָרֶדֶת אֶל-כֶּרֶם נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי--לְרִשְׁתּוֹ.  {פ}	16 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it. {P}
21.17 יז  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי, לֵאמֹר.	17 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying:
21.18 יח  קוּם רֵד, לִקְרַאת אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֲשֶׁר בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; הִנֵּה בְּכֶרֶם נָבוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-יָרַד שָׁם לְרִשְׁתּוֹ.	18 'Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who dwelleth in Samaria; behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to take possession of it.
21.19 יט  וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הֲרָצַחְתָּ, וְגַם-יָרָשְׁתָּ; וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר לָקְקוּ הַכְּלָבִים אֶת-דַּם נָבוֹת, יָלֹקּוּ הַכְּלָבִים אֶת-דָּמְךָ גַּם-אָתָּה.	19 And thou shalt speak unto him, saying: Thus saith the LORD: Hast thou killed, and also taken possessions? and thou shalt speak unto him, saying: Thus saith the LORD: In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.'
21.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אַחְאָב אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ, הַמְצָאתַנִי אֹיְבִי; וַיֹּאמֶר מָצָאתִי--יַעַן הִתְמַכֶּרְךָ, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.	20 And Ahab said to Elijah: 'Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?' And he answered: 'I have found thee; because thou hast given thyself over to do that which is evil in the sight of the LORD.
21.21 כא  הִנְנִי מֵבִי אֵלֶיךָ רָעָה, וּבִעַרְתִּי אַחֲרֶיךָ; וְהִכְרַתִּי לְאַחְאָב מַשְׁתִּין בְּקִיר, וְעָצוּר וְעָזוּב בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	21 Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will utterly sweep thee away, and will cut off from Ahab every man-child, and him that is shut up and him that is left at large in Israel.
21.22 כב  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-בֵּיתְךָ, כְּבֵית יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, וּכְבֵית, בַּעְשָׁא בֶן-אֲחִיָּה:  אֶל-הַכַּעַס אֲשֶׁר הִכְעַסְתָּ, וַתַּחֲטִא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	22 And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasa the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked Me, and hast made Israel to sin.
21.23 כג  וְגַם-לְאִיזֶבֶל--דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר:  הַכְּלָבִים יֹאכְלוּ אֶת-אִיזֶבֶל, בְּחֵל יִזְרְעֶאל.	23 And of Jezebel also spoke the LORD, saying: The dogs shall eat Jezebel in the moat of Jezreel.
21.24 כד  הַמֵּת לְאַחְאָב בָּעִיר, יֹאכְלוּ הַכְּלָבִים; וְהַמֵּת, בַּשָּׂדֶה, יֹאכְלוּ, עוֹף הַשָּׁמָיִם.	24 Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.'
21.25 כה  רַק, לֹא-הָיָה כְאַחְאָב, אֲשֶׁר הִתְמַכֵּר, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר-הֵסַתָּה אֹתוֹ, אִיזֶבֶל אִשְׁתּוֹ.	25 But there was none like unto Ahab, who did give himself over to do that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.
21.26 כו  וַיַּתְעֵב מְאֹד, לָלֶכֶת אַחֲרֵי הַגִּלֻּלִים--כְּכֹל, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	26 And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all that the Amorites did, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel. {P}
21.27 כז  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ אַחְאָב אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וַיִּקְרַע בְּגָדָיו, וַיָּשֶׂם-שַׂק עַל-בְּשָׂרוֹ, וַיָּצוֹם; וַיִּשְׁכַּב בַּשָּׂק, וַיְהַלֵּךְ אַט.  {פ}	27 And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softy. {P}
21.28 כח  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי, לֵאמֹר.	28 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying:
21.29 כט  הֲרָאִיתָ, כִּי-נִכְנַע אַחְאָב מִלְּפָנָי; יַעַן כִּי-נִכְנַע מִפָּנַי, לֹא-אָבִי הָרָעָה בְּיָמָיו--בִּימֵי בְנוֹ, אָבִיא הָרָעָה עַל-בֵּיתוֹ.	29 'Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before Me? because he humbleth himself before Me, I will not bring the evil in his days; but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.'
22.1 א  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים:  אֵין, מִלְחָמָה, בֵּין אֲרָם, וּבֵין יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	1 And they continued three years without war between Aram and Israel. {P}
22.2 ב  וַיְהִי, בַּשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁלִישִׁית; וַיֵּרֶד יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
22.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-עֲבָדָיו, הַיְדַעְתֶּם, כִּי-לָנוּ רָמֹת גִּלְעָד; וַאֲנַחְנוּ מַחְשִׁים--מִקַּחַת אֹתָהּ, מִיַּד מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם.	3 And the king of Israel said unto his servants: 'Know ye that Ramoth-gilead is ours, and we are still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of Aram?'
22.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הֲתֵלֵךְ אִתִּי לַמִּלְחָמָה, רָמֹת גִּלְעָד; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשָׁפָט אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כָּמוֹנִי כָמוֹךָ כְּעַמִּי כְעַמֶּךָ כְּסוּסַי כְּסוּסֶיךָ.	4 And he said unto Jehoshaphat: 'Wilt thou go with me to battle to Ramoth-gilead?' And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel: 'I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.'
22.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשָׁפָט, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  דְּרָשׁ-נָא כַיּוֹם, אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה.	5 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel: 'Inquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD today.'
22.6 ו  וַיִּקְבֹּץ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַנְּבִיאִים, כְּאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם הַאֵלֵךְ עַל-רָמֹת גִּלְעָד לַמִּלְחָמָה, אִם-אֶחְדָּל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ עֲלֵה, וְיִתֵּן אֲדֹנָי בְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.	6 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them: 'Shall I go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?' And they said: 'Go up; for the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.'
22.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר, יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הַאֵין פֹּה נָבִיא לַיהוָה, עוֹד; וְנִדְרְשָׁה, מֵאֹתוֹ.	7 But Jehoshaphat said: 'Is there not here besides a prophet of the LORD, that we might inquire of him?'
22.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט עוֹד אִישׁ-אֶחָד לִדְרֹשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה מֵאֹתוֹ וַאֲנִי שְׂנֵאתִיו, כִּי לֹא-יִתְנַבֵּא עָלַי טוֹב כִּי אִם-רָע--מִיכָיְהוּ, בֶּן-יִמְלָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, יְהוֹשָׁפָט, אַל-יֹאמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, כֵּן.	8 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: 'There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of the LORD, Micaiah the son of Imlah; but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning me, but evil.' And Jehoshaphat said: 'Let not the king say so.'
22.9 ט  וַיִּקְרָא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-סָרִיס אֶחָד; וַיֹּאמֶר, מַהֲרָה מִיכָיְהוּ בֶן-יִמְלָה.	9 Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said: 'Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.'
22.10 י  וּמֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה יֹשְׁבִים אִישׁ עַל-כִּסְאוֹ מְלֻבָּשִׁים בְּגָדִים, בְּגֹרֶן, פֶּתַח, שַׁעַר שֹׁמְרוֹן; וְכָל-הַנְּבִיאִים--מִתְנַבְּאִים, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	10 Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, in a threshing-floor, at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.
22.11 יא  וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ צִדְקִיָּה בֶן-כְּנַעֲנָה, קַרְנֵי בַרְזֶל; וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, בְּאֵלֶּה תְּנַגַּח אֶת-אֲרָם עַד-כַּלֹּתָם.	11 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron, and said: 'Thus saith the LORD: With these shalt thou gore the Arameans, until they be consumed.'
22.12 יב  וְכָל-הַנְּבִאִים--נִבְּאִים כֵּן, לֵאמֹר:  עֲלֵה רָמֹת גִּלְעָד, וְהַצְלַח, וְנָתַן יְהוָה, בְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.	12 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying: 'Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.'
22.13 יג  וְהַמַּלְאָךְ אֲשֶׁר-הָלַךְ לִקְרֹא מִיכָיְהוּ, דִּבֶּר אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה-נָא דִּבְרֵי הַנְּבִיאִים פֶּה-אֶחָד טוֹב, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; יְהִי-נָא דבריך (דְבָרְךָ), כִּדְבַר אַחַד מֵהֶם--וְדִבַּרְתָּ טּוֹב.	13 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spoke unto him, saying: 'Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the king with one mouth, let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak thou good.'
22.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר, מִיכָיְהוּ:  חַי-יְהוָה--כִּי אֶת-אֲשֶׁר יֹאמַר יְהוָה אֵלַי, אֹתוֹ אֲדַבֵּר.	14 And Micaiah said: 'As the LORD liveth, what the LORD saith unto me, that will I speak.'
22.15 טו  וַיָּבוֹא, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵלָיו מִיכָיְהוּ הֲנֵלֵךְ אֶל-רָמֹת גִּלְעָד לַמִּלְחָמָה, אִם-נֶחְדָּל; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו עֲלֵה וְהַצְלַח, וְנָתַן יְהוָה בְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.	15 And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him: 'Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we forbear?' And he answered him: 'Go up, and prosper; and the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.'
22.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַד-כַּמֶּה פְעָמִים אֲנִי מַשְׁבִּיעֶךָ:  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תְדַבֵּר אֵלַי, רַק-אֱמֶת--בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה.	16 And the king said unto him: 'How many times shall I adjure thee that thou speak unto me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?'
22.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר, רָאִיתִי אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל נְפֹצִים אֶל-הֶהָרִים, כַּצֹּאן, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לָהֶם רֹעֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה לֹא-אֲדֹנִים לָאֵלֶּה, יָשׁוּבוּ אִישׁ-לְבֵיתוֹ בְּשָׁלוֹם.	17 And he said: 'I saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd; and the LORD said: These have no master; let them return every man to his house in peace.'
22.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט:  הֲלוֹא אָמַרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ, לוֹא-יִתְנַבֵּא עָלַי טוֹב כִּי אִם-רָע.  {ס}	18 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat: 'Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?' {S}
22.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר, לָכֵן שְׁמַע דְּבַר-יְהוָה; רָאִיתִי אֶת-יְהוָה, יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, וְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם עֹמֵד עָלָיו, מִימִינוֹ וּמִשְּׂמֹאלוֹ.	19 And he said: 'Therefore hear thou the word of the LORD. I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven standing by Him on His right hand and on his left.
22.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, מִי יְפַתֶּה אֶת-אַחְאָב, וְיַעַל, וְיִפֹּל בְּרָמֹת גִּלְעָד; וַיֹּאמֶר זֶה בְּכֹה, וְזֶה אֹמֵר בְּכֹה.	20 And the LORD said: Who shall entice Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead. And one said: On this manner; and another said: On that manner.
22.21 כא  וַיֵּצֵא הָרוּחַ, וַיַּעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, אֲנִי אֲפַתֶּנּוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, בַּמָּה.	21 And there came forth the spirit, and stood before the LORD, and said: I will entice him.
22.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵצֵא וְהָיִיתִי רוּחַ שֶׁקֶר, בְּפִי, כָּל-נְבִיאָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר, תְּפַתֶּה וְגַם-תּוּכָל--צֵא, וַעֲשֵׂה-כֵן.	22 And the LORD said unto him: Wherewith? And he said: I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And He said: Thou shalt entice him, and shalt prevail also; go forth, and do so.
22.23 כג  וְעַתָּה, הִנֵּה נָתַן יְהוָה רוּחַ שֶׁקֶר, בְּפִי, כָּל-נְבִיאֶיךָ אֵלֶּה; וַיהוָה, דִּבֶּר עָלֶיךָ רָעָה.	23 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets; and the LORD hath spoken evil concerning thee.'
22.24 כד  וַיִּגַּשׁ צִדְקִיָּהוּ בֶן-כְּנַעֲנָה, וַיַּכֶּה אֶת-מִיכָיְהוּ עַל-הַלֶּחִי; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵי-זֶה עָבַר רוּחַ-יְהוָה מֵאִתִּי לְדַבֵּר אוֹתָךְ.	24 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said: 'Which way went the spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?'
22.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר מִיכָיְהוּ, הִנְּךָ רֹאֶה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֲשֶׁר תָּבֹא חֶדֶר בְּחֶדֶר, לְהֵחָבֵה.	25 And Micaiah said: 'Behold, thou shalt see on that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.'
22.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, קַח אֶת-מִיכָיְהוּ, וַהֲשִׁיבֵהוּ אֶל-אָמֹן שַׂר-הָעִיר; וְאֶל-יוֹאָשׁ, בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ.	26 And the king of Israel said: 'Take Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;
22.27 כז  וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, שִׂימוּ אֶת-זֶה, בֵּית הַכֶּלֶא; וְהַאֲכִלֻהוּ לֶחֶם לַחַץ, וּמַיִם לַחַץ, עַד, בֹּאִי בְשָׁלוֹם.	27 and say: Thus saith the king: Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with scant bread and with scant water, until I come in peace.'
22.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר מִיכָיְהוּ--אִם-שׁוֹב תָּשׁוּב בְּשָׁלוֹם, לֹא-דִבֶּר יְהוָה בִּי; וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁמְעוּ עַמִּים כֻּלָּם.	28 And Micaiah said: 'If thou return at all in peace, the LORD hath not spoken by me.' And he said: 'Hear, ye peoples, all of you.'
22.29 כט  וַיַּעַל מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, רָמֹת גִּלְעָד.	29 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
22.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הִתְחַפֵּשׂ וָבֹא בַמִּלְחָמָה, וְאַתָּה, לְבַשׁ בְּגָדֶיךָ; וַיִּתְחַפֵּשׂ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּבוֹא בַּמִּלְחָמָה.	30 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: 'I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but put thou on thy robes.' And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.
22.31 לא  וּמֶלֶךְ אֲרָם צִוָּה אֶת-שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁנַיִם, לֵאמֹר, לֹא תִּלָּחֲמוּ, אֶת-קָטֹן וְאֶת-גָּדוֹל:  כִּי אִם-אֶת-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְבַדּוֹ.	31 Now the king of Aram had commanded the thirty and two captains of his chariots, saying: 'Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of Israel.'
22.32 לב  וַיְהִי כִּרְאוֹת שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב אֶת-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, וְהֵמָּה אָמְרוּ אַךְ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל הוּא, וַיָּסֻרוּ עָלָיו, לְהִלָּחֵם; וַיִּזְעַק, יְהוֹשָׁפָט.	32 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said: 'Surely it is the king of Israel'; and they turned aside to fight against him; and Jehoshaphat cried out.
22.33 לג  וַיְהִי, כִּרְאוֹת שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב, כִּי-לֹא-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוּא; וַיָּשׁוּבוּ, מֵאַחֲרָיו.	33 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
22.34 לד  וְאִישׁ, מָשַׁךְ בַּקֶּשֶׁת לְתֻמּוֹ, וַיַּכֶּה אֶת-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בֵּין הַדְּבָקִים וּבֵין הַשִּׁרְיָן; וַיֹּאמֶר לְרַכָּבוֹ, הֲפֹךְ יָדְךָ וְהוֹצִיאֵנִי מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה--כִּי הָחֳלֵיתִי.	34 And a certain man drew his bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the lower armour and the breastplate; wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot: 'Turn thy hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am sore wounded.'
22.35 לה  וַתַּעֲלֶה הַמִּלְחָמָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ הָיָה מָעֳמָד בַּמֶּרְכָּבָה, נֹכַח אֲרָם; וַיָּמָת בָּעֶרֶב, וַיִּצֶק דַּם-הַמַּכָּה אֶל-חֵיק הָרָכֶב.	35 And the battle increased that day; and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Arameans, and died at even; and the blood ran out of the wound into the bottom of the chariot.
22.36 לו  וַיַּעֲבֹר הָרִנָּה בַּמַּחֲנֶה, כְּבֹא הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ לֵאמֹר:  אִישׁ אֶל-עִירוֹ, וְאִישׁ אֶל-אַרְצוֹ.	36 And there went a cry throughout the host about the going down of the sun, saying: 'Every man to his city, and every man to his country.'
22.37 לז  וַיָּמָת הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיָּבוֹא שֹׁמְרוֹן; וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.	37 So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.
22.38 לח  וַיִּשְׁטֹף אֶת-הָרֶכֶב עַל בְּרֵכַת שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיָּלֹקּוּ הַכְּלָבִים אֶת-דָּמוֹ, וְהַזֹּנוֹת, רָחָצוּ--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר.	38 And they washed the chariot by the pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; the harlots also washed themselves there; according unto the word of the LORD which He spoke.
22.39 לט  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אַחְאָב וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּבֵית הַשֵּׁן אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה, וְכָל-הֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה:  הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	39 Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
22.40 מ  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אַחְאָב, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲחַזְיָהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	40 So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
22.41 מא  וִיהוֹשָׁפָט, בֶּן-אָסָא, מָלַךְ, עַל-יְהוּדָה--בִּשְׁנַת אַרְבַּע, לְאַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	41 And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.
22.42 מב  יְהוֹשָׁפָט, בֶּן-שְׁלֹשִׁים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, עֲזוּבָה בַּת-שִׁלְחִי.	42 Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
22.43 מג  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּכָל-דֶּרֶךְ אָסָא אָבִיו--לֹא-סָר מִמֶּנּוּ:  לַעֲשׂוֹת הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.  אַךְ הַבָּמוֹת, לֹא-סָרוּ:  עוֹד הָעָם מְזַבְּחִים וּמְקַטְּרִים, בַּבָּמוֹת.	43 And he walked in all the way of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD; howbeit the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places.
22.44 מד  וַיַּשְׁלֵם יְהוֹשָׁפָט, עִם-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	44 And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
22.45 מה  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹשָׁפָט וּגְבוּרָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, וַאֲשֶׁר נִלְחָם:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.	45 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he showed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
22.46 מו  וְיֶתֶר, הַקָּדֵשׁ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁאַר, בִּימֵי אָסָא אָבִיו--בִּעֵר, מִן-הָאָרֶץ.	46 And the remnant of the sodomites that remained in the days of his father Asa, he put away out of the land.
22.47 מז  וּמֶלֶךְ אֵין בֶּאֱדוֹם, נִצָּב מֶלֶךְ.	47 And there was no king in Edom: a deputy was king.
22.48 מח  יְהוֹשָׁפָט עשר (עָשָׂה) אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ לָלֶכֶת אֹפִירָה, לַזָּהָב--וְלֹא הָלָךְ:  כִּי-נשברה (נִשְׁבְּרוּ) אֳנִיּוֹת, בְּעֶצְיוֹן גָּבֶר.	48 Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold; but they went not; for the ships were broken at Ezion-geber.
22.49 מט  אָז אָמַר אֲחַזְיָהוּ בֶן-אַחְאָב, אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, יֵלְכוּ עֲבָדַי עִם-עֲבָדֶיךָ, בָּאֳנִיּוֹת; וְלֹא אָבָה, יְהוֹשָׁפָט.	49 Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat: 'Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships.' But Jehoshaphat would not.
22.50 נ  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יְהוֹשָׁפָט, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר דָּוִד אָבִיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹרָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {ס}	50 And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. {S}
22.51 נא  אֲחַזְיָהוּ בֶן-אַחְאָב, מָלַךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, בִּשְׁנַת שְׁבַע עֶשְׂרֵה, לִיהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁנָתָיִם.	51 Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and he reigned two years over Israel.
22.52 נב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ אָבִיו וּבְדֶרֶךְ אִמּוֹ, וּבְדֶרֶךְ יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	52 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherein he made Israel to sin.
22.53 נג  וַיַּעֲבֹד, אֶת-הַבַּעַל, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲוֶה, לוֹ; וַיַּכְעֵס, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, אָבִיו.	53 And he served Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked the LORD, the God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
