1.1 א  וַיְהִי אִישׁ אֶחָד מִן-הָרָמָתַיִם, צוֹפִים--מֵהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וּשְׁמוֹ אֶלְקָנָה בֶּן-יְרֹחָם בֶּן-אֱלִיהוּא, בֶּן-תֹּחוּ בֶן-צוּף--אֶפְרָתִי.    1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim, of the hill-country of Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite.
1.2 ב  וְלוֹ, שְׁתֵּי נָשִׁים--שֵׁם אַחַת חַנָּה, וְשֵׁם הַשֵּׁנִית פְּנִנָּה; וַיְהִי לִפְנִנָּה יְלָדִים, וּלְחַנָּה אֵין יְלָדִים.    2 And he had two wives: the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah; and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
1.3 ג  וְעָלָה הָאִישׁ הַהוּא מֵעִירוֹ מִיָּמִים יָמִימָה, לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת וְלִזְבֹּחַ לַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת בְּשִׁלֹה; וְשָׁם שְׁנֵי בְנֵי-עֵלִי, חָפְנִי וּפִנְחָס, כֹּהֲנִים, לַיהוָה.    3 And this man went up out of his city from year to year to worship and to sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there priests unto the LORD.
1.4 ד  וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם, וַיִּזְבַּח אֶלְקָנָה; וְנָתַן לִפְנִנָּה אִשְׁתּוֹ, וּלְכָל-בָּנֶיהָ וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ--מָנוֹת.    4 And it came to pass upon a day, when Elkanah sacrificed, that he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions;
1.5 ה  וּלְחַנָּה, יִתֵּן מָנָה אַחַת אַפָּיִם:  כִּי אֶת-חַנָּה אָהֵב, וַיהוָה סָגַר רַחְמָהּ.    5 but unto Hannah he gave a double portion; for he loved Hannah, but the LORD had shut up her womb.
1.6 ו  וְכִעֲסַתָּה צָרָתָהּ גַּם-כַּעַס, בַּעֲבוּר הַרְּעִמָהּ:  כִּי-סָגַר יְהוָה, בְּעַד רַחְמָהּ.    6 And her rival vexed her sore, to make her fret, because the LORD had shut up her womb.
1.7 ז  וְכֵן יַעֲשֶׂה שָׁנָה בְשָׁנָה, מִדֵּי עֲלֹתָהּ בְּבֵית יְהוָה--כֵּן, תַּכְעִסֶנָּה; וַתִּבְכֶּה, וְלֹא תֹאכַל.    7 And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the LORD, so she vexed her; therefore she wept, and would not eat.
1.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ אֶלְקָנָה אִישָׁהּ, חַנָּה לָמֶה תִבְכִּי וְלָמֶה לֹא תֹאכְלִי, וְלָמֶה, יֵרַע לְבָבֵךְ:  הֲלוֹא אָנֹכִי טוֹב לָךְ, מֵעֲשָׂרָה בָּנִים.    8 And Elkanah her husband said unto her: 'Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to thee than ten sons?'
1.9 ט  וַתָּקָם חַנָּה, אַחֲרֵי אָכְלָה בְשִׁלֹה וְאַחֲרֵי שָׁתֹה; וְעֵלִי הַכֹּהֵן, יֹשֵׁב עַל-הַכִּסֵּא, עַל-מְזוּזַת, הֵיכַל יְהוָה.    9 So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk--now Eli the priest sat upon his seat by the door-post of the temple of the LORD;
1.10 י  וְהִיא, מָרַת נָפֶשׁ; וַתִּתְפַּלֵּל עַל-יְהוָה, וּבָכֹה תִבְכֶּה.    10 and she was in bitterness of soul--and prayed unto the LORD, and wept sore.
1.11 יא  וַתִּדֹּר נֶדֶר וַתֹּאמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אִם-רָאֹה תִרְאֶה בָּעֳנִי אֲמָתֶךָ וּזְכַרְתַּנִי וְלֹא-תִשְׁכַּח אֶת-אֲמָתֶךָ, וְנָתַתָּה לַאֲמָתְךָ, זֶרַע אֲנָשִׁים--וּנְתַתִּיו לַיהוָה כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּיו, וּמוֹרָה לֹא-יַעֲלֶה עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ.    11 And she vowed a vow, and said: 'O LORD of hosts, if Thou wilt indeed look on the affliction of Thy handmaid, and remember me, and not forget Thy handmaid, but wilt give unto Thy handmaid a man-child, then I will give him unto the LORD all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head.'
1.12 יב  וְהָיָה כִּי הִרְבְּתָה, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְעֵלִי, שֹׁמֵר אֶת-פִּיהָ.    12 And it came to pass, as she prayed long before the LORD, that Eli watched her mouth.
1.13 יג  וְחַנָּה, הִיא מְדַבֶּרֶת עַל-לִבָּהּ--רַק שְׂפָתֶיהָ נָּעוֹת, וְקוֹלָהּ לֹא יִשָּׁמֵעַ; וַיַּחְשְׁבֶהָ עֵלִי, לְשִׁכֹּרָה.    13 Now Hannah, she spoke in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice could not be heard; therefore, Eli thought she had been drunken.
1.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ עֵלִי, עַד-מָתַי תִּשְׁתַּכָּרִין; הָסִירִי אֶת-יֵינֵךְ, מֵעָלָיִךְ.    14 And Eli said unto her: 'How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee.'
1.15 טו  וַתַּעַן חַנָּה וַתֹּאמֶר, לֹא אֲדֹנִי, אִשָּׁה קְשַׁת-רוּחַ אָנֹכִי, וְיַיִן וְשֵׁכָר לֹא שָׁתִיתִי; וָאֶשְׁפֹּךְ אֶת-נַפְשִׁי, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    15 And Hannah answered and said: 'No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit; I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but I poured out my soul before the LORD.
1.16 טז  אַל-תִּתֵּן, אֶת-אֲמָתְךָ, לִפְנֵי, בַּת-בְּלִיָּעַל:  כִּי-מֵרֹב שִׂיחִי וְכַעְסִי, דִּבַּרְתִּי עַד-הֵנָּה.    16 Count not thy handmaid for a wicked woman: for out of the abundance of my complaint and my vexation have I spoken hitherto.'
1.17 יז  וַיַּעַן עֵלִי וַיֹּאמֶר, לְכִי לְשָׁלוֹם; וֵאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יִתֵּן אֶת-שֵׁלָתֵךְ, אֲשֶׁר שָׁאַלְתְּ, מֵעִמּוֹ.    17 Then Eli answered and said: 'Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thy petition that thou hast asked of Him.'
1.18 יח  וַתֹּאמֶר, תִּמְצָא שִׁפְחָתְךָ חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ; וַתֵּלֶךְ הָאִשָּׁה לְדַרְכָּהּ וַתֹּאכַל, וּפָנֶיהָ לֹא-הָיוּ-לָהּ עוֹד.    18 And she said: 'Let thy servant find favour in thy sight.' So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.
1.19 יט  וַיַּשְׁכִּמוּ בַבֹּקֶר, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-בֵּיתָם, הָרָמָתָה; וַיֵּדַע אֶלְקָנָה אֶת-חַנָּה אִשְׁתּוֹ, וַיִּזְכְּרֶהָ יְהוָה.    19 And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah; and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and the LORD remembered her.
1.20 כ  וַיְהִי לִתְקֻפוֹת הַיָּמִים, וַתַּהַר חַנָּה וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן; וַתִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ שְׁמוּאֵל, כִּי מֵיְהוָה שְׁאִלְתִּיו.    20 And it came to pass, when the time was come about, that Hannah conceived, and bore a son; and she called his name Samuel: 'because I have asked him of the LORD.'
1.21 כא  וַיַּעַל הָאִישׁ אֶלְקָנָה, וְכָל-בֵּיתוֹ, לִזְבֹּחַ לַיהוָה אֶת-זֶבַח הַיָּמִים, וְאֶת-נִדְרוֹ.    21 And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.
1.22 כב  וְחַנָּה, לֹא עָלָתָה:  כִּי-אָמְרָה לְאִישָׁהּ, עַד יִגָּמֵל הַנַּעַר וַהֲבִאֹתִיו וְנִרְאָה אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה, וְיָשַׁב שָׁם, עַד-עוֹלָם.    22 But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband: 'Until the child be weaned, when I will bring him, that he may appear before the LORD, and there abide for ever.'
1.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ אֶלְקָנָה אִישָׁהּ עֲשִׂי הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינַיִךְ, שְׁבִי עַד-גָּמְלֵךְ אֹתוֹ--אַךְ יָקֵם יְהוָה, אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ; וַתֵּשֶׁב הָאִשָּׁה וַתֵּינֶק אֶת-בְּנָהּ, עַד-גָמְלָהּ אֹתוֹ.    23 And Elkanah her husband said unto her: 'Do what seemeth thee good; tarry until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish His word.' So the woman tarried and gave her son suck, until she weaned him.
1.24 כד  וַתַּעֲלֵהוּ עִמָּהּ כַּאֲשֶׁר גְּמָלַתּוּ, בְּפָרִים שְׁלֹשָׁה וְאֵיפָה אַחַת קֶמַח וְנֵבֶל יַיִן, וַתְּבִאֵהוּ בֵית-יְהוָה, שִׁלוֹ; וְהַנַּעַר, נָעַר.    24 And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of meal, and a bottle of wine, and brought him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh; and the child was young.
1.25 כה  וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ, אֶת-הַפָּר; וַיָּבִאוּ אֶת-הַנַּעַר, אֶל-עֵלִי.    25 And when the bullock was slain, the child was brought to Eli.
1.26 כו  וַתֹּאמֶר בִּי אֲדֹנִי, חֵי נַפְשְׁךָ אֲדֹנִי; אֲנִי הָאִשָּׁה, הַנִּצֶּבֶת עִמְּכָה בָּזֶה, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-יְהוָה.    26 And she said: 'Oh, my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the LORD.
1.27 כז  אֶל-הַנַּעַר הַזֶּה, הִתְפַּלָּלְתִּי; וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה לִי אֶת-שְׁאֵלָתִי, אֲשֶׁר שָׁאַלְתִּי מֵעִמּוֹ.    27 For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath granted me my petition which I asked of Him;
1.28 כח  וְגַם אָנֹכִי, הִשְׁאִלְתִּהוּ לַיהוָה, כָּל-הַיָּמִים אֲשֶׁר הָיָה, הוּא שָׁאוּל לַיהוָה; וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ שָׁם, לַיהוָה.  {ס}    28 therefore I also have lent him to the LORD; as long as he liveth he is lent to the LORD.' And he worshipped the LORD there. {S}
2.1 א  וַתִּתְפַּלֵּל חַנָּה, וַתֹּאמַר, עָלַץ לִבִּי בַּיהוָה, רָמָה קַרְנִי בַּיהוָה; רָחַב פִּי עַל-אוֹיְבַי, כִּי שָׂמַחְתִּי בִּישׁוּעָתֶךָ.    1 And Hannah prayed, and said: my heart exulteth in the LORD, my horn is exalted in the LORD; my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because I rejoice in Thy salvation.
2.2 ב  אֵין-קָדוֹשׁ כַּיהוָה, כִּי אֵין בִּלְתֶּךָ; וְאֵין צוּר, כֵּאלֹהֵינוּ.    2 There is none holy as the LORD, for there is none beside Thee; neither is there any rock like our God.
2.3 ג  אַל-תַּרְבּוּ תְדַבְּרוּ גְּבֹהָה גְבֹהָה, יֵצֵא עָתָק מִפִּיכֶם:  כִּי אֵל דֵּעוֹת יְהוָה, ולא (וְלוֹ) נִתְכְּנוּ עֲלִלוֹת.    3 Multiply not exceeding proud talk; let not arrogancy come out of your mouth; for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by Him actions are weighed.
2.4 ד  קֶשֶׁת גִּבֹּרִים, חַתִּים; וְנִכְשָׁלִים, אָזְרוּ חָיִל.    4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are girded with strength.
2.5 ה  שְׂבֵעִים בַּלֶּחֶם נִשְׂכָּרוּ, וּרְעֵבִים חָדֵלּוּ, עַד-עֲקָרָה יָלְדָה שִׁבְעָה, וְרַבַּת בָּנִים אֻמְלָלָה.    5 They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they that were hungry have ceased; while the barren hath borne seven, she that had many children hath languished.
2.6 ו  יְהוָה, מֵמִית וּמְחַיֶּה; מוֹרִיד שְׁאוֹל, וַיָּעַל.    6 The LORD killeth, and maketh alive; He bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.
2.7 ז  יְהוָה, מוֹרִישׁ וּמַעֲשִׁיר; מַשְׁפִּיל, אַף-מְרוֹמֵם.    7 The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich; He bringeth low, He also lifteth up.
2.8 ח  מֵקִים מֵעָפָר דָּל, מֵאַשְׁפֹּת יָרִים אֶבְיוֹן, לְהוֹשִׁיב עִם-נְדִיבִים, וְכִסֵּא כָבוֹד יַנְחִלֵם:  כִּי לַיהוָה מְצֻקֵי אֶרֶץ, וַיָּשֶׁת עֲלֵיהֶם תֵּבֵל.    8 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, He lifteth up the needy from the dung-hill, to make them sit with princes, and inherit the throne of glory; for the pillars of the earth are the LORD'S, and He hath set the world upon them.
2.9 ט  רַגְלֵי חֲסִידָו יִשְׁמֹר, וּרְשָׁעִים בַּחֹשֶׁךְ יִדָּמּוּ:  כִּי-לֹא בְכֹחַ, יִגְבַּר-אִישׁ.    9 He will keep the feet of His holy ones, but the wicked shall be put to silence in darkness; for not by strength shall man prevail.
2.10 י  יְהוָה יֵחַתּוּ מְרִיבָו, עָלָו בַּשָּׁמַיִם יַרְעֵם--יְהוָה, יָדִין אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ; וְיִתֶּן-עֹז לְמַלְכּוֹ, וְיָרֵם קֶרֶן מְשִׁיחוֹ.  {פ}    10 They that strive with the LORD shall be broken to pieces; against them will He thunder in heaven; the LORD will judge the ends of the earth; and He will give strength unto His king, and exalt the horn of His anointed. {P}
2.11 יא  וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶלְקָנָה הָרָמָתָה, עַל-בֵּיתוֹ; וְהַנַּעַר, הָיָה מְשָׁרֵת אֶת-יְהוָה, אֶת-פְּנֵי, עֵלִי הַכֹּהֵן.    11 And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest.
2.12 יב  וּבְנֵי עֵלִי, בְּנֵי בְלִיָּעַל:  לֹא יָדְעוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה.    12 Now the sons of Eli were base men; they knew not the LORD.
2.13 יג  וּמִשְׁפַּט הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶת-הָעָם--כָּל-אִישׁ זֹבֵחַ זֶבַח, וּבָא נַעַר הַכֹּהֵן כְּבַשֵּׁל הַבָּשָׂר, וְהַמַּזְלֵג שְׁלֹשׁ הַשִּׁנַּיִם, בְּיָדוֹ.    13 And the custom of the priests with the people was, that, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in seething, with a flesh-hook of three teeth in his hand;
2.14 יד  וְהִכָּה בַכִּיּוֹר אוֹ בַדּוּד, אוֹ בַקַּלַּחַת אוֹ בַפָּרוּר--כֹּל אֲשֶׁר יַעֲלֶה הַמַּזְלֵג, יִקַּח הַכֹּהֵן בּוֹ; כָּכָה יַעֲשׂוּ לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַבָּאִים שָׁם בְּשִׁלֹה.    14 and he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the flesh-hook brought up the priest took therewith. So they did unto all the Israelites that came thither in Shiloh.
2.15 טו  גַּם, בְּטֶרֶם יַקְטִרוּן אֶת-הַחֵלֶב, וּבָא נַעַר הַכֹּהֵן וְאָמַר לָאִישׁ הַזֹּבֵחַ, תְּנָה בָשָׂר לִצְלוֹת לַכֹּהֵן; וְלֹא-יִקַּח מִמְּךָ בָּשָׂר מְבֻשָּׁל, כִּי אִם-חָי.    15 Yea, before the fat was made to smoke, the priest's servant came, and said to the man that sacrificed: 'Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.'
2.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הָאִישׁ, קַטֵּר יַקְטִירוּן כַּיּוֹם הַחֵלֶב, וְקַח-לְךָ, כַּאֲשֶׁר תְּאַוֶּה נַפְשֶׁךָ; וְאָמַר לו (לֹא), כִּי עַתָּה תִתֵּן--וְאִם-לֹא, לָקַחְתִּי בְחָזְקָה.    16 And if the man said unto him: 'Let the fat be made to smoke first of all, and then take as much as thy soul desireth'; then he would say: 'Nay, but thou shalt give it me now; and if not, I will take it by force.'
2.17 יז  וַתְּהִי חַטַּאת הַנְּעָרִים גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד, אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה:  כִּי נִאֲצוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֵת מִנְחַת יְהוָה.    17 And the sin of the young men was very great before the LORD; for the men dealt contemptuously with the offering of the LORD.
2.18 יח  וּשְׁמוּאֵל, מְשָׁרֵת אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה:  נַעַר, חָגוּר אֵפוֹד בָּד.    18 But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.
2.19 יט  וּמְעִיל קָטֹן תַּעֲשֶׂה-לּוֹ אִמּוֹ, וְהַעַלְתָה לוֹ מִיָּמִים יָמִימָה--בַּעֲלוֹתָהּ, אֶת-אִישָׁהּ, לִזְבֹּחַ, אֶת-זֶבַח הַיָּמִים.    19 Moreover his mother made him a little robe, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
2.20 כ  וּבֵרַךְ עֵלִי אֶת-אֶלְקָנָה וְאֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ, וְאָמַר יָשֵׂם יְהוָה לְךָ זֶרַע מִן-הָאִשָּׁה הַזֹּאת, תַּחַת הַשְּׁאֵלָה, אֲשֶׁר שָׁאַל לַיהוָה; וְהָלְכוּ, לִמְקוֹמוֹ.    20 And Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife, and say: 'The LORD give thee seed of this woman for the loan which was lent to the LORD.' And they would go unto their own home.
2.21 כא  כִּי-פָקַד יְהוָה אֶת-חַנָּה, וַתַּהַר וַתֵּלֶד שְׁלֹשָׁה-בָנִים וּשְׁתֵּי בָנוֹת; וַיִּגְדַּל הַנַּעַר שְׁמוּאֵל, עִם-יְהוָה.  {ס}    21 So the LORD remembered Hannah, and she conceived, and bore three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the LORD. {S}
2.22 כב  וְעֵלִי, זָקֵן מְאֹד; וְשָׁמַע, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשׂוּן בָּנָיו לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר-יִשְׁכְּבוּן אֶת-הַנָּשִׁים, הַצֹּבְאוֹת פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    22 Now Eli was very old; and he heard all that his sons did unto all Israel, and how that they lay with the women that did service at the door of the tent of meeting.
2.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, לָמָּה תַעֲשׂוּן כַּדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁמֵעַ אֶת-דִּבְרֵיכֶם רָעִים, מֵאֵת כָּל-הָעָם אֵלֶּה.    23 And he said unto them: 'Why do ye such things? for I hear evil reports concerning you from all this people.
2.24 כד  אַל, בָּנָי:  כִּי לוֹא-טוֹבָה הַשְּׁמֻעָה אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁמֵעַ, מַעֲבִרִים עַם-יְהוָה.    24 Nay, my sons; for it is no good report which I hear the LORD'S people do spread abroad.
2.25 כה  אִם-יֶחֱטָא אִישׁ לְאִישׁ, וּפִלְלוֹ אֱלֹהִים, וְאִם לַיהוָה יֶחֱטָא-אִישׁ, מִי יִתְפַּלֶּל-לוֹ; וְלֹא יִשְׁמְעוּ לְקוֹל אֲבִיהֶם, כִּי-חָפֵץ יְהוָה לַהֲמִיתָם.    25 If one man sin against another, God shall judge him; but if a man sin against the LORD, who shall entreat for him?' But they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD would slay them.
2.26 כו  וְהַנַּעַר שְׁמוּאֵל, הֹלֵךְ וְגָדֵל וָטוֹב:  גַּם, עִם-יְהוָה, וְגַם, עִם-אֲנָשִׁים.  {פ}    26 And the child Samuel grew on, and increased in favour both with the LORD, and also with men. {P}
2.27 כז  וַיָּבֹא אִישׁ-אֱלֹהִים, אֶל-עֵלִי; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הֲנִגְלֹה נִגְלֵיתִי אֶל-בֵּית אָבִיךָ, בִּהְיוֹתָם בְּמִצְרַיִם לְבֵית פַּרְעֹה.    27 And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD: Did I reveal Myself unto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in bondage to Pharaoh's house?
2.28 כח  וּבָחֹר אֹתוֹ מִכָּל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לִי, לְכֹהֵן, לַעֲלוֹת עַל-מִזְבְּחִי לְהַקְטִיר קְטֹרֶת לָשֵׂאת אֵפוֹד, לְפָנָי; וָאֶתְּנָה לְבֵית אָבִיךָ, אֶת-כָּל-אִשֵּׁי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    28 And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be My priest, to go up unto Mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before Me? and did I give unto the house of thy father all the offerings of the children of Israel made by fire?
2.29 כט  לָמָּה תִבְעֲטוּ, בְּזִבְחִי וּבְמִנְחָתִי, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי, מָעוֹן; וַתְּכַבֵּד אֶת-בָּנֶיךָ, מִמֶּנִּי, לְהַבְרִיאֲכֶם מֵרֵאשִׁית כָּל-מִנְחַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְעַמִּי.    29 Wherefore kick ye at My sacrifice and at Mine offering, which I have commanded in My habitation; and honourest thy sons above Me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel My people?
2.30 ל  לָכֵן, נְאֻם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָמוֹר אָמַרְתִּי, בֵּיתְךָ וּבֵית אָבִיךָ יִתְהַלְּכוּ לְפָנַי עַד-עוֹלָם; וְעַתָּה נְאֻם-יְהוָה חָלִילָה לִּי, כִּי-מְכַבְּדַי אֲכַבֵּד וּבֹזַי יֵקָלּוּ.    30 Therefore the LORD, the God of Israel, saith: I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before Me for ever; but now the LORD saith: Be it far from Me: for them that honour Me I will honour, and they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.
2.31 לא  הִנֵּה, יָמִים בָּאִים, וְגָדַעְתִּי אֶת-זְרֹעֲךָ, וְאֶת-זְרֹעַ בֵּית אָבִיךָ--מִהְיוֹת זָקֵן, בְּבֵיתֶךָ.    31 Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house.
2.32 לב  וְהִבַּטְתָּ צַר מָעוֹן, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יֵיטִיב אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה זָקֵן בְּבֵיתְךָ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.    32 And thou shalt behold a rival in My habitation, in all the good which shall be done to Israel; and there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever.
2.33 לג  וְאִישׁ, לֹא-אַכְרִית לְךָ מֵעִם מִזְבְּחִי, לְכַלּוֹת אֶת-עֵינֶיךָ, וְלַאֲדִיב אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ; וְכָל-מַרְבִּית בֵּיתְךָ, יָמוּתוּ אֲנָשִׁים.    33 Yet will I not cut off every man of thine from Mine altar, to make thine eyes to fail, and thy heart to languish; and all the increase of thy house shall die young men.
2.34 לד  וְזֶה-לְּךָ הָאוֹת, אֲשֶׁר יָבֹא אֶל-שְׁנֵי בָנֶיךָ--אֶל-חָפְנִי, וּפִינְחָס:  בְּיוֹם אֶחָד, יָמוּתוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם.    34 And this shall be the sign unto thee, that which shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas: in one day they shall die both of them.
2.35 לה  וַהֲקִימֹתִי לִי כֹּהֵן נֶאֱמָן, כַּאֲשֶׁר בִּלְבָבִי וּבְנַפְשִׁי יַעֲשֶׂה; וּבָנִיתִי לוֹ בַּיִת נֶאֱמָן, וְהִתְהַלֵּךְ לִפְנֵי-מְשִׁיחִי כָּל-הַיָּמִים.    35 And I will raise Me up a faithful priest, that shall do according to that which is in My heart and in My mind; and I will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before Mine anointed for ever.
2.36 לו  וְהָיָה, כָּל-הַנּוֹתָר בְּבֵיתְךָ, יָבוֹא לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת לוֹ, לַאֲגוֹרַת כֶּסֶף וְכִכַּר-לָחֶם; וְאָמַר, סְפָחֵנִי נָא אֶל-אַחַת הַכְּהֻנּוֹת--לֶאֱכֹל פַּת-לָחֶם.  {פ}    36 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thy house shall come and bow down to him for a piece of silver and a loaf of bread, and shall say: Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices, that I may eat a morsel of bread.' {P}
3.1 א  וְהַנַּעַר שְׁמוּאֵל מְשָׁרֵת אֶת-יְהוָה, לִפְנֵי עֵלִי; וּדְבַר-יְהוָה, הָיָה יָקָר בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם--אֵין חָזוֹן, נִפְרָץ.  {ס}    1 And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no frequent vision. {S}
3.2 ב  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וְעֵלִי שֹׁכֵב בִּמְקוֹמוֹ; וְעֵינָו הֵחֵלּוּ כֵהוֹת, לֹא יוּכַל לִרְאוֹת.    2 And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place--now his eyes had begun to wax dim, that he could not see--
3.3 ג  וְנֵר אֱלֹהִים טֶרֶם יִכְבֶּה, וּשְׁמוּאֵל שֹׁכֵב, בְּהֵיכַל יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהִים.  {פ}    3 and the lamp of God was not yet gone out, and Samuel was laid down to sleep in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was, {P}
3.4 ד  וַיִּקְרָא יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּנִי.    4 that the LORD called Samuel; and he said: 'Here am I.'
3.5 ה  וַיָּרָץ אֶל-עֵלִי, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנְנִי כִּי-קָרָאתָ לִּי, וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא-קָרָאתִי, שׁוּב שְׁכָב; וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיִּשְׁכָּב.  {ס}    5 And he ran unto Eli, and said: 'Here am I; for thou didst call me.' And he said: 'I called not; lie down again.' And he went and lay down. {S}
3.6 ו  וַיֹּסֶף יְהוָה, קְרֹא עוֹד שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיָּקָם שְׁמוּאֵל וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-עֵלִי, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנְנִי כִּי קָרָאתָ לִי; וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא-קָרָאתִי בְנִי, שׁוּב שְׁכָב.    6 And the LORD called yet again Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said: 'Here am I; for thou didst call me.' And he answered: 'I called not, my son; lie down again.'
3.7 ז  וּשְׁמוּאֵל, טֶרֶם יָדַע אֶת-יְהוָה; וְטֶרֶם יִגָּלֶה אֵלָיו, דְּבַר-יְהוָה.    7 Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the LORD yet revealed unto him.
3.8 ח  וַיֹּסֶף יְהוָה קְרֹא-שְׁמוּאֵל, בַּשְּׁלִישִׁת, וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-עֵלִי, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנְנִי כִּי קָרָאתָ לִי; וַיָּבֶן עֵלִי, כִּי יְהוָה קֹרֵא לַנָּעַר.    8 And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said: 'Here am I; for thou didst call me.' And Eli perceived that the LORD was calling the child.
3.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר עֵלִי לִשְׁמוּאֵל, לֵךְ שְׁכָב, וְהָיָה אִם-יִקְרָא אֵלֶיךָ, וְאָמַרְתָּ דַּבֵּר יְהוָה כִּי שֹׁמֵעַ עַבְדֶּךָ; וַיֵּלֶךְ שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיִּשְׁכַּב בִּמְקוֹמוֹ.    9 Therefore Eli said unto Samuel: 'Go, lie down; and it shall be, if thou be called, that thou shalt say: Speak, LORD; for Thy servant heareth.' So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
3.10 י  וַיָּבֹא יְהוָה וַיִּתְיַצַּב, וַיִּקְרָא כְפַעַם-בְּפַעַם שְׁמוּאֵל שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל דַּבֵּר, כִּי שֹׁמֵעַ עַבְדֶּךָ.  {פ}    10 And the LORD came, and stood, and called as at other times: 'Samuel, Samuel.' Then Samuel said: 'Speak; for Thy servant heareth.' {P}
3.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי עֹשֶׂה דָבָר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲשֶׁר, כָּל-שֹׁמְעוֹ--תְּצִלֶּינָה, שְׁתֵּי אָזְנָיו.    11 And the LORD said to Samuel: 'Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.
3.12 יב  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא אָקִים אֶל-עֵלִי, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ--הָחֵל, וְכַלֵּה.    12 In that day I will perform against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from the beginning even unto the end.
3.13 יג  וְהִגַּדְתִּי לוֹ, כִּי-שֹׁפֵט אֲנִי אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ עַד-עוֹלָם--בַּעֲוֺן אֲשֶׁר-יָדַע, כִּי-מְקַלְלִים לָהֶם בָּנָיו, וְלֹא כִהָה, בָּם.    13 For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity, in that he knew that his sons did bring a curse upon themselves, and he rebuked them not.
3.14 יד  וְלָכֵן נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי, לְבֵית עֵלִי:  אִם-יִתְכַּפֵּר עֲוֺן בֵּית-עֵלִי, בְּזֶבַח וּבְמִנְחָה--עַד-עוֹלָם.    14 And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be expiated with sacrifice nor offering for ever.'
3.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁכַּב שְׁמוּאֵל עַד-הַבֹּקֶר, וַיִּפְתַּח אֶת-דַּלְתוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה; וּשְׁמוּאֵל יָרֵא, מֵהַגִּיד אֶת-הַמַּרְאָה אֶל-עֵלִי.    15 And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to tell Eli the vision.
3.16 טז  וַיִּקְרָא עֵלִי אֶת-שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל בְּנִי; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּנִי.    16 Then Eli called Samuel, and said: 'Samuel, my son.' And he said: 'Here am I.'
3.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר, מָה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֵלֶיךָ--אַל-נָא תְכַחֵד, מִמֶּנִּי:  כֹּה יַעֲשֶׂה-לְּךָ אֱלֹהִים, וְכֹה יוֹסִיף, אִם-תְּכַחֵד מִמֶּנִּי דָּבָר, מִכָּל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֵלֶיךָ.    17 And he said: 'What is the thing that He hath spoken unto thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me, God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me of all the things that He spoke unto thee.'
3.18 יח  וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, וְלֹא כִחֵד מִמֶּנּוּ; וַיֹּאמַר--יְהוָה הוּא, הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינָו יַעֲשֶׂה.  {פ}    18 And Samuel told him all the words, and hid nothing from him. And he said: 'It is the LORD; let Him do what seemeth Him good.' {P}
3.19 יט  וַיִּגְדַּל, שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיהוָה הָיָה עִמּוֹ, וְלֹא-הִפִּיל מִכָּל-דְּבָרָיו אָרְצָה.    19 And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground.
3.20 כ  וַיֵּדַע, כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִדָּן, וְעַד-בְּאֵר שָׁבַע:  כִּי נֶאֱמָן שְׁמוּאֵל, לְנָבִיא לַיהוָה.  {ס}    20 And all Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the LORD. {S}
3.21 כא  וַיֹּסֶף יְהוָה, לְהֵרָאֹה בְשִׁלֹה:  כִּי-נִגְלָה יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל בְּשִׁלוֹ, בִּדְבַר יְהוָה.  {פ}    21 And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh; for the LORD revealed Himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD. {P}
4.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-שְׁמוּאֵל, לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּצֵא יִשְׂרָאֵל לִקְרַאת פְּלִשְׁתִּים לַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיַּחֲנוּ עַל-הָאֶבֶן הָעֵזֶר, וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, חָנוּ בַאֲפֵק.    1 And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Eben-ezer; and the Philistines pitched in Aphek.
4.2 ב  וַיַּעַרְכוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים לִקְרַאת יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַתִּטֹּשׁ הַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיִּנָּגֶף יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּכּוּ בַמַּעֲרָכָה בַּשָּׂדֶה, כְּאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ.    2 And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel; and when the battle was spread, Israel was smitten before the Philistines; and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.
4.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא הָעָם, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לָמָּה נְגָפָנוּ יְהוָה הַיּוֹם לִפְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; נִקְחָה אֵלֵינוּ מִשִּׁלֹה, אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית יְהוָה, וְיָבֹא בְקִרְבֵּנוּ, וְיֹשִׁעֵנוּ מִכַּף אֹיְבֵינוּ.    3 And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said: 'Wherefore hath the LORD smitten us to-day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of Shiloh unto us, that He may come among us, and save us out of the hand of our enemies.'
4.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁלַח הָעָם, שִׁלֹה, וַיִּשְׂאוּ מִשָּׁם אֵת אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, יֹשֵׁב הַכְּרֻבִים; וְשָׁם שְׁנֵי בְנֵי-עֵלִי, עִם-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית הָאֱלֹהִים--חָפְנִי, וּפִינְחָס.    4 So the people sent to Shiloh, and they brought from thence the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, who sitteth upon the cherubim; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
4.5 ה  וַיְהִי, כְּבוֹא אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיָּרִעוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, תְּרוּעָה גְדוֹלָה; וַתֵּהֹם, הָאָרֶץ.    5 And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang.
4.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, אֶת-קוֹל הַתְּרוּעָה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מֶה קוֹל הַתְּרוּעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת בְּמַחֲנֵה הָעִבְרִים; וַיֵּדְעוּ--כִּי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, בָּא אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה.    6 And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said: 'What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?' And they knew that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp.
4.7 ז  וַיִּרְאוּ, הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים--כִּי אָמְרוּ, בָּא אֱלֹהִים אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אוֹי לָנוּ, כִּי לֹא הָיְתָה כָּזֹאת אֶתְמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם.    7 And the Philistines were afraid, for they said: 'God is come into the camp.' And they said: 'Woe unto us! for there was not such a thing yesterday and the day before.
4.8 ח  אוֹי לָנוּ--מִי יַצִּילֵנוּ, מִיַּד הָאֱלֹהִים הָאַדִּירִים הָאֵלֶּה:  אֵלֶּה הֵם הָאֱלֹהִים, הַמַּכִּים אֶת-מִצְרַיִם בְּכָל-מַכָּה--בַּמִּדְבָּר.    8 Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? these are the gods that smote the Egyptians with all manner of plagues and in the wilderness.
4.9 ט  הִתְחַזְּקוּ וִהְיוּ לַאֲנָשִׁים, פְּלִשְׁתִּים--פֶּן תַּעַבְדוּ לָעִבְרִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָבְדוּ לָכֶם; וִהְיִיתֶם לַאֲנָשִׁים, וְנִלְחַמְתֶּם.    9 Be strong, and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you; quit yourselves like men, and fight.'
4.10 י  וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּנָּגֶף יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיָּנֻסוּ אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו, וַתְּהִי הַמַּכָּה, גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד; וַיִּפֹּל, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, רַגְלִי.    10 And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man to his tent; and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
4.11 יא  וַאֲרוֹן אֱלֹהִים, נִלְקָח; וּשְׁנֵי בְנֵי-עֵלִי מֵתוּ, חָפְנִי וּפִינְחָס.    11 And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.
4.12 יב  וַיָּרָץ אִישׁ-בִּנְיָמִן מֵהַמַּעֲרָכָה, וַיָּבֹא שִׁלֹה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וּמַדָּיו קְרֻעִים, וַאֲדָמָה עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ.    12 And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head.
4.13 יג  וַיָּבוֹא, וְהִנֵּה עֵלִי יֹשֵׁב עַל-הַכִּסֵּא יך (יַד) דֶּרֶךְ מְצַפֶּה--כִּי-הָיָה לִבּוֹ חָרֵד, עַל אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים; וְהָאִישׁ, בָּא לְהַגִּיד בָּעִיר, וַתִּזְעַק, כָּל-הָעִיר.    13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon his seat by the wayside watching; for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.
4.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁמַע עֵלִי, אֶת-קוֹל הַצְּעָקָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, מֶה קוֹל הֶהָמוֹן הַזֶּה; וְהָאִישׁ מִהַר, וַיָּבֹא וַיַּגֵּד לְעֵלִי.    14 And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said: 'What meaneth the noise of this tumult?' And the man made haste, and came and told Eli.
4.15 טו  וְעֵלִי, בֶּן-תִּשְׁעִים וּשְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנָה; וְעֵינָיו קָמָה, וְלֹא יָכוֹל לִרְאוֹת.    15 Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were set, that he could not see.
4.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר הָאִישׁ אֶל-עֵלִי, אָנֹכִי הַבָּא מִן-הַמַּעֲרָכָה, וַאֲנִי, מִן-הַמַּעֲרָכָה נַסְתִּי הַיּוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר מֶה-הָיָה הַדָּבָר, בְּנִי.    16 And the man said unto Eli: 'I am he that came out of the army, and I fled to-day out of the army.' And he said: 'How went the matter, my son?'
4.17 יז  וַיַּעַן הַמְבַשֵּׂר וַיֹּאמֶר, נָס יִשְׂרָאֵל לִפְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וְגַם מַגֵּפָה גְדוֹלָה, הָיְתָה בָעָם; וְגַם-שְׁנֵי בָנֶיךָ מֵתוּ, חָפְנִי וּפִינְחָס, וַאֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, נִלְקָחָה.  {פ}    17 And he that brought the tidings answered and said: 'Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.' {P}
4.18 יח  וַיְהִי כְּהַזְכִּירוֹ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיִּפֹּל מֵעַל-הַכִּסֵּא אֲחֹרַנִּית בְּעַד יַד הַשַּׁעַר וַתִּשָּׁבֵר מַפְרַקְתּוֹ וַיָּמֹת--כִּי-זָקֵן הָאִישׁ, וְכָבֵד; וְהוּא שָׁפַט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה.    18 And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off his seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck broke, and he died; for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.
4.19 יט  וְכַלָּתוֹ אֵשֶׁת-פִּינְחָס, הָרָה לָלַת, וַתִּשְׁמַע אֶת-הַשְּׁמוּעָה אֶל-הִלָּקַח אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וּמֵת חָמִיהָ וְאִישָׁהּ; וַתִּכְרַע וַתֵּלֶד, כִּי-נֶהֶפְכוּ עָלֶיהָ צִרֶיהָ.    19 And his daughter-in-law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered; and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and brought forth; for her pains came suddenly upon her.
4.20 כ  וּכְעֵת מוּתָהּ, וַתְּדַבֵּרְנָה הַנִּצָּבוֹת עָלֶיהָ, אַל-תִּירְאִי, כִּי בֵן יָלָדְתְּ; וְלֹא עָנְתָה, וְלֹא-שָׁתָה לִבָּהּ.    20 And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said unto her: 'Fear not; for thou hast brought forth a son.' But she answered not, neither did she regard it.
4.21 כא  וַתִּקְרָא לַנַּעַר, אִיכָבוֹד לֵאמֹר, גָּלָה כָבוֹד, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל; אֶל-הִלָּקַח אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וְאֶל-חָמִיהָ וְאִישָׁהּ.    21 And she named the child Ichabod, saying: 'The glory is departed from Israel'; because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father-in-law and her husband.
4.22 כב  וַתֹּאמֶר, גָּלָה כָבוֹד מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי נִלְקַח, אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים.  {פ}    22 And she said: 'The glory is departed from Israel; for the ark of God is taken.' {P}
5.1 א  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, לָקְחוּ, אֵת, אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיְבִאֻהוּ מֵאֶבֶן הָעֵזֶר, אַשְׁדּוֹדָה.    1 Now the Philistines had taken the ark of God, and they brought it from Eben-ezer unto Ashdod.
5.2 ב  וַיִּקְחוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיָּבִאוּ אֹתוֹ בֵּית דָּגוֹן; וַיַּצִּיגוּ אֹתוֹ, אֵצֶל דָּגוֹן.    2 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.
5.3 ג  וַיַּשְׁכִּמוּ אַשְׁדּוֹדִים, מִמָּחֳרָת, וְהִנֵּה דָגוֹן נֹפֵל לְפָנָיו אַרְצָה, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה; וַיִּקְחוּ, אֶת-דָּגוֹן, וַיָּשִׁבוּ אֹתוֹ, לִמְקוֹמוֹ.    3 And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.
5.4 ד  וַיַּשְׁכִּמוּ בַבֹּקֶר, מִמָּחֳרָת, וְהִנֵּה דָגוֹן נֹפֵל לְפָנָיו אַרְצָה, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה; וְרֹאשׁ דָּגוֹן וּשְׁתֵּי כַּפּוֹת יָדָיו, כְּרֻתוֹת אֶל-הַמִּפְתָּן--רַק דָּגוֹן, נִשְׁאַר עָלָיו.    4 And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands lay cut off upon the threshold; only the trunk of Dagon was left to him.
5.5 ה  עַל-כֵּן לֹא-יִדְרְכוּ כֹהֲנֵי דָגוֹן וְכָל-הַבָּאִים בֵּית-דָּגוֹן, עַל-מִפְתַּן דָּגוֹן--בְּאַשְׁדּוֹד:  עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    5 Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day. {P}
5.6 ו  וַתִּכְבַּד יַד-יְהוָה אֶל-הָאַשְׁדּוֹדִים, וַיְשִׁמֵּם; וַיַּךְ אֹתָם בעפלים (בַּטְּחֹרִים), אֶת-אַשְׁדּוֹד וְאֶת-גְּבוּלֶיהָ.    6 But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and He destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the borders thereof.
5.7 ז  וַיִּרְאוּ אַנְשֵׁי-אַשְׁדּוֹד, כִּי-כֵן; וְאָמְרוּ, לֹא-יֵשֵׁב אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמָּנוּ--כִּי-קָשְׁתָה יָדוֹ עָלֵינוּ, וְעַל דָּגוֹן אֱלֹהֵינוּ.    7 And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said: 'The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us; for His hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god.'
5.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ וַיַּאַסְפוּ אֶת-כָּל-סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים אֲלֵיהֶם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה לַאֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, גַּת יִסֹּב אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּסֵּבּוּ, אֶת-אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    8 They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said: 'What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?' And they answered: 'Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about unto Gath.' And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about thither. {S}
5.9 ט  וַיְהִי אַחֲרֵי הֵסַבּוּ אֹתוֹ, וַתְּהִי יַד-יְהוָה בָּעִיר מְהוּמָה גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד, וַיַּךְ אֶת-אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, מִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל; וַיִּשָּׂתְרוּ לָהֶם, עפלים (טְחֹרִים).    9 And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of the LORD was against the city with a very great discomfiture; and He smote the men of the city, both small and great, and emerods broke out upon them.
5.10 י  וַיְשַׁלְּחוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, עֶקְרוֹן; וַיְהִי, כְּבוֹא אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים עֶקְרוֹן, וַיִּזְעֲקוּ הָעֶקְרֹנִים לֵאמֹר הֵסַבּוּ אֵלַי אֶת-אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַהֲמִיתֵנִי וְאֶת-עַמִּי.    10 So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying: 'They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our people.'
5.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ וַיַּאַסְפוּ אֶת-כָּל-סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֹּאמְרוּ שַׁלְּחוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וְיָשֹׁב לִמְקוֹמוֹ, וְלֹא-יָמִית אֹתִי, וְאֶת-עַמִּי:  כִּי-הָיְתָה מְהוּמַת-מָוֶת בְּכָל-הָעִיר, כָּבְדָה מְאֹד יַד הָאֱלֹהִים שָׁם.    11 They sent therefore and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and they said: 'Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go back to its own place, that it slay us not, and our people'; for there was a deadly discomfiture throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.
5.12 יב  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מֵתוּ, הֻכּוּ בעפלים (בַּטְּחֹרִים); וַתַּעַל שַׁוְעַת הָעִיר, הַשָּׁמָיִם.  {ס}    12 And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods; and the cry of the city went up to heaven. {S}
6.1 א  וַיְהִי אֲרוֹן-יְהוָה בִּשְׂדֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, שִׁבְעָה חֳדָשִׁים.    1 And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven months.
6.2 ב  וַיִּקְרְאוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַקֹּסְמִים לֵאמֹר, מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה, לַאֲרוֹן יְהוָה:  הוֹדִעֻנוּ, בַּמֶּה נְשַׁלְּחֶנּוּ לִמְקוֹמוֹ.  {ס}    2 And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying: 'What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? declare unto us wherewith we shall send it to its place.' {S}
6.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אִם-מְשַׁלְּחִים אֶת-אֲרוֹן אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אַל-תְּשַׁלְּחוּ אֹתוֹ רֵיקָם--כִּי-הָשֵׁב תָּשִׁיבוּ לוֹ, אָשָׁם; אָז תֵּרָפְאוּ וְנוֹדַע לָכֶם, לָמָּה לֹא-תָסוּר יָדוֹ מִכֶּם.    3 And they said: 'If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return Him a guilt-offering; then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why His hand is not removed from you.'
6.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מָה הָאָשָׁם אֲשֶׁר נָשִׁיב לוֹ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ מִסְפַּר סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, חֲמִשָּׁה עפלי (טְחֹרֵי) זָהָב וַחֲמִשָּׁה עַכְבְּרֵי זָהָב:  כִּי-מַגֵּפָה אַחַת לְכֻלָּם, וּלְסַרְנֵיכֶם.    4 Then said they: 'What shall be the guilt-offering which we shall return to Him?' And they said: 'Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines; for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.
6.5 ה  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם צַלְמֵי עפליכם (טְחֹרֵיכֶם) וְצַלְמֵי עַכְבְּרֵיכֶם, הַמַּשְׁחִיתִם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וּנְתַתֶּם לֵאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כָּבוֹד; אוּלַי, יָקֵל אֶת-יָדוֹ מֵעֲלֵיכֶם, וּמֵעַל אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וּמֵעַל אַרְצְכֶם.    5 Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel; peradventure He will lighten His hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.
6.6 ו  וְלָמָּה תְכַבְּדוּ אֶת-לְבַבְכֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר כִּבְּדוּ מִצְרַיִם וּפַרְעֹה אֶת-לִבָּם:  הֲלוֹא כַּאֲשֶׁר הִתְעַלֵּל בָּהֶם, וַיְשַׁלְּחוּם וַיֵּלֵכוּ.    6 Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when He had wrought among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?
6.7 ז  וְעַתָּה, קְחוּ וַעֲשׂוּ עֲגָלָה חֲדָשָׁה אֶחָת, וּשְׁתֵּי פָרוֹת עָלוֹת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָלָה עֲלֵיהֶם עֹל; וַאֲסַרְתֶּם אֶת-הַפָּרוֹת בָּעֲגָלָה, וַהֲשֵׁיבֹתֶם בְּנֵיהֶם מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם הַבָּיְתָה.    7 Now therefore take and prepare you a new cart, and two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them.
6.8 ח  וּלְקַחְתֶּם אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, וּנְתַתֶּם אֹתוֹ אֶל-הָעֲגָלָה, וְאֵת כְּלֵי הַזָּהָב אֲשֶׁר הֲשֵׁבֹתֶם לוֹ אָשָׁם, תָּשִׂימוּ בָאַרְגַּז מִצִּדּוֹ; וְשִׁלַּחְתֶּם אֹתוֹ, וְהָלָךְ.    8 And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return Him for a guilt-offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go.
6.9 ט  וּרְאִיתֶם, אִם-דֶּרֶךְ גְּבוּלוֹ יַעֲלֶה בֵּית שֶׁמֶשׁ--הוּא עָשָׂה לָנוּ, אֶת-הָרָעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת; וְאִם-לֹא, וְיָדַעְנוּ כִּי לֹא יָדוֹ נָגְעָה בָּנוּ--מִקְרֶה הוּא, הָיָה לָנוּ.    9 And see, if it goeth up by the way of its own border to Beth-shemesh, then He hath done us this great evil; but if not, then we shall know that it is not His hand that smote us; it was a chance that happened to us.'
6.10 י  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, כֵּן, וַיִּקְחוּ שְׁתֵּי פָרוֹת עָלוֹת, וַיַּאַסְרוּם בָּעֲגָלָה; וְאֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם, כָּלוּ בַבָּיִת.    10 And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home.
6.11 יא  וַיָּשִׂמוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, אֶל-הָעֲגָלָה; וְאֵת הָאַרְגַּז, וְאֵת עַכְבְּרֵי הַזָּהָב, וְאֵת, צַלְמֵי טְחֹרֵיהֶם.    11 And they put the ark of the LORD upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.
6.12 יב  וַיִּשַּׁרְנָה הַפָּרוֹת בַּדֶּרֶךְ, עַל-דֶּרֶךְ בֵּית שֶׁמֶשׁ, בִּמְסִלָּה אַחַת הָלְכוּ הָלֹךְ וְגָעוֹ, וְלֹא-סָרוּ יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול; וְסַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים הֹלְכִים אַחֲרֵיהֶם, עַד-גְּבוּל בֵּית שָׁמֶשׁ.    12 And the kine took the straight way by the way to Beth-shemesh; they went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of Beth-shemesh.
6.13 יג  וּבֵית שֶׁמֶשׁ, קֹצְרִים קְצִיר-חִטִּים בָּעֵמֶק; וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-עֵינֵיהֶם, וַיִּרְאוּ אֶת-הָאָרוֹן, וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ, לִרְאוֹת.    13 And they of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley; and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.
6.14 יד  וְהָעֲגָלָה בָּאָה אֶל-שְׂדֵה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֵּית-הַשִּׁמְשִׁי, וַתַּעֲמֹד שָׁם, וְשָׁם, אֶבֶן גְּדוֹלָה; וַיְבַקְּעוּ, אֶת-עֲצֵי הָעֲגָלָה, וְאֶת-הַפָּרוֹת, הֶעֱלוּ עֹלָה לַיהוָה.  {ס}    14 And the cart came into the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite, and stood there, where there was a great stone; and they cleaved the wood of the cart, and offered up the kine for a burnt-offering unto the LORD. {S}
6.15 טו  וְהַלְוִיִּם הוֹרִידוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, וְאֶת-הָאַרְגַּז אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ כְלֵי-זָהָב, וַיָּשִׂמוּ, אֶל-הָאֶבֶן הַגְּדוֹלָה; וְאַנְשֵׁי בֵית-שֶׁמֶשׁ, הֶעֱלוּ עֹלוֹת וַיִּזְבְּחוּ זְבָחִים בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--לַיהוָה.    15 And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD, and the coffer that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone; and the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt-offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD.
6.16 טז  וַחֲמִשָּׁה סַרְנֵי-פְלִשְׁתִּים, רָאוּ; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ עֶקְרוֹן, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.  {ס}    16 And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day. {S}
6.17 יז  וְאֵלֶּה טְחֹרֵי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר הֵשִׁיבוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים  {ר}  אָשָׁם לַיהוָה:  {ס}  לְאַשְׁדּוֹד אֶחָד  {ס}  לְעַזָּה  {ר}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  לְאַשְׁקְלוֹן אֶחָד,  {ס}  לְגַת  {ר}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  לְעֶקְרוֹן אֶחָד.  {ס}    17 And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for a guilt-offering unto the LORD: for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;
6.18 יח  וְעַכְבְּרֵי  {ר}  הַזָּהָב, מִסְפַּר כָּל-עָרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים לַחֲמֵשֶׁת הַסְּרָנִים--מֵעִיר מִבְצָר, וְעַד כֹּפֶר הַפְּרָזִי; וְעַד אָבֵל הַגְּדוֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר הִנִּיחוּ עָלֶיהָ אֵת אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, בִּשְׂדֵה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בֵּית הַשִּׁמְשִׁי.    18 and the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fortified cities and of country villages, even unto Abel by the great stone, whereon they set down the ark of the LORD, which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite.
6.19 יט  וַיַּךְ בְּאַנְשֵׁי בֵית-שֶׁמֶשׁ, כִּי רָאוּ בַּאֲרוֹן יְהוָה, וַיַּךְ בָּעָם שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ, חֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף אִישׁ; וַיִּתְאַבְּלוּ הָעָם, כִּי-הִכָּה יְהוָה בָּעָם מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה.    19 And He smote of the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had gazed upon the ark of the LORD, even He smote of the people seventy men, and fifty thousand men; and the people mourned, because the LORD had smitten the people with a great slaughter.
6.20 כ  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אַנְשֵׁי בֵית-שֶׁמֶשׁ, מִי יוּכַל לַעֲמֹד, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ הַזֶּה; וְאֶל-מִי, יַעֲלֶה מֵעָלֵינוּ.    20 And the men of Beth-shemesh said: 'Who is able to stand before the LORD, this holy God? and to whom shall it go up from us?'
6.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ, מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-יוֹשְׁבֵי קִרְיַת-יְעָרִים, לֵאמֹר:  הֵשִׁבוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה--רְדוּ, הַעֲלוּ אֹתוֹ אֲלֵיכֶם.    21 And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim, saying: 'The Philistines have brought back the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and fetch it up to you.'
7.1 א  וַיָּבֹאוּ אַנְשֵׁי קִרְיַת יְעָרִים, וַיַּעֲלוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, וַיָּבִאוּ אֹתוֹ, אֶל-בֵּית אֲבִינָדָב בַּגִּבְעָה; וְאֶת-אֶלְעָזָר בְּנוֹ קִדְּשׁוּ, לִשְׁמֹר אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה.  {פ}    1 And the men of Kiriath-jearim came, and fetched up the ark of the LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the LORD. {P}
7.2 ב  וַיְהִי, מִיּוֹם שֶׁבֶת הָאָרוֹן בְּקִרְיַת יְעָרִים, וַיִּרְבּוּ הַיָּמִים, וַיִּהְיוּ עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה; וַיִּנָּהוּ כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}    2 And it came to pass, from the day that the ark abode in Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years; and all the house of Israel yearned after the LORD. {S}
7.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר, אִם-בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם אַתֶּם שָׁבִים אֶל-יְהוָה, הָסִירוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הַנֵּכָר מִתּוֹכְכֶם וְהָעַשְׁתָּרוֹת; וְהָכִינוּ לְבַבְכֶם אֶל-יְהוָה וְעִבְדֻהוּ לְבַדּוֹ, וְיַצֵּל אֶתְכֶם מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    3 And Samuel spoke unto all the house of Israel, saying: 'If ye do return unto the LORD with all your heart, then put away the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you, and direct your hearts unto the LORD, and serve Him only; and He will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.'
7.4 ד  וַיָּסִירוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַבְּעָלִים וְאֶת-הָעַשְׁתָּרֹת; וַיַּעַבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, לְבַדּוֹ.  {פ}    4 Then the children of Israel did put away the Baalim and the Ashtaroth, and served the LORD only. {P}
7.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, קִבְצוּ אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמִּצְפָּתָה; וְאֶתְפַּלֵּל בַּעַדְכֶם, אֶל-יְהוָה.    5 And Samuel said: 'Gather all Israel to Mizpah, and I will pray for you unto the LORD.'
7.6 ו  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ הַמִּצְפָּתָה וַיִּשְׁאֲבוּ-מַיִם וַיִּשְׁפְּכוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיָּצוּמוּ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וַיֹּאמְרוּ שָׁם, חָטָאנוּ לַיהוָה; וַיִּשְׁפֹּט שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּמִּצְפָּה.    6 And they gathered together to Mizpah, and drew water, and poured it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there: 'We have sinned against the LORD.' And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpah.
7.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, כִּי-הִתְקַבְּצוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמִּצְפָּתָה, וַיַּעֲלוּ סַרְנֵי-פְלִשְׁתִּים, אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּרְאוּ מִפְּנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים.    7 And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines.
7.8 ח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, אַל-תַּחֲרֵשׁ מִמֶּנּוּ, מִזְּעֹק אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וְיֹשִׁעֵנוּ, מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    8 And the children of Israel said to Samuel: 'Cease not to cry unto the LORD our God for us, that He save us out of the hand of the Philistines.'
7.9 ט  וַיִּקַּח שְׁמוּאֵל, טְלֵה חָלָב אֶחָד, ויעלה (וַיַּעֲלֵהוּ) עוֹלָה כָּלִיל, לַיהוָה; וַיִּזְעַק שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-יְהוָה בְּעַד יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעֲנֵהוּ יְהוָה.    9 And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a whole burnt-offering unto the LORD; and Samuel cried unto the LORD for Israel; and the LORD answered him.
7.10 י  וַיְהִי שְׁמוּאֵל, מַעֲלֶה הָעוֹלָה, וּפְלִשְׁתִּים נִגְּשׁוּ, לַמִּלְחָמָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּרְעֵם יְהוָה בְּקוֹל-גָּדוֹל בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא עַל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיְהֻמֵּם, וַיִּנָּגְפוּ, לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    10 And as Samuel was offering up the burnt-offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel; but the LORD thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten down before Israel.
7.11 יא  וַיֵּצְאוּ אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִן-הַמִּצְפָּה, וַיִּרְדְּפוּ, אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּכּוּם, עַד-מִתַּחַת לְבֵית כָּר.    11 And the men of Israel went out of Mizpah, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Beth-car.
7.12 יב  וַיִּקַּח שְׁמוּאֵל אֶבֶן אַחַת, וַיָּשֶׂם בֵּין-הַמִּצְפָּה וּבֵין הַשֵּׁן, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמָהּ, אֶבֶן הָעָזֶר; וַיֹּאמַר, עַד-הֵנָּה עֲזָרָנוּ יְהוָה.    12 Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpah and Shen, and called the name of it Eben-ezer, saying: 'Hitherto hath the LORD helped us.'
7.13 יג  וַיִּכָּנְעוּ, הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְלֹא-יָסְפוּ עוֹד, לָבוֹא בִּגְבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַתְּהִי יַד-יְהוָה בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים, כֹּל יְמֵי שְׁמוּאֵל.    13 So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more within the border of Israel; and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
7.14 יד  וַתָּשֹׁבְנָה הֶעָרִים אֲשֶׁר לָקְחוּ-פְלִשְׁתִּים מֵאֵת יִשְׂרָאֵל לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעֶקְרוֹן וְעַד-גַּת, וְאֶת-גְּבוּלָן, הִצִּיל יִשְׂרָאֵל מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיְהִי שָׁלוֹם, בֵּין יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבֵין הָאֱמֹרִי.    14 And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the border thereof did Israel deliver out of the hand of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.
7.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיָּיו.    15 And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
7.16 טז  וְהָלַךְ, מִדֵּי שָׁנָה בְּשָׁנָה, וְסָבַב בֵּית-אֵל, וְהַגִּלְגָּל וְהַמִּצְפָּה; וְשָׁפַט, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֵת כָּל-הַמְּקוֹמוֹת, הָאֵלֶּה.    16 And he went from year to year in circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged Israel in all those places.
7.17 יז  וּתְשֻׁבָתוֹ הָרָמָתָה כִּי-שָׁם בֵּיתוֹ, וְשָׁם שָׁפָט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּבֶן-שָׁם מִזְבֵּחַ, לַיהוָה.  {פ}    17 And his return was to Ramah, for there was his house; and there he judged Israel; and he built there an altar unto the LORD. {P}
8.1 א  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר זָקֵן שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-בָּנָיו שֹׁפְטִים, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.
8.2 ב  וַיְהִי שֶׁם-בְּנוֹ הַבְּכוֹר יוֹאֵל, וְשֵׁם מִשְׁנֵהוּ אֲבִיָּה--שֹׁפְטִים, בִּבְאֵר שָׁבַע.    2 Now the name of his first-born was Joel; and the name of his second, Abijah; they were judges in Beer-sheba.
8.3 ג  וְלֹא-הָלְכוּ בָנָיו בִּדְרָכָו, וַיִּטּוּ אַחֲרֵי הַבָּצַע; וַיִּקְחוּ-שֹׁחַד--וַיַּטּוּ, מִשְׁפָּט.  {פ}    3 And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted justice. {P}
8.4 ד  וַיִּתְקַבְּצוּ, כֹּל זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, הָרָמָתָה.    4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah.
8.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, הִנֵּה אַתָּה זָקַנְתָּ, וּבָנֶיךָ, לֹא הָלְכוּ בִּדְרָכֶיךָ; עַתָּה, שִׂימָה-לָּנוּ מֶלֶךְ לְשָׁפְטֵנוּ--כְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם.    5 And they said unto him: 'Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways; now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.'
8.6 ו  וַיֵּרַע הַדָּבָר, בְּעֵינֵי שְׁמוּאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר אָמְרוּ, תְּנָה-לָּנוּ מֶלֶךְ לְשָׁפְטֵנוּ; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה.  {פ}    6 But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said: 'Give us a king to judge us.' And Samuel prayed unto the LORD. {P}
8.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, שְׁמַע בְּקוֹל הָעָם, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יֹאמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ:  כִּי לֹא אֹתְךָ מָאָסוּ, כִּי-אֹתִי מָאֲסוּ מִמְּלֹךְ עֲלֵיהֶם.    7 And the LORD said unto Samuel: 'Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected Me, that I should not be king over them.
8.8 ח  כְּכָל-הַמַּעֲשִׂים אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ, מִיּוֹם הַעֲלֹתִי אוֹתָם מִמִּצְרַיִם וְעַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וַיַּעַזְבֻנִי, וַיַּעַבְדוּ אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--כֵּן הֵמָּה עֹשִׂים, גַּם-לָךְ.    8 According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, in that they have forsaken Me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.
8.9 ט  וְעַתָּה, שְׁמַע בְּקוֹלָם:  אַךְ, כִּי-הָעֵד תָּעִיד בָּהֶם, וְהִגַּדְתָּ לָהֶם, מִשְׁפַּט הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר יִמְלֹךְ עֲלֵיהֶם.  {ס}    9 Now therefore hearken unto their voice; howbeit thou shalt earnestly forewarn them, and shalt declare unto them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.' {S}
8.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה, אֶל-הָעָם, הַשֹּׁאֲלִים מֵאִתּוֹ מֶלֶךְ.  {ס}    10 And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king. {S}
8.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר--זֶה יִהְיֶה מִשְׁפַּט הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר יִמְלֹךְ עֲלֵיכֶם:  אֶת-בְּנֵיכֶם יִקָּח, וְשָׂם לוֹ בְּמֶרְכַּבְתּוֹ וּבְפָרָשָׁיו, וְרָצוּ, לִפְנֵי מֶרְכַּבְתּוֹ.    11 And he said: 'This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them unto him, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and they shall run before his chariots.
8.12 יב  וְלָשׂוּם לוֹ, שָׂרֵי אֲלָפִים וְשָׂרֵי חֲמִשִּׁים; וְלַחֲרֹשׁ חֲרִישׁוֹ וְלִקְצֹר קְצִירוֹ, וְלַעֲשׂוֹת כְּלֵי-מִלְחַמְתּוֹ וּכְלֵי רִכְבּוֹ.    12 And he will appoint them unto him for captains of thousands, and captains of fifties; and to plow his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and the instruments of his chariots.
8.13 יג  וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיכֶם, יִקָּח, לְרַקָּחוֹת וּלְטַבָּחוֹת, וּלְאֹפוֹת.    13 And he will take your daughters to be perfumers, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.
8.14 יד  וְאֶת-שְׂדוֹתֵיכֶם וְאֶת-כַּרְמֵיכֶם וְזֵיתֵיכֶם, הַטּוֹבִים--יִקָּח; וְנָתַן, לַעֲבָדָיו.    14 And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.
8.15 טו  וְזַרְעֵיכֶם וְכַרְמֵיכֶם, יַעְשֹׂר; וְנָתַן לְסָרִיסָיו, וְלַעֲבָדָיו.    15 And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.
8.16 טז  וְאֶת-עַבְדֵיכֶם וְאֶת-שִׁפְחוֹתֵיכֶם וְאֶת-בַּחוּרֵיכֶם הַטּוֹבִים, וְאֶת-חֲמוֹרֵיכֶם--יִקָּח; וְעָשָׂה, לִמְלַאכְתּוֹ.    16 And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.
8.17 יז  צֹאנְכֶם, יַעְשֹׂר; וְאַתֶּם, תִּהְיוּ-לוֹ לַעֲבָדִים.    17 He will take the tenth of your flocks; and ye shall be his servants.
8.18 יח  וּזְעַקְתֶּם, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, מִלִּפְנֵי מַלְכְּכֶם, אֲשֶׁר בְּחַרְתֶּם לָכֶם; וְלֹא-יַעֲנֶה יְהוָה אֶתְכֶם, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.    18 And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king whom ye shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not answer you in that day.'
8.19 יט  וַיְמָאֲנוּ הָעָם, לִשְׁמֹעַ בְּקוֹל שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לֹּא, כִּי אִם-מֶלֶךְ יִהְיֶה עָלֵינוּ.    19 But the people refused to hearken unto the voice of Samuel; and they said: 'Nay; but there shall be a king over us;
8.20 כ  וְהָיִינוּ גַם-אֲנַחְנוּ, כְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם; וּשְׁפָטָנוּ מַלְכֵּנוּ וְיָצָא לְפָנֵינוּ, וְנִלְחַם אֶת-מִלְחֲמֹתֵנוּ.    20 that we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.'
8.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁמַע שְׁמוּאֵל, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הָעָם; וַיְדַבְּרֵם, בְּאָזְנֵי יְהוָה.  {פ}    21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he spoke them in the ears of the LORD. {P}
8.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל שְׁמַע בְּקוֹלָם, וְהִמְלַכְתָּ לָהֶם מֶלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְכוּ אִישׁ לְעִירוֹ.  {פ}    22 And the LORD said to Samuel: 'Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king.' And Samuel said unto the men of Israel: 'Go ye every man unto his city.' {P}
9.1 א  וַיְהִי-אִישׁ מבן ימין (מִבִּנְיָמִין), וּשְׁמוֹ קִישׁ בֶּן-אֲבִיאֵל בֶּן-צְרוֹר בֶּן-בְּכוֹרַת בֶּן-אֲפִיחַ--בֶּן-אִישׁ יְמִינִי:  גִּבּוֹר, חָיִל.    1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, the son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of valour.
9.2 ב  וְלוֹ-הָיָה בֵן וּשְׁמוֹ שָׁאוּל, בָּחוּר וָטוֹב, וְאֵין אִישׁ מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, טוֹב מִמֶּנּוּ; מִשִּׁכְמוֹ וָמַעְלָה, גָּבֹהַּ מִכָּל-הָעָם.    2 And he had a son, whose name was Saul, young and goodly, and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people.
9.3 ג  וַתֹּאבַדְנָה, הָאֲתֹנוֹת, לְקִישׁ, אֲבִי שָׁאוּל; וַיֹּאמֶר קִישׁ אֶל-שָׁאוּל בְּנוֹ, קַח-נָא אִתְּךָ אֶת-אַחַד מֵהַנְּעָרִים, וְקוּם לֵךְ, בַּקֵּשׁ אֶת-הָאֲתֹנֹת.    3 Now the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son: 'Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses.'
9.4 ד  וַיַּעֲבֹר בְּהַר-אֶפְרַיִם וַיַּעֲבֹר בְּאֶרֶץ-שָׁלִשָׁה, וְלֹא מָצָאוּ; וַיַּעַבְרוּ בְאֶרֶץ-שַׁעֲלִים וָאַיִן, וַיַּעֲבֹר בְּאֶרֶץ-יְמִינִי וְלֹא מָצָאוּ.    4 And he passed through the hill-country of Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalishah, but they found them not; then they passed through the land of Shaalim, and there they were not; and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.
9.5 ה  הֵמָּה, בָּאוּ בְּאֶרֶץ צוּף, וְשָׁאוּל אָמַר לְנַעֲרוֹ אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ, לְכָה וְנָשׁוּבָה--פֶּן-יֶחְדַּל אָבִי מִן-הָאֲתֹנוֹת, וְדָאַג לָנוּ.    5 When they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him: 'Come and let us return; lest my father leave caring for the asses, and become anxious concerning us.'
9.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, הִנֵּה-נָא אִישׁ-אֱלֹהִים בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְהָאִישׁ נִכְבָּד, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יְדַבֵּר בּוֹא יָבוֹא; עַתָּה, נֵלְכָה שָּׁם--אוּלַי יַגִּיד לָנוּ, אֶת-דַּרְכֵּנוּ אֲשֶׁר-הָלַכְנוּ עָלֶיהָ.    6 And he said unto him: 'Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is a man that is held in honour; all that he saith cometh surely to pass; now let us go thither; peradventure he can tell us concerning our journey whereon we go.'
9.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל לְנַעֲרוֹ, וְהִנֵּה נֵלֵךְ וּמַה-נָּבִיא לָאִישׁ--כִּי הַלֶּחֶם אָזַל מִכֵּלֵינוּ, וּתְשׁוּרָה אֵין-לְהָבִיא לְאִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים:  מָה, אִתָּנוּ.    7 Then said Saul to his servant: 'But, behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God; what have we?'
9.8 ח  וַיֹּסֶף הַנַּעַר, לַעֲנוֹת אֶת-שָׁאוּל, וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה נִמְצָא בְיָדִי רֶבַע שֶׁקֶל כָּסֶף; וְנָתַתִּי לְאִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וְהִגִּיד לָנוּ אֶת-דַּרְכֵּנוּ.    8 And the servant answered Saul again, and said: 'Behold, I have in my hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver, that will I give to the man of God, to tell us our way.'--
9.9 ט  לְפָנִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה-אָמַר הָאִישׁ בְּלֶכְתּוֹ לִדְרוֹשׁ אֱלֹהִים, לְכוּ וְנֵלְכָה, עַד-הָרֹאֶה:  כִּי לַנָּבִיא הַיּוֹם, יִקָּרֵא לְפָנִים הָרֹאֶה.    9 Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, thus he said: 'Come and let us go to the seer'; for he that is now called a prophet was beforetime called a seer.--
9.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל לְנַעֲרוֹ טוֹב דְּבָרְךָ, לְכָה נֵלֵכָה; וַיֵּלְכוּ, אֶל-הָעִיר, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים.    10 Then said Saul to his servant: 'Well said; come, let us go.' So they went unto the city where the man of God was.
9.11 יא  הֵמָּה, עֹלִים בְּמַעֲלֵה הָעִיר, וְהֵמָּה מָצְאוּ נְעָרוֹת, יֹצְאוֹת לִשְׁאֹב מָיִם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָהֶן, הֲיֵשׁ בָּזֶה הָרֹאֶה.    11 As they went up the ascent to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them: 'Is the seer here?'
9.12 יב  וַתַּעֲנֶינָה אוֹתָם וַתֹּאמַרְנָה יֵּשׁ, הִנֵּה לְפָנֶיךָ; מַהֵר עַתָּה, כִּי הַיּוֹם בָּא לָעִיר--כִּי זֶבַח הַיּוֹם לָעָם, בַּבָּמָה.    12 And they answered them, and said: 'He is; behold, he is before thee; make haste now, for he is come to-day into the city; for the people have a sacrifice to-day in the high place.
9.13 יג  כְּבֹאֲכֶם הָעִיר כֵּן תִּמְצְאוּן אֹתוֹ בְּטֶרֶם יַעֲלֶה הַבָּמָתָה לֶאֱכֹל, כִּי לֹא-יֹאכַל הָעָם עַד-בֹּאוֹ--כִּי-הוּא יְבָרֵךְ הַזֶּבַח, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן יֹאכְלוּ הַקְּרֻאִים; וְעַתָּה עֲלוּ, כִּי-אֹתוֹ כְהַיּוֹם תִּמְצְאוּן אֹתוֹ.    13 As soon as ye are come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up to the high place to eat; for the people will not eat until he come, because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that are bidden. Now therefore get you up; for at this time ye shall find him.'
9.14 יד  וַיַּעֲלוּ, הָעִיר; הֵמָּה, בָּאִים בְּתוֹךְ הָעִיר, וְהִנֵּה שְׁמוּאֵל יֹצֵא לִקְרָאתָם, לַעֲלוֹת הַבָּמָה.  {ס}    14 And they went up to the city; and as they came within the city, behold, Samuel came out toward them, to go up to the high place. {S}
9.15 טו  וַיהוָה, גָּלָה אֶת-אֹזֶן שְׁמוּאֵל, יוֹם אֶחָד, לִפְנֵי בוֹא-שָׁאוּל לֵאמֹר.    15 Now the LORD had revealed unto Samuel a day before Saul came, saying:
9.16 טז  כָּעֵת מָחָר אֶשְׁלַח אֵלֶיךָ אִישׁ מֵאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן, וּמְשַׁחְתּוֹ לְנָגִיד עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-עַמִּי, מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים:  כִּי רָאִיתִי אֶת-עַמִּי, כִּי בָּאָה צַעֲקָתוֹ אֵלָי.    16 'To-morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be prince over My people Israel, and he shall save My people out of the hand of the Philistines; for I have looked upon My people, because their cry is come unto Me.'
9.17 יז  וּשְׁמוּאֵל, רָאָה אֶת-שָׁאוּל; וַיהוָה עָנָהוּ--הִנֵּה הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ, זֶה יַעְצֹר בְּעַמִּי.    17 And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD spoke unto him: 'Behold the man of whom I said unto thee: This same shall have authority over My people.'
9.18 יח  וַיִּגַּשׁ שָׁאוּל אֶת-שְׁמוּאֵל, בְּתוֹךְ הַשָּׁעַר; וַיֹּאמֶר הַגִּידָה-נָּא לִי, אֵי-זֶה בֵּית הָרֹאֶה.    18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said: 'Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.'
9.19 יט  וַיַּעַן שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-שָׁאוּל, וַיֹּאמֶר אָנֹכִי הָרֹאֶה--עֲלֵה לְפָנַי הַבָּמָה, וַאֲכַלְתֶּם עִמִּי הַיּוֹם; וְשִׁלַּחְתִּיךָ בַבֹּקֶר, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר בִּלְבָבְךָ אַגִּיד לָךְ.    19 And Samuel answered Saul, and said: 'I am the seer; go up before me unto the high place, for ye shall eat with me to-day; and in the morning I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thy heart.
9.20 כ  וְלָאֲתֹנוֹת הָאֹבְדוֹת לְךָ, הַיּוֹם שְׁלֹשֶׁת הַיָּמִים--אַל-תָּשֶׂם אֶת-לִבְּךָ לָהֶם, כִּי נִמְצָאוּ; וּלְמִי, כָּל-חֶמְדַּת יִשְׂרָאֵל--הֲלוֹא לְךָ, וּלְכֹל בֵּית אָבִיךָ.  {ס}    20 And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?' {S}
9.21 כא  וַיַּעַן שָׁאוּל וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲלוֹא בֶן-יְמִינִי אָנֹכִי מִקַּטַנֵּי שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִשְׁפַּחְתִּי הַצְּעִרָה, מִכָּל-מִשְׁפְּחוֹת שִׁבְטֵי בִנְיָמִן; וְלָמָּה דִּבַּרְתָּ אֵלַי, כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.  {ס}    21 And Saul answered and said: 'Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou to me after this manner?' {S}
9.22 כב  וַיִּקַּח שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-שָׁאוּל וְאֶת-נַעֲרוֹ, וַיְבִיאֵם לִשְׁכָּתָה; וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם מָקוֹם בְּרֹאשׁ הַקְּרוּאִים, וְהֵמָּה כִּשְׁלֹשִׁם אִישׁ.    22 And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the chamber, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, who were about thirty persons.
9.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, לַטַּבָּח, תְּנָה אֶת-הַמָּנָה, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָךְ--אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ, שִׂים אֹתָהּ עִמָּךְ.    23 And Samuel said unto the cook: 'Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee: Set it by thee.'
9.24 כד  וַיָּרֶם הַטַּבָּח אֶת-הַשּׁוֹק וְהֶעָלֶיהָ וַיָּשֶׂם לִפְנֵי שָׁאוּל, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה הַנִּשְׁאָר שִׂים-לְפָנֶיךָ אֱכֹל--כִּי לַמּוֹעֵד שָׁמוּר-לְךָ לֵאמֹר, הָעָם קָרָאתִי; וַיֹּאכַל שָׁאוּל עִם-שְׁמוּאֵל, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.    24 And the cook took up the thigh, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And [Samuel] said: 'Behold that which hath been reserved! set it before thee and eat; because unto the appointed time hath it been kept for thee, for I said: I have invited the people.' So Saul did eat with Samuel that day.
9.25 כה  וַיֵּרְדוּ מֵהַבָּמָה, הָעִיר; וַיְדַבֵּר עִם-שָׁאוּל, עַל-הַגָּג.    25 And when they were come down from the high place into the city, he spoke with Saul upon the housetop.
9.26 כו  וַיַּשְׁכִּמוּ, וַיְהִי כַּעֲלוֹת הַשַּׁחַר וַיִּקְרָא שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-שָׁאוּל הגג (הַגָּגָה) לֵאמֹר, קוּמָה, וַאֲשַׁלְּחֶךָּ; וַיָּקָם שָׁאוּל, וַיֵּצְאוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם הוּא וּשְׁמוּאֵל--הַחוּצָה.    26 And they arose early; and it came to pass about the break of day, that Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, saying: 'Up, that I may send thee away.' And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.
9.27 כז  הֵמָּה, יוֹרְדִים בִּקְצֵה הָעִיר, וּשְׁמוּאֵל אָמַר אֶל-שָׁאוּל אֱמֹר לַנַּעַר וְיַעֲבֹר לְפָנֵינוּ, וַיַּעֲבֹר; וְאַתָּה עֲמֹד כַּיּוֹם, וְאַשְׁמִיעֲךָ אֶת-דְּבַר אֱלֹהִים.  {פ}    27 As they were going down at the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul: 'Bid the servant pass on before us--and he passed on--but stand thou still at this time, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God.' {P}
10.1 א  וַיִּקַּח שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-פַּךְ הַשֶּׁמֶן, וַיִּצֹק עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ--וַיִּשָּׁקֵהוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר--הֲלוֹא כִּי-מְשָׁחֲךָ יְהוָה עַל-נַחֲלָתוֹ, לְנָגִיד.    1 Then Samuel took the vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said: 'Is it not that the LORD hath anointed thee to be prince over His inheritance?
10.2 ב  בְּלֶכְתְּךָ הַיּוֹם, מֵעִמָּדִי, וּמָצָאתָ שְׁנֵי אֲנָשִׁים עִם-קְבֻרַת רָחֵל בִּגְבוּל בִּנְיָמִן, בְּצֶלְצַח; וְאָמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ, נִמְצְאוּ הָאֲתֹנוֹת אֲשֶׁר הָלַכְתָּ לְבַקֵּשׁ, וְהִנֵּה נָטַשׁ אָבִיךָ אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הָאֲתֹנוֹת, וְדָאַג לָכֶם לֵאמֹר מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה לִבְנִי.    2 When thou art departed from me to-day, then thou shalt find two men by the tomb of Rachel, in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee: The asses which thou wentest to seek are found; and, lo, thy father hath left off caring for the asses, and is anxious concerning you, saying: What shall I do for my son?
10.3 ג  וְחָלַפְתָּ מִשָּׁם וָהָלְאָה, וּבָאתָ עַד-אֵלוֹן תָּבוֹר, וּמְצָאוּךָ שָּׁם שְׁלֹשָׁה אֲנָשִׁים, עֹלִים אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים בֵּית-אֵל; אֶחָד נֹשֵׂא שְׁלֹשָׁה גְדָיִים, וְאֶחָד נֹשֵׂא שְׁלֹשֶׁת כִּכְּרוֹת לֶחֶם, וְאֶחָד, נֹשֵׂא נֵבֶל-יָיִן.    3 Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the terebinth of Tabor, and there shall meet thee there three men going up to God to Beth-el, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine.
10.4 ד  וְשָׁאֲלוּ לְךָ, לְשָׁלוֹם; וְנָתְנוּ לְךָ שְׁתֵּי-לֶחֶם, וְלָקַחְתָּ מִיָּדָם.    4 And they will salute thee, and give thee two cakes of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hand.
10.5 ה  אַחַר כֵּן, תָּבוֹא גִּבְעַת הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם, נְצִבֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; וִיהִי כְבֹאֲךָ שָׁם הָעִיר, וּפָגַעְתָּ חֶבֶל נְבִאִים יֹרְדִים מֵהַבָּמָה, וְלִפְנֵיהֶם נֵבֶל וְתֹף וְחָלִיל וְכִנּוֹר, וְהֵמָּה מִתְנַבְּאִים.    5 After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines; and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a band of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a timbrel, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they will be prophesying.
10.6 ו  וְצָלְחָה עָלֶיךָ רוּחַ יְהוָה, וְהִתְנַבִּיתָ עִמָּם; וְנֶהְפַּכְתָּ, לְאִישׁ אַחֵר.    6 And the spirit of the LORD will come mightily upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.
10.7 ז  וְהָיָה, כִּי תבאינה (תָבֹאנָה) הָאֹתוֹת הָאֵלֶּה--לָךְ:  עֲשֵׂה לְךָ אֲשֶׁר תִּמְצָא יָדֶךָ, כִּי הָאֱלֹהִים עִמָּךְ.    7 And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as thy hand shall find; for God is with thee.
10.8 ח  וְיָרַדְתָּ לְפָנַי, הַגִּלְגָּל, וְהִנֵּה אָנֹכִי יֹרֵד אֵלֶיךָ, לְהַעֲלוֹת עֹלוֹת לִזְבֹּחַ זִבְחֵי שְׁלָמִים; שִׁבְעַת יָמִים תּוֹחֵל, עַד-בּוֹאִי אֵלֶיךָ, וְהוֹדַעְתִּי לְךָ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה.    8 And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings; seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come unto thee, and tell thee what thou shalt do.'
10.9 ט  וְהָיָה, כְּהַפְנֹתוֹ שִׁכְמוֹ לָלֶכֶת מֵעִם שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיַּהֲפָךְ-לוֹ אֱלֹהִים, לֵב אַחֵר; וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-הָאֹתוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.  {ס}    9 And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart; and all those signs came to pass that day. {S}
10.10 י  וַיָּבֹאוּ שָׁם הַגִּבְעָתָה, וְהִנֵּה חֶבֶל-נְבִאִים לִקְרָאתוֹ; וַתִּצְלַח עָלָיו רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים, וַיִּתְנַבֵּא בְּתוֹכָם.    10 And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a band of prophets met him; and the spirit of God came mightily upon him, and he prophesied among them.
10.11 יא  וַיְהִי, כָּל-יוֹדְעוֹ מֵאִתְּמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם, וַיִּרְאוּ, וְהִנֵּה עִם-נְבִאִים נִבָּא:  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר הָעָם אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ, מַה-זֶּה הָיָה לְבֶן-קִישׁ--הֲגַם שָׁאוּל, בַּנְּבִיאִים.    11 And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied with the prophets, {S} then the people said one to another: 'What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?'
10.12 יב  וַיַּעַן אִישׁ מִשָּׁם וַיֹּאמֶר, וּמִי אֲבִיהֶם; עַל-כֵּן הָיְתָה לְמָשָׁל, הֲגַם שָׁאוּל בַּנְּבִאִים.    12 And one of the same place answered and said: 'And who is their father?' Therefore it became a proverb: 'Is Saul also among the prophets?'
10.13 יג  וַיְכַל, מֵהִתְנַבּוֹת, וַיָּבֹא, הַבָּמָה.    13 And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.
10.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר דּוֹד שָׁאוּל אֵלָיו וְאֶל-נַעֲרוֹ, אָן הֲלַכְתֶּם; וַיֹּאמֶר, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-הָאֲתֹנוֹת, וַנִּרְאֶה כִי-אַיִן, וַנָּבוֹא אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל.    14 And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant: 'Whither went ye?' And he said: 'To seek the asses; and when we saw that they were not found, we came to Samuel.'
10.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, דּוֹד שָׁאוּל:  הַגִּידָה-נָּא לִי, מָה-אָמַר לָכֶם שְׁמוּאֵל.    15 And Saul's uncle said: 'Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto you.'
10.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, אֶל-דּוֹדוֹ, הַגֵּד הִגִּיד לָנוּ, כִּי נִמְצְאוּ הָאֲתֹנוֹת; וְאֶת-דְּבַר הַמְּלוּכָה לֹא-הִגִּיד לוֹ, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר שְׁמוּאֵל.  {פ}    16 And Saul said unto his uncle: 'He told us plainly that the asses were found.' But concerning the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spoke, he told him not. {P}
10.17 יז  וַיַּצְעֵק שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-הָעָם, אֶל-יְהוָה הַמִּצְפָּה.    17 And Samuel called the people together unto the LORD to Mizpah.
10.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל,  {פ} כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָנֹכִי הֶעֱלֵיתִי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמִּצְרָיִם; וָאַצִּיל אֶתְכֶם, מִיַּד מִצְרַיִם, וּמִיַּד כָּל-הַמַּמְלָכוֹת, הַלֹּחֲצִים אֶתְכֶם.    18 And he said unto the children of Israel: {P} 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you.
10.19 יט  וְאַתֶּם הַיּוֹם מְאַסְתֶּם אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא מוֹשִׁיעַ לָכֶם מִכָּל-רָעוֹתֵיכֶם וְצָרֹתֵיכֶם, וַתֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ, כִּי-מֶלֶךְ תָּשִׂים עָלֵינוּ; וְעַתָּה, הִתְיַצְּבוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְשִׁבְטֵיכֶם, וּלְאַלְפֵיכֶם.    19 But ye have this day rejected your God, who Himself saveth you out of all your calamities and your distresses; and ye have said unto Him: Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and by your thousands.'
10.20 כ  וַיַּקְרֵב שְׁמוּאֵל, אֵת כָּל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּלָּכֵד, שֵׁבֶט בִּנְיָמִן.    20 So Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
10.21 כא  וַיַּקְרֵב אֶת-שֵׁבֶט בִּנְיָמִן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָו, וַתִּלָּכֵד, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַמַּטְרִי; וַיִּלָּכֵד שָׁאוּל בֶּן-קִישׁ, וַיְבַקְשֻׁהוּ וְלֹא נִמְצָא.    21 And he brought the tribe of Benjamin near by their families, and the family of the Matrites was taken; and Saul the son of Kish was taken; but when they sought him, he could not be found.
10.22 כב  וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ-עוֹד, בַּיהוָה, הֲבָא עוֹד, הֲלֹם אִישׁ;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה-הוּא נֶחְבָּא אֶל-הַכֵּלִים.    22 Therefore they asked of the LORD further: 'Is there yet a man come hither?' {S} And the LORD answered: 'Behold, he hath hid himself among the baggage.'
10.23 כג  וַיָּרֻצוּ וַיִּקָּחֻהוּ מִשָּׁם, וַיִּתְיַצֵּב בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם; וַיִּגְבַּהּ, מִכָּל-הָעָם, מִשִּׁכְמוֹ, וָמָעְלָה.    23 And they ran and fetched him thence; and when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward.
10.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, הַרְּאִיתֶם אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר-בּוֹ יְהוָה, כִּי אֵין כָּמֹהוּ, בְּכָל-הָעָם; וַיָּרִעוּ כָל-הָעָם וַיֹּאמְרוּ, יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    24 And Samuel said to all the people: 'See ye him whom the LORD hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?' And all the people shouted, and said: 'Long live the king.' {S}
10.25 כה  וַיְדַבֵּר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-הָעָם, אֵת מִשְׁפַּט הַמְּלֻכָה, וַיִּכְתֹּב בַּסֵּפֶר, וַיַּנַּח לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיְשַׁלַּח שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, אִישׁ לְבֵיתוֹ.    25 Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.
10.26 כו  וְגַם-שָׁאוּל--הָלַךְ לְבֵיתוֹ, גִּבְעָתָה; וַיֵּלְכוּ עִמּוֹ--הַחַיִל, אֲשֶׁר-נָגַע אֱלֹהִים בְּלִבָּם.    26 And Saul also went to his house to Gibeah; and there went with him the men of valour, whose hearts God had touched.
10.27 כז  וּבְנֵי בְלִיַּעַל אָמְרוּ, מַה-יֹּשִׁעֵנוּ זֶה, וַיִּבְזֻהוּ, וְלֹא-הֵבִיאוּ לוֹ מִנְחָה; וַיְהִי, כְּמַחֲרִישׁ.  {פ}    27 But certain base fellows said: 'How shall this man save us?' And they despised him, and brought him no present. But he was as one that held his peace. {P}
11.1 א  וַיַּעַל, נָחָשׁ הָעַמּוֹנִי, וַיִּחַן, עַל-יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד; וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָּל-אַנְשֵׁי יָבֵישׁ, אֶל-נָחָשׁ, כְּרָת-לָנוּ בְרִית, וְנַעַבְדֶךָּ.    1 Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabesh-gilead; and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash: 'Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.'
11.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, נָחָשׁ הָעַמּוֹנִי, בְּזֹאת אֶכְרֹת לָכֶם, בִּנְקוֹר לָכֶם כָּל-עֵין יָמִין; וְשַׂמְתִּיהָ חֶרְפָּה, עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 And Nahash the Ammonite said unto them: 'On this condition will I make it with you, that all your right eyes be put out; and I will lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.'
11.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו זִקְנֵי יָבֵישׁ, הֶרֶף לָנוּ שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וְנִשְׁלְחָה מַלְאָכִים, בְּכֹל גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאִם-אֵין מוֹשִׁיעַ אֹתָנוּ, וְיָצָאנוּ אֵלֶיךָ.    3 And the elders of Jabesh said unto him: 'Give us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers unto all the borders of Israel; and then, if there be none to deliver us, we will come out to thee.'
11.4 ד  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַמַּלְאָכִים גִּבְעַת שָׁאוּל, וַיְדַבְּרוּ הַדְּבָרִים בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם; וַיִּשְׂאוּ כָל-הָעָם אֶת-קוֹלָם, וַיִּבְכּוּ.    4 Then came the messengers to Gibeath-shaul, and spoke these words in the ears of the people; and all the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
11.5 ה  וְהִנֵּה שָׁאוּל, בָּא אַחֲרֵי הַבָּקָר מִן-הַשָּׂדֶה, וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, מַה-לָּעָם כִּי יִבְכּוּ; וַיְסַפְּרוּ-לוֹ--אֶת-דִּבְרֵי, אַנְשֵׁי יָבֵישׁ.    5 And, behold, Saul came following the oxen out of the field; and Saul said: 'What aileth the people that they weep?' And they told him the words of the men of Jabesh.
11.6 ו  וַתִּצְלַח רוּחַ-אֱלֹהִים עַל-שָׁאוּל, בשמעו (כְּשָׁמְעוֹ) אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיִּחַר אַפּוֹ, מְאֹד.    6 And the spirit of God came mightily upon Saul when he heard those words, and his anger was kindled greatly.
11.7 ז  וַיִּקַּח צֶמֶד בָּקָר וַיְנַתְּחֵהוּ, וַיְשַׁלַּח בְּכָל-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּיַד הַמַּלְאָכִים לֵאמֹר, אֲשֶׁר אֵינֶנּוּ יֹצֵא אַחֲרֵי שָׁאוּל וְאַחַר שְׁמוּאֵל, כֹּה יֵעָשֶׂה לִבְקָרוֹ; וַיִּפֹּל פַּחַד-יְהוָה עַל-הָעָם, וַיֵּצְאוּ כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד.    7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the borders of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying: 'Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen.' And the dread of the LORD fell on the people, and they came out as one man.
11.8 ח  וַיִּפְקְדֵם, בְּבָזֶק; וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף, וְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה שְׁלֹשִׁים אָלֶף.    8 And he numbered them in Bezek; and the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.
11.9 ט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לַמַּלְאָכִים הַבָּאִים, כֹּה תֹאמְרוּן לְאִישׁ יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד, מָחָר תִּהְיֶה-לָכֶם תְּשׁוּעָה, בחם (כְּחֹם) הַשָּׁמֶשׁ; וַיָּבֹאוּ הַמַּלְאָכִים, וַיַּגִּידוּ לְאַנְשֵׁי יָבֵישׁ--וַיִּשְׂמָחוּ.    9 And they said unto the messengers that came: 'Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabesh-gilead: To-morrow, by the time the sun is hot, ye shall have deliverance.' And the messengers came and told the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.
11.10 י  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אַנְשֵׁי יָבֵישׁ, מָחָר נֵצֵא אֲלֵיכֶם; וַעֲשִׂיתֶם לָנוּ, כְּכָל-הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֵיכֶם.  {ס}    10 And the men of Jabesh said: 'To-morrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.' {S}
11.11 יא  וַיְהִי מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיָּשֶׂם שָׁאוּל אֶת-הָעָם שְׁלֹשָׁה רָאשִׁים, וַיָּבֹאוּ בְתוֹךְ-הַמַּחֲנֶה בְּאַשְׁמֹרֶת הַבֹּקֶר, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-עַמּוֹן עַד-חֹם הַיּוֹם; וַיְהִי הַנִּשְׁאָרִים וַיָּפֻצוּ, וְלֹא נִשְׁאֲרוּ-בָם שְׁנַיִם יָחַד.    11 And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the camp in the morning watch, and smote the Ammonites until the heat of the day; and it came to pass, that they that remained were scattered, so that two of them were not left together.
11.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר הָעָם, אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, מִי הָאֹמֵר, שָׁאוּל יִמְלֹךְ עָלֵינוּ:  תְּנוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, וּנְמִיתֵם.    12 And the people said unto Samuel: 'Who is he that said: Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.'
11.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, לֹא-יוּמַת אִישׁ בַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי הַיּוֹם עָשָׂה-יְהוָה תְּשׁוּעָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    13 And Saul said: 'There shall not a man be put to death this day; for to-day the LORD hath wrought deliverance in Israel.'
11.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-הָעָם, לְכוּ וְנֵלְכָה הַגִּלְגָּל; וּנְחַדֵּשׁ שָׁם, הַמְּלוּכָה.    14 Then said Samuel to the people: 'Come and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.'
11.15 טו  וַיֵּלְכוּ כָל-הָעָם הַגִּלְגָּל, וַיַּמְלִכוּ שָׁם אֶת-שָׁאוּל לִפְנֵי יְהוָה בַּגִּלְגָּל, וַיִּזְבְּחוּ-שָׁם זְבָחִים שְׁלָמִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּשְׂמַח שָׁם שָׁאוּל וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד-מְאֹד.  {פ}    15 And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace-offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly. {P}
12.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנֵּה שָׁמַעְתִּי בְקֹלְכֶם, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-אֲמַרְתֶּם לִי; וָאַמְלִיךְ עֲלֵיכֶם, מֶלֶךְ.    1 And Samuel said unto all Israel: 'Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.
12.2 ב  וְעַתָּה הִנֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ מִתְהַלֵּךְ לִפְנֵיכֶם, וַאֲנִי זָקַנְתִּי וָשַׂבְתִּי, וּבָנַי, הִנָּם אִתְּכֶם; וַאֲנִי הִתְהַלַּכְתִּי לִפְנֵיכֶם, מִנְּעֻרַי עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    2 And now, behold, the king walketh before you; and I am old and grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you; and I have walked before you from my youth unto this day.
12.3 ג  הִנְנִי עֲנוּ בִי נֶגֶד יְהוָה וְנֶגֶד מְשִׁיחוֹ, אֶת-שׁוֹר מִי לָקַחְתִּי וַחֲמוֹר מִי לָקַחְתִּי וְאֶת-מִי עָשַׁקְתִּי אֶת-מִי רַצּוֹתִי, וּמִיַּד-מִי לָקַחְתִּי כֹפֶר, וְאַעְלִים עֵינַי בּוֹ; וְאָשִׁיב, לָכֶם.    3 Here I am; witness against me before the LORD, and before His anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? or whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I taken a ransom to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.'
12.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֹא עֲשַׁקְתָּנוּ וְלֹא רַצּוֹתָנוּ; וְלֹא-לָקַחְתָּ מִיַּד-אִישׁ, מְאוּמָה.    4 And they said: 'Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken aught of any man's hand.'
12.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם עֵד יְהוָה בָּכֶם, וְעֵד מְשִׁיחוֹ הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--כִּי לֹא מְצָאתֶם בְּיָדִי, מְאוּמָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, עֵד.  {פ}    5 And he said unto them: 'The LORD is witness against you, and His anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found aught in my hand.' And they said: 'He is witness.' {P}
12.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-הָעָם:  יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן, וַאֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָה אֶת-אֲבֹתֵיכֶם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    6 And Samuel said unto the people: 'It is the LORD that made Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.
12.7 ז  וְעַתָּה, הִתְיַצְּבוּ וְאִשָּׁפְטָה אִתְּכֶם--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  אֵת כָּל-צִדְקוֹת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה אִתְּכֶם וְאֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.    7 Now therefore stand still, that I may plead with you before the LORD concerning all the righteous acts of the LORD, which He did to you and to your fathers.
12.8 ח  כַּאֲשֶׁר-בָּא יַעֲקֹב, מִצְרָיִם--וַיִּזְעֲקוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן וַיּוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-אֲבֹתֵיכֶם מִמִּצְרַיִם, וַיֹּשִׁבוּם בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.    8 When Jacob was come into Egypt, then your fathers cried unto the LORD, and the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, who brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and they were made to dwell in this place.
12.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁכְּחוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וַיִּמְכֹּר אֹתָם בְּיַד סִיסְרָא שַׂר-צְבָא חָצוֹר וּבְיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּבְיַד מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ, בָּם.    9 But they forgot the LORD their God, and He gave them over into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.
12.10 י  וַיִּזְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, ויאמר (וַיֹּאמְרוּ) חָטָאנוּ, כִּי עָזַבְנוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וַנַּעֲבֹד אֶת-הַבְּעָלִים וְאֶת-הָעַשְׁתָּרוֹת; וְעַתָּה, הַצִּילֵנוּ מִיַּד אֹיְבֵינוּ--וְנַעַבְדֶךָּ.    10 And they cried unto the LORD, and said: We have sinned, because we have forsaken the LORD, and have served the Baalim and the Ashtaroth; but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve Thee.
12.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה אֶת-יְרֻבַּעַל וְאֶת-בְּדָן, וְאֶת-יִפְתָּח וְאֶת-שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיַּצֵּל אֶתְכֶם מִיַּד אֹיְבֵיכֶם, מִסָּבִיב, וַתֵּשְׁבוּ, בֶּטַח.    11 And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelt in safety.
12.12 יב  וַתִּרְאוּ, כִּי-נָחָשׁ מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן בָּא עֲלֵיכֶם, וַתֹּאמְרוּ לִי, לֹא כִּי-מֶלֶךְ יִמְלֹךְ עָלֵינוּ:  וַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, מַלְכְּכֶם.    12 And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me: Nay, but a king shall reign over us; when the LORD your God was your king.
12.13 יג  וְעַתָּה, הִנֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר בְּחַרְתֶּם--אֲשֶׁר שְׁאֶלְתֶּם; וְהִנֵּה נָתַן יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם, מֶלֶךְ.    13 Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have asked for; and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you.
12.14 יד  אִם-תִּירְאוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֹתוֹ וּשְׁמַעְתֶּם בְּקוֹלוֹ, וְלֹא תַמְרוּ, אֶת-פִּי יְהוָה--וִהְיִתֶם גַּם-אַתֶּם, וְגַם-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ עֲלֵיכֶם, אַחַר, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    14 If ye will fear the LORD, and serve Him, and hearken unto His voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, and both ye and also the king that reigneth over you be followers of the LORD your God--;
12.15 טו  וְאִם-לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ בְּקוֹל יְהוָה, וּמְרִיתֶם אֶת-פִּי יְהוָה--וְהָיְתָה יַד-יְהוָה בָּכֶם, וּבַאֲבֹתֵיכֶם.    15 but if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the LORD, but rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD be against you, and against your fathers.
12.16 טז  גַּם-עַתָּה הִתְיַצְּבוּ וּרְאוּ, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַגָּדוֹל הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר יְהוָה, עֹשֶׂה לְעֵינֵיכֶם.    16 Now therefore stand still and see this great thing, which the LORD will do before your eyes.
12.17 יז  הֲלוֹא קְצִיר-חִטִּים, הַיּוֹם--אֶקְרָא אֶל-יְהוָה, וְיִתֵּן קֹלוֹת וּמָטָר; וּדְעוּ וּרְאוּ, כִּי-רָעַתְכֶם רַבָּה אֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, לִשְׁאוֹל לָכֶם, מֶלֶךְ.  {ס}    17 Is it not wheat harvest to-day? I will call unto the LORD, that He may send thunder and rain; and ye shall know and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in asking you a king.' {S}
12.18 יח  וַיִּקְרָא שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה קֹלֹת וּמָטָר בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיִּירָא כָל-הָעָם מְאֹד אֶת-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-שְׁמוּאֵל.    18 So Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and rain that day; and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.
12.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הָעָם אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, הִתְפַּלֵּל בְּעַד-עֲבָדֶיךָ אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ--וְאַל-נָמוּת:  כִּי-יָסַפְנוּ עַל-כָּל-חַטֹּאתֵינוּ רָעָה, לִשְׁאֹל לָנוּ מֶלֶךְ.    19 And all the people said unto Samuel: 'Pray for thy servants unto the LORD thy God, that we die not; for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king.'
12.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-הָעָם, אַל-תִּירָאוּ--אַתֶּם עֲשִׂיתֶם, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת; אַךְ, אַל-תָּסוּרוּ מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֶת-יְהוָה, בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם.    20 And Samuel said unto the people: 'Fear not; ye have indeed done all this evil; yet turn not aside from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart;
12.21 כא  וְלֹא, תָּסוּרוּ:  כִּי אַחֲרֵי הַתֹּהוּ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יוֹעִילוּ וְלֹא יַצִּילוּ--כִּי-תֹהוּ הֵמָּה.    21 and turn ye not aside; for then should ye go after vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain.
12.22 כב  כִּי לֹא-יִטֹּשׁ יְהוָה, אֶת-עַמּוֹ--בַּעֲבוּר, שְׁמוֹ הַגָּדוֹל:  כִּי הוֹאִיל יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶתְכֶם לוֹ לְעָם.    22 For the LORD will not forsake His people for His great name's sake; because it hath pleased the LORD to make you a people unto Himself.
12.23 כג  גַּם אָנֹכִי, חָלִילָה לִּי מֵחֲטֹא לַיהוָה--מֵחֲדֹל, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל בַּעַדְכֶם; וְהוֹרֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם, בְּדֶרֶךְ הַטּוֹבָה וְהַיְשָׁרָה.    23 Moreover as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against the LORD in ceasing to pray for you; but I will instruct you in the good and the right way.
12.24 כד  אַךְ יְראוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֹתוֹ בֶּאֱמֶת--בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם:  כִּי רְאוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הִגְדִּל עִמָּכֶם.    24 Only fear the LORD, and serve Him in truth with all your heart; for consider how great things He hath done for you.
12.25 כה  וְאִם-הָרֵעַ, תָּרֵעוּ--גַּם-אַתֶּם גַּם-מַלְכְּכֶם, תִּסָּפוּ.  {פ}    25 But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be swept away, both ye and your king.' {P}
13.1 א  בֶּן-שָׁנָה, שָׁאוּל בְּמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׁתֵּי שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 Saul was ---- years old when he began to reign; and two years he reigned over Israel.
13.2 ב  וַיִּבְחַר-לוֹ שָׁאוּל שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּהְיוּ עִם-שָׁאוּל אַלְפַּיִם בְּמִכְמָשׂ וּבְהַר בֵּית-אֵל, וְאֶלֶף הָיוּ עִם-יוֹנָתָן בְּגִבְעַת בִּנְיָמִין; וְיֶתֶר הָעָם, שִׁלַּח אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו.    2 And Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two thousand were with Saul in Michmas and in the mount of Beth-el, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeath-benjamin; and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.
13.3 ג  וַיַּךְ יוֹנָתָן, אֵת נְצִיב פְּלִשְׁתִּים אֲשֶׁר בְּגֶבַע, וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וְשָׁאוּל תָּקַע בַּשּׁוֹפָר בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ לֵאמֹר, יִשְׁמְעוּ הָעִבְרִים.    3 And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the horn throughout all the land, saying: 'Let the Hebrews hear.'
13.4 ד  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל שָׁמְעוּ לֵאמֹר, הִכָּה שָׁאוּל אֶת-נְצִיב פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְגַם-נִבְאַשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיִּצָּעֲקוּ הָעָם אַחֲרֵי שָׁאוּל, הַגִּלְגָּל.    4 And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten the garrison of the Philistines, and that Israel also had made himself odious with the Philistines. And the people were gathered together after Saul to Gilgal.
13.5 ה  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים נֶאֶסְפוּ לְהִלָּחֵם עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף רֶכֶב וְשֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים פָּרָשִׁים, וְעָם, כַּחוֹל אֲשֶׁר עַל-שְׂפַת-הַיָּם לָרֹב; וַיַּעֲלוּ וַיַּחֲנוּ בְמִכְמָשׂ, קִדְמַת בֵּית אָוֶן.    5 And the Philistines assembled themselves together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea-shore in multitude; and they came up, and pitched in Michmas, eastward of Beth-aven.
13.6 ו  וְאִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל רָאוּ כִּי צַר-לוֹ, כִּי נִגַּשׂ הָעָם; וַיִּתְחַבְּאוּ הָעָם, בַּמְּעָרוֹת וּבַחֲוָחִים וּבַסְּלָעִים, וּבַצְּרִחִים, וּבַבֹּרוֹת.    6 When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait--for the people were distressed--then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in holds, and in pits.
13.7 ז  וְעִבְרִים, עָבְרוּ אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, אֶרֶץ גָּד, וְגִלְעָד; וְשָׁאוּל עוֹדֶנּוּ בַגִּלְגָּל, וְכָל-הָעָם חָרְדוּ אַחֲרָיו.    7 Now some of the Hebrews had gone over the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead; but as for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.
13.8 ח  וייחל (וַיּוֹחֶל) שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, לַמּוֹעֵד אֲשֶׁר שְׁמוּאֵל, וְלֹא-בָא שְׁמוּאֵל, הַגִּלְגָּל; וַיָּפֶץ הָעָם, מֵעָלָיו.    8 And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed; but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.
13.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל--הַגִּשׁוּ אֵלַי, הָעֹלָה וְהַשְּׁלָמִים; וַיַּעַל, הָעֹלָה.    9 And Saul said: 'Bring hither to me the burnt-offering and the peace-offerings.' And he offered the burnt-offering.
13.10 י  וַיְהִי, כְּכַלֹּתוֹ לְהַעֲלוֹת הָעֹלָה, וְהִנֵּה שְׁמוּאֵל, בָּא; וַיֵּצֵא שָׁאוּל לִקְרָאתוֹ, לְבָרְכוֹ.    10 And it came to pass that, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt-offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.
13.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, מֶה עָשִׂיתָ; וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל כִּי-רָאִיתִי כִי-נָפַץ הָעָם מֵעָלַי, וְאַתָּה לֹא-בָאתָ לְמוֹעֵד הַיָּמִים, וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, נֶאֱסָפִים מִכְמָשׂ.    11 And Samuel said: 'What hast thou done?' And Saul said: 'Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within the days appointed, and that the Philistines assembled themselves together against Michmas;
13.12 יב  וָאֹמַר, עַתָּה יֵרְדוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים אֵלַי הַגִּלְגָּל, וּפְנֵי יְהוָה, לֹא חִלִּיתִי; וָאֶתְאַפַּק, וָאַעֲלֶה הָעֹלָה.  {ס}    12 therefore said I: Now will the Philistines come down upon me to Gilgal, and I have not entreated the favour of the LORD; I forced myself therefore, and offered the burnt-offering.' {S}
13.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-שָׁאוּל, נִסְכָּלְתָּ:  לֹא שָׁמַרְתָּ, אֶת-מִצְוַת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר צִוָּךְ, כִּי עַתָּה הֵכִין יְהוָה אֶת-מַמְלַכְתְּךָ אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד-עוֹלָם.    13 And Samuel said to Saul: 'Thou hast done foolishly; thou hast not kept the commandment of the LORD thy God, which He commanded thee; for now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.
13.14 יד  וְעַתָּה, מַמְלַכְתְּךָ לֹא-תָקוּם:  בִּקֵּשׁ יְהוָה לוֹ אִישׁ כִּלְבָבוֹ, וַיְצַוֵּהוּ יְהוָה לְנָגִיד עַל-עַמּוֹ--כִּי לֹא שָׁמַרְתָּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-צִוְּךָ יְהוָה.  {ס}    14 But now thy kingdom shall not continue; the LORD hath sought him a man after His own heart, and the LORD hath appointed him to be prince over His people, because thou hast not kept that which the LORD commanded thee.' {S}
13.15 טו  וַיָּקָם שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיַּעַל מִן-הַגִּלְגָּל--גִּבְעַת בִּנְיָמִן; וַיִּפְקֹד שָׁאוּל, אֶת-הָעָם הַנִּמְצְאִים עִמּוֹ, כְּשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, אִישׁ.    15 And Samuel arose, and got him up from Gilgal unto Gibeath-benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him, about six hundred men.
13.16 טז  וְשָׁאוּל וְיוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ, וְהָעָם הַנִּמְצָא עִמָּם, יֹשְׁבִים, בְּגֶבַע בִּנְיָמִן; וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, חָנוּ בְמִכְמָשׂ.    16 And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present with them, abode in Gibeath-benjamin; but the Philistines encamped in Michmas.
13.17 יז  וַיֵּצֵא הַמַּשְׁחִית מִמַּחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, שְׁלֹשָׁה רָאשִׁים:  הָרֹאשׁ אֶחָד יִפְנֶה אֶל-דֶּרֶךְ עָפְרָה, אֶל-אֶרֶץ שׁוּעָל.    17 And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual;
13.18 יח  וְהָרֹאשׁ אֶחָד יִפְנֶה, דֶּרֶךְ בֵּית חֹרוֹן; וְהָרֹאשׁ אֶחָד יִפְנֶה דֶּרֶךְ הַגְּבוּל, הַנִּשְׁקָף עַל-גֵּי הַצְּבֹעִים הַמִּדְבָּרָה.  {ס}    18 and another company turned the way to Beth-horon; and another company turned the way of the border that looketh down upon the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness. {S}
13.19 יט  וְחָרָשׁ לֹא יִמָּצֵא, בְּכֹל אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי-אמר (אָמְרוּ) פְלִשְׁתִּים--פֶּן יַעֲשׂוּ הָעִבְרִים, חֶרֶב אוֹ חֲנִית.    19 Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel; for the Philistines said: 'Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears';
13.20 כ  וַיֵּרְדוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים--לִלְטוֹשׁ אִישׁ אֶת-מַחֲרַשְׁתּוֹ וְאֶת-אֵתוֹ, וְאֶת-קַרְדֻּמּוֹ, וְאֵת, מַחֲרֵשָׁתוֹ.    20 but all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his plowshare, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.
13.21 כא  וְהָיְתָה הַפְּצִירָה פִים, לַמַּחֲרֵשֹׁת וְלָאֵתִים, וְלִשְׁלֹשׁ קִלְּשׁוֹן, וּלְהַקַּרְדֻּמִּים; וּלְהַצִּיב, הַדָּרְבָן.    21 And the price of the filing was a pim for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks with three teeth, and for the axes; and to set the goads.
13.22 כב  וְהָיָה, בְּיוֹם מִלְחֶמֶת, וְלֹא נִמְצָא חֶרֶב וַחֲנִית בְּיַד כָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר אֶת-שָׁאוּל וְאֶת-יוֹנָתָן; וַתִּמָּצֵא לְשָׁאוּל, וּלְיוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ.    22 So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan; but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found.
13.23 כג  וַיֵּצֵא מַצַּב פְּלִשְׁתִּים, אֶל-מַעֲבַר מִכְמָשׂ.  {ס}    23 And the garrison of the Philistines went out unto the pass of Michmas. {S}
14.1 א  וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם, וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שָׁאוּל אֶל-הַנַּעַר נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, לְכָה וְנַעְבְּרָה אֶל-מַצַּב פְּלִשְׁתִּים, אֲשֶׁר מֵעֵבֶר הַלָּז; וּלְאָבִיו, לֹא הִגִּיד.    1 Now it fell upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bore his armour: 'Come and let us go over to the Philistines' garrison, that is on yonder side. But he told not his father.
14.2 ב  וְשָׁאוּל, יוֹשֵׁב בִּקְצֵה הַגִּבְעָה, תַּחַת הָרִמּוֹן, אֲשֶׁר בְּמִגְרוֹן; וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר עִמּוֹ, כְּשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת אִישׁ.    2 And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under the pomegranate-tree which is in Migron; and the people that were with him were about six hundred men,
14.3 ג  וַאֲחִיָּה בֶן-אֲחִטוּב אֲחִי אִיכָבוֹד בֶּן-פִּינְחָס בֶּן-עֵלִי כֹּהֵן יְהוָה, בְּשִׁלוֹ--נֹשֵׂא אֵפוֹד; וְהָעָם לֹא יָדַע, כִּי הָלַךְ יוֹנָתָן.    3 and Ahijah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of the LORD in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.
14.4 ד  וּבֵין הַמַּעְבְּרוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בִּקֵּשׁ יוֹנָתָן לַעֲבֹר עַל-מַצַּב פְּלִשְׁתִּים--שֵׁן-הַסֶּלַע מֵהָעֵבֶר מִזֶּה, וְשֵׁן-הַסֶּלַע מֵהָעֵבֶר מִזֶּה; וְשֵׁם הָאֶחָד בּוֹצֵץ, וְשֵׁם הָאֶחָד סֶנֶּה.    4 And between the passes, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side, and a rocky crag on the other side; and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
14.5 ה  הַשֵּׁן הָאֶחָד מָצוּק מִצָּפוֹן, מוּל מִכְמָשׂ; וְהָאֶחָד מִנֶּגֶב, מוּל גָּבַע.  {ס}    5 The one crag rose up on the north in front of Michmas, and the other on the south in front of Geba. {S}
14.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָתָן אֶל-הַנַּעַר נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, לְכָה וְנַעְבְּרָה אֶל-מַצַּב הָעֲרֵלִים הָאֵלֶּה--אוּלַי יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה, לָנוּ:  כִּי אֵין לַיהוָה מַעְצוֹר, לְהוֹשִׁיעַ בְּרַב אוֹ בִמְעָט.    6 And Jonathan said to the young man that bore his armour: 'Come and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised; it may be that the LORD will work for us; for there is no restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few.'
14.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, עֲשֵׂה כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בִּלְבָבֶךָ; נְטֵה לָךְ, הִנְנִי עִמְּךָ כִּלְבָבֶךָ.  {ס}    7 And his armour-bearer said unto him: 'Do all that is in thy heart; turn thee, behold I am with thee according to thy heart.' {S}
14.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר, יְהוֹנָתָן, הִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ עֹבְרִים, אֶל-הָאֲנָשִׁים; וְנִגְלִינוּ, אֲלֵיהֶם.    8 Then said Jonathan: 'Behold, we will pass over unto the men, and we will disclose ourselves unto them.
14.9 ט  אִם-כֹּה יֹאמְרוּ, אֵלֵינוּ, דֹּמּוּ, עַד-הַגִּיעֵנוּ אֲלֵיכֶם--וְעָמַדְנוּ תַחְתֵּינוּ, וְלֹא נַעֲלֶה אֲלֵיהֶם.    9 If they say thus unto us: Tarry until we come to you; then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.
14.10 י  וְאִם-כֹּה יֹאמְרוּ עֲלוּ עָלֵינוּ, וְעָלִינוּ--כִּי-נְתָנָם יְהוָה, בְּיָדֵנוּ:  וְזֶה-לָּנוּ, הָאוֹת.    10 But if they say thus: Come up unto us; then we will go up; for the LORD hath delivered them into our hand; and this shall be the sign unto us.'
14.11 יא  וַיִּגָּלוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם, אֶל-מַצַּב פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיֹּאמְרוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים--הִנֵּה עִבְרִים יֹצְאִים, מִן-הַחֹרִים אֲשֶׁר הִתְחַבְּאוּ-שָׁם.    11 And both of them disclosed themselves unto the garrison of the Philistines; and the Philistines said: 'Behold Hebrews coming forth out of the holes where they hid themselves.'
14.12 יב  וַיַּעֲנוּ אַנְשֵׁי הַמַּצָּבָה אֶת-יוֹנָתָן וְאֶת-נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, וַיֹּאמְרוּ עֲלוּ אֵלֵינוּ, וְנוֹדִיעָה אֶתְכֶם, דָּבָר;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹנָתָן אֶל-נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, עֲלֵה אַחֲרַי--כִּי-נְתָנָם יְהוָה, בְּיַד יִשְׂרָאֵל.    12 And the men of the garrison spoke to Jonathan and his armour-bearer, and said: 'Come up to us, and we will show you a thing.' {P} And Jonathan said unto his armour-bearer: 'Come up after me; for the LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.'
14.13 יג  וַיַּעַל יוֹנָתָן, עַל-יָדָיו וְעַל-רַגְלָיו, וְנֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, אַחֲרָיו; וַיִּפְּלוּ לִפְנֵי יוֹנָתָן, וְנֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו מְמוֹתֵת אַחֲרָיו.    13 And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his armour-bearer after him; and they fell before Jonathan; and his armour-bearer slew them after him.
14.14 יד  וַתְּהִי הַמַּכָּה הָרִאשֹׁנָה, אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה יוֹנָתָן וְנֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו--כְּעֶשְׂרִים אִישׁ:  כְּבַחֲצִי מַעֲנָה, צֶמֶד שָׂדֶה.    14 And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armour-bearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were half a furrow's length in an acre of land.
14.15 טו  וַתְּהִי חֲרָדָה בַמַּחֲנֶה בַשָּׂדֶה, וּבְכָל-הָעָם--הַמַּצָּב וְהַמַּשְׁחִית, חָרְדוּ גַּם-הֵמָּה; וַתִּרְגַּז הָאָרֶץ, וַתְּהִי לְחֶרְדַּת אֱלֹהִים.    15 And there was a trembling in the camp in the field, and among all the people; the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled; and the earth quaked; so it grew into a terror from God.
14.16 טז  וַיִּרְאוּ הַצֹּפִים לְשָׁאוּל, בְּגִבְעַת בִּנְיָמִן; וְהִנֵּה הֶהָמוֹן נָמוֹג, וַיֵּלֶךְ וַהֲלֹם.  {פ}    16 And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeath-benjamin looked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went hither and thither. {P}
14.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, לָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, פִּקְדוּ-נָא וּרְאוּ, מִי הָלַךְ מֵעִמָּנוּ; וַיִּפְקְדוּ, וְהִנֵּה אֵין יוֹנָתָן וְנֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו.    17 Then said Saul unto the people that were with him: 'Number now, and see who is gone from us.' And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armour-bearer were not there.
14.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל לַאֲחִיָּה, הַגִּישָׁה אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים:  כִּי-הָיָה אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    18 And Saul said unto Ahijah: 'Bring hither the ark of God.' For the ark of God was there at that time with the children of Israel.
14.19 יט  וַיְהִי, עַד דִּבֶּר שָׁאוּל אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, וְהֶהָמוֹן אֲשֶׁר בְּמַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֵּלֶךְ הָלוֹךְ וָרָב;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, אֱסֹף יָדֶךָ.    19 And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the tumult that was in the camp of the Philistines went on and increased; {P} and Saul said unto the priest: 'Withdraw thy hand.'
14.20 כ  וַיִּזָּעֵק שָׁאוּל, וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-הַמִּלְחָמָה; וְהִנֵּה הָיְתָה חֶרֶב אִישׁ, בְּרֵעֵהוּ--מְהוּמָה, גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד.    20 And Saul and all the people that were with him were gathered together, and came to the battle; and, behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.
14.21 כא  וְהָעִבְרִים, הָיוּ לַפְּלִשְׁתִּים כְּאֶתְמוֹל שִׁלְשׁוֹם, אֲשֶׁר עָלוּ עִמָּם בַּמַּחֲנֶה, סָבִיב; וְגַם-הֵמָּה, לִהְיוֹת עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר עִם-שָׁאוּל, וְיוֹנָתָן.    21 Now the Hebrews that were with the Philistines as beforetime, and that went up with them into the camp round about; even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.
14.22 כב  וְכֹל אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמִּתְחַבְּאִים בְּהַר-אֶפְרַיִם, שָׁמְעוּ, כִּי-נָסוּ, פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּדְבְּקוּ גַם-הֵמָּה אַחֲרֵיהֶם, בַּמִּלְחָמָה.    22 Likewise all the men of Israel that had hid themselves in the hill-country of Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle.
14.23 כג  וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהַמִּלְחָמָה--עָבְרָה, אֶת-בֵּית אָוֶן.    23 So the LORD saved Israel that day; and the battle passed on as far as Beth-aven.
14.24 כד  וְאִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל נִגַּשׂ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיֹּאֶל שָׁאוּל אֶת-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, אָרוּר הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יֹאכַל לֶחֶם עַד-הָעֶרֶב וְנִקַּמְתִּי מֵאֹיְבַי, וְלֹא-טָעַם כָּל-הָעָם, לָחֶם.  {ס}    24 And the men of Israel were distressed that day; but Saul adjured the people, saying: 'Cursed be the man that eateth any food until it be evening, and I be avenged on mine enemies.' So none of the people tasted food. {S}
14.25 כה  וְכָל-הָאָרֶץ, בָּאוּ בַיָּעַר; וַיְהִי דְבַשׁ, עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה.    25 And all the people came into the forest; and there was honey upon the ground.
14.26 כו  וַיָּבֹא הָעָם אֶל-הַיַּעַר, וְהִנֵּה הֵלֶךְ דְּבָשׁ; וְאֵין-מַשִּׂיג יָדוֹ אֶל-פִּיו, כִּי-יָרֵא הָעָם אֶת-הַשְּׁבֻעָה.    26 And when the people were come unto the forest, behold a flow of honey; but no man put his hand to his mouth; for the people feared the oath.
14.27 כז  וְיוֹנָתָן לֹא-שָׁמַע, בְּהַשְׁבִּיעַ אָבִיו אֶת-הָעָם, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶת-קְצֵה הַמַּטֶּה אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדוֹ, וַיִּטְבֹּל אוֹתָהּ בְּיַעְרַת הַדְּבָשׁ; וַיָּשֶׁב יָדוֹ אֶל-פִּיו, ותראנה (וַתָּאֹרְנָה) עֵינָיו.    27 But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath; and he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in the honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes brightened.
14.28 כח  וַיַּעַן אִישׁ מֵהָעָם וַיֹּאמֶר, הַשְׁבֵּעַ הִשְׁבִּיעַ אָבִיךָ אֶת-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, אָרוּר הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יֹאכַל לֶחֶם, הַיּוֹם; וַיָּעַף, הָעָם.    28 Then answered one of the people, and said: 'Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying: Cursed be the man that eateth food this day; and the people are faint.'
14.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר, יוֹנָתָן, עָכַר אָבִי, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ:  רְאוּ-נָא, כִּי-אֹרוּ עֵינַי--כִּי טָעַמְתִּי, מְעַט דְּבַשׁ הַזֶּה.    29 Then said Jonathan: 'My father hath troubled the land; see, I pray you, how mine eyes are brightened, because I tasted a little of this honey.
14.30 ל  אַף, כִּי לוּא אָכֹל אָכַל הַיּוֹם הָעָם, מִשְּׁלַל אֹיְבָיו, אֲשֶׁר מָצָא:  כִּי עַתָּה לֹא-רָבְתָה מַכָּה, בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים.    30 How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to-day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? had there not been then a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?'
14.31 לא  וַיַּכּוּ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים, מִמִּכְמָשׂ, אַיָּלֹנָה; וַיָּעַף הָעָם, מְאֹד.    31 And they smote of the Philistines that day from Michmas to Aijalon; and the people were very faint.
14.32 לב  ויעש (וַיַּעַט) הָעָם אֶל-שלל (הַשָּׁלָל), וַיִּקְחוּ צֹאן וּבָקָר וּבְנֵי בָקָר וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ-אָרְצָה; וַיֹּאכַל הָעָם, עַל-הַדָּם.    32 And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground; and the people did eat them with the blood.
14.33 לג  וַיַּגִּידוּ לְשָׁאוּל לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה הָעָם חֹטִאים לַיהוָה לֶאֱכֹל עַל-הַדָּם; וַיֹּאמֶר בְּגַדְתֶּם, גֹּלּוּ-אֵלַי הַיּוֹם אֶבֶן גְּדוֹלָה.    33 Then they told Saul, saying: 'Behold, the people sin against the LORD, in that they eat with the blood.' And he said: 'Ye have dealt treacherously; roll a great stone unto me this day.'
14.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל פֻּצוּ בָעָם וַאֲמַרְתֶּם לָהֶם הַגִּישׁוּ אֵלַי אִישׁ שׁוֹרוֹ וְאִישׁ שְׂיֵהוּ, וּשְׁחַטְתֶּם בָּזֶה וַאֲכַלְתֶּם, וְלֹא-תֶחֶטְאוּ לַיהוָה, לֶאֱכֹל אֶל-הַדָּם; וַיַּגִּשׁוּ כָל-הָעָם אִישׁ שׁוֹרוֹ בְיָדוֹ, הַלַּיְלָה--וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ-שָׁם.    34 And Saul said: 'Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto them: Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating with the blood.' And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and slew them there.
14.35 לה  וַיִּבֶן שָׁאוּל מִזְבֵּחַ, לַיהוָה; אֹתוֹ הֵחֵל, לִבְנוֹת מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה.  {פ}    35 And Saul built an altar unto the LORD; the same was the first altar that he built unto the LORD. {P}
14.36 לו  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל נֵרְדָה אַחֲרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים לַיְלָה וְנָבֹזָה בָהֶם עַד-אוֹר הַבֹּקֶר, וְלֹא-נַשְׁאֵר בָּהֶם אִישׁ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כָּל-הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ עֲשֵׂה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר, הַכֹּהֵן, נִקְרְבָה הֲלֹם, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים.    36 And Saul said: 'Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them.' And they said: 'Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee.' {S} Then said the priest: 'Let us draw near hither unto God.'
14.37 לז  וַיִּשְׁאַל שָׁאוּל, בֵּאלֹהִים, הַאֵרֵד אַחֲרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, הֲתִתְּנֵם בְּיַד יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא עָנָהוּ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.    37 And Saul asked counsel of God: 'Shall I go down after the Philistines? wilt Thou deliver them into the hand of Israel?' But He answered him not that day.
14.38 לח  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל--גֹּשׁוּ הֲלֹם, כֹּל פִּנּוֹת הָעָם; וּדְעוּ וּרְאוּ--בַּמָּה הָיְתָה הַחַטָּאת הַזֹּאת, הַיּוֹם.    38 And Saul said: 'Draw nigh hither, all ye chiefs of the people; and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.
14.39 לט  כִּי חַי-יְהוָה, הַמּוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי אִם-יֶשְׁנוֹ בְּיוֹנָתָן בְּנִי, כִּי מוֹת יָמוּת; וְאֵין עֹנֵהוּ, מִכָּל-הָעָם.    39 For, as the LORD liveth, who saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die.' But there was not a man among all the people that answered him.
14.40 מ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַתֶּם תִּהְיוּ לְעֵבֶר אֶחָד, וַאֲנִי וְיוֹנָתָן בְּנִי, נִהְיֶה לְעֵבֶר אֶחָד; וַיֹּאמְרוּ הָעָם אֶל-שָׁאוּל, הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ עֲשֵׂה.  {ס}    40 Then said he unto all Israel: 'Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side.' And the people said unto Saul: 'Do what seemeth good unto thee.' {S}
14.41 מא  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--הָבָה תָמִים; וַיִּלָּכֵד יוֹנָתָן וְשָׁאוּל, וְהָעָם יָצָאוּ.    41 Therefore Saul said unto the LORD, the God of Israel: 'Declare the right.' And Jonathan and Saul were taken by lot; but the people escaped.
14.42 מב  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל--הַפִּילוּ, בֵּינִי וּבֵין יוֹנָתָן בְּנִי; וַיִּלָּכֵד, יוֹנָתָן.    42 And Saul said: 'Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son.' And Jonathan was taken.
14.43 מג  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-יוֹנָתָן, הַגִּידָה לִּי מֶה עָשִׂיתָה; וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ יוֹנָתָן, וַיֹּאמֶר טָעֹם טָעַמְתִּי בִּקְצֵה הַמַּטֶּה אֲשֶׁר-בְּיָדִי מְעַט דְּבַשׁ--הִנְנִי אָמוּת.  {ס}    43 Then Saul said to Jonathan: 'Tell me what thou hast done.' And Jonathan told him, and said: 'I did certainly taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in my hand; here am I: I will die.' {S}
14.44 מד  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, כֹּה-יַעֲשֶׂה אֱלֹהִים וְכֹה יוֹסִף:  כִּי-מוֹת תָּמוּת, יוֹנָתָן.    44 And Saul said: 'God do so and more also; thou shalt surely die, Jonathan.'
14.45 מה  וַיֹּאמֶר הָעָם אֶל-שָׁאוּל, הֲיוֹנָתָן יָמוּת אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה הַיְשׁוּעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--חָלִילָה חַי-יְהוָה אִם-יִפֹּל מִשַּׂעֲרַת רֹאשׁוֹ אַרְצָה, כִּי-עִם-אֱלֹהִים עָשָׂה הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וַיִּפְדּוּ הָעָם אֶת-יוֹנָתָן, וְלֹא-מֵת.  {ס}    45 And the people said unto Saul: 'Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? Far from it; as the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day.' So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not. {S}
14.46 מו  וַיַּעַל שָׁאוּל, מֵאַחֲרֵי פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, הָלְכוּ לִמְקוֹמָם.    46 Then Saul went up from following the Philistines; and the Philistines went to their own place.
14.47 מז  וְשָׁאוּל לָכַד הַמְּלוּכָה, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּלָּחֶם סָבִיב בְּכָל-אֹיְבָיו בְּמוֹאָב וּבִבְנֵי-עַמּוֹן וּבֶאֱדוֹם וּבְמַלְכֵי צוֹבָה, וּבַפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּבְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִפְנֶה, יַרְשִׁיעַ.    47 So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines; and whithersoever he turned himself, he put them to the worse.
14.48 מח  וַיַּעַשׂ חַיִל, וַיַּךְ אֶת-עֲמָלֵק; וַיַּצֵּל אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִיַּד שֹׁסֵהוּ.  {פ}    48 And he did valiantly, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them. {P}
14.49 מט  וַיִּהְיוּ בְּנֵי שָׁאוּל, יוֹנָתָן וְיִשְׁוִי וּמַלְכִּישׁוּעַ; וְשֵׁם, שְׁתֵּי בְנֹתָיו--שֵׁם הַבְּכִירָה מֵרַב, וְשֵׁם הַקְּטַנָּה מִיכַל.    49 Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishvi, and Malchi-shua; and the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the first-born Merab, and the name of the younger Michal;
14.50 נ  וְשֵׁם אֵשֶׁת שָׁאוּל, אֲחִינֹעַם בַּת-אֲחִימָעַץ; וְשֵׁם שַׂר-צְבָאוֹ אֲבִינֵר, בֶּן-נֵר דּוֹד שָׁאוּל.    50 and the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz; and the name of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.
14.51 נא  וְקִישׁ אֲבִי-שָׁאוּל וְנֵר אֲבִי-אַבְנֵר, בֶּן-אֲבִיאֵל.  {ס}    51 And Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel. {S}
14.52 נב  וַתְּהִי הַמִּלְחָמָה חֲזָקָה עַל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, כֹּל יְמֵי שָׁאוּל; וְרָאָה שָׁאוּל כָּל-אִישׁ גִּבּוֹר, וְכָל-בֶּן-חַיִל, וַיַּאַסְפֵהוּ, אֵלָיו.  {פ}    52 And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul; and when Saul saw any mighty man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him. {P}
15.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-שָׁאוּל, אֹתִי שָׁלַח יְהוָה לִמְשָׁחֳךָ לְמֶלֶךְ, עַל-עַמּוֹ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְעַתָּה שְׁמַע, לְקוֹל דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}    1 And Samuel said unto Saul: 'The LORD sent me to anoint thee to be king over His people, over Israel; now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the LORD. {S}
15.2 ב  כֹּה אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, פָּקַדְתִּי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה עֲמָלֵק לְיִשְׂרָאֵל--אֲשֶׁר-שָׂם לוֹ בַּדֶּרֶךְ, בַּעֲלֹתוֹ מִמִּצְרָיִם.    2 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him in the way, when he came up out of Egypt.
15.3 ג  עַתָּה לֵךְ וְהִכִּיתָה אֶת-עֲמָלֵק, וְהַחֲרַמְתֶּם אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, וְלֹא תַחְמֹל, עָלָיו; וְהֵמַתָּה מֵאִישׁ עַד-אִשָּׁה, מֵעֹלֵל וְעַד-יוֹנֵק, מִשּׁוֹר וְעַד-שֶׂה, מִגָּמָל וְעַד-חֲמוֹר.  {ס}    3 Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.' {S}
15.4 ד  וַיְשַׁמַּע שָׁאוּל, אֶת-הָעָם, וַיִּפְקְדֵם בַּטְּלָאִים, מָאתַיִם אֶלֶף רַגְלִי; וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים, אֶת-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה.    4 And Saul summoned the people, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.
15.5 ה  וַיָּבֹא שָׁאוּל, עַד-עִיר עֲמָלֵק; וַיָּרֶב, בַּנָּחַל.    5 And Saul came to the city of Amalek, and lay in wait in the valley.
15.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-הַקֵּינִי לְכוּ סֻּרוּ רְדוּ מִתּוֹךְ עֲמָלֵקִי, פֶּן-אֹסִפְךָ עִמּוֹ, וְאַתָּה עָשִׂיתָה חֶסֶד עִם-כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּעֲלוֹתָם מִמִּצְרָיִם; וַיָּסַר קֵינִי, מִתּוֹךְ עֲמָלֵק.    6 And Saul said unto the Kenites: 'Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them; for ye showed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt.' So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.
15.7 ז  וַיַּךְ שָׁאוּל, אֶת-עֲמָלֵק, מֵחֲוִילָה בּוֹאֲךָ שׁוּר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי מִצְרָיִם.    7 And Saul smote the Amalekites, from Havilah as thou goest to Shur, that is in front of Egypt.
15.8 ח  וַיִּתְפֹּשׂ אֶת-אֲגַג מֶלֶךְ-עֲמָלֵק, חָי; וְאֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, הֶחֱרִים לְפִי-חָרֶב.    8 And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
15.9 ט  וַיַּחְמֹל שָׁאוּל וְהָעָם עַל-אֲגָג, וְעַל-מֵיטַב הַצֹּאן וְהַבָּקָר וְהַמִּשְׁנִים וְעַל-הַכָּרִים וְעַל-כָּל-הַטּוֹב, וְלֹא אָבוּ, הַחֲרִימָם; וְכָל-הַמְּלָאכָה נְמִבְזָה וְנָמֵס, אֹתָהּ הֶחֱרִימוּ.  {פ}    9 But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, even the young of the second birth, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them; but every thing that was of no account and feeble, that they destroyed utterly. {P}
15.10 י  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, לֵאמֹר.    10 Then came the word of the LORD unto Samuel, saying:
15.11 יא  נִחַמְתִּי, כִּי-הִמְלַכְתִּי אֶת-שָׁאוּל לְמֶלֶךְ--כִּי-שָׁב מֵאַחֲרַי, וְאֶת-דְּבָרַי לֹא הֵקִים; וַיִּחַר, לִשְׁמוּאֵל, וַיִּזְעַק אֶל-יְהוָה, כָּל-הַלָּיְלָה.    11 'It repenteth Me that I have set up Saul to be king; for he is turned back from following Me, and hath not performed My commandments.' And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD all night.
15.12 יב  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם שְׁמוּאֵל לִקְרַאת שָׁאוּל, בַּבֹּקֶר; וַיֻּגַּד לִשְׁמוּאֵל לֵאמֹר, בָּא-שָׁאוּל הַכַּרְמֶלָה וְהִנֵּה מַצִּיב לוֹ יָד, וַיִּסֹּב וַיַּעֲבֹר, וַיֵּרֶד הַגִּלְגָּל.    12 And Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning; and it was told Samuel, saying: 'Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he is setting him up a monument, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.'
15.13 יג  וַיָּבֹא שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-שָׁאוּל; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ שָׁאוּל, בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה לַיהוָה--הֲקִימֹתִי, אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה.    13 And Samuel came to Saul; and Saul said unto him: 'Blessed be thou of the LORD; I have performed the commandment of the LORD.'
15.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, וּמֶה קוֹל-הַצֹּאן הַזֶּה בְּאָזְנָי, וְקוֹל הַבָּקָר, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁמֵעַ.    14 And Samuel said: 'What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?'
15.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל מֵעֲמָלֵקִי הֱבִיאוּם, אֲשֶׁר חָמַל הָעָם עַל-מֵיטַב הַצֹּאן וְהַבָּקָר, לְמַעַן זְבֹחַ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ; וְאֶת-הַיּוֹתֵר, הֶחֱרַמְנוּ.  {פ}    15 And Saul said: 'They have brought them from the Amalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.' {P}
15.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-שָׁאוּל, הֶרֶף וְאַגִּידָה לְּךָ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֵלַי הַלָּיְלָה; ויאמרו (וַיֹּאמֶר) לוֹ, דַּבֵּר.  {ס}    16 Then Samuel said unto Saul: 'Stay, and I will tell thee what the LORD hath said to me this night.' And he said unto him: 'Say on.' {S}
15.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל--הֲלוֹא אִם-קָטֹן אַתָּה בְּעֵינֶיךָ, רֹאשׁ שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אָתָּה; וַיִּמְשָׁחֲךָ יְהוָה לְמֶלֶךְ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    17 And Samuel said: 'Though thou be little in thine own sight, art thou not head of the tribes of Israel? And the LORD anointed thee king over Israel;
15.18 יח  וַיִּשְׁלָחֲךָ יְהוָה, בְּדָרֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר, לֵךְ וְהַחֲרַמְתָּה אֶת-הַחַטָּאִים אֶת-עֲמָלֵק, וְנִלְחַמְתָּ בוֹ, עַד כַּלּוֹתָם אֹתָם.    18 and the LORD sent thee on a journey, and said: Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed.
15.19 יט  וְלָמָּה לֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה; וַתַּעַט, אֶל-הַשָּׁלָל, וַתַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}    19 Wherefore then didst thou not hearken to the voice of the LORD, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst that which was evil in the sight of the LORD?' {S}
15.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתִּי בְּקוֹל יְהוָה, וָאֵלֵךְ, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-שְׁלָחַנִי יְהוָה; וָאָבִיא, אֶת-אֲגַג מֶלֶךְ עֲמָלֵק, וְאֶת-עֲמָלֵק, הֶחֱרַמְתִּי.    20 And Saul said unto Samuel: 'Yea, I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.
15.21 כא  וַיִּקַּח הָעָם מֵהַשָּׁלָל צֹאן וּבָקָר, רֵאשִׁית הַחֵרֶם, לִזְבֹּחַ לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, בַּגִּלְגָּל.  {ס}    21 But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the devoted things, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God in Gilgal.' {S}
15.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, הַחֵפֶץ לַיהוָה בְּעֹלוֹת וּזְבָחִים, כִּשְׁמֹעַ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה:  הִנֵּה שְׁמֹעַ מִזֶּבַח טוֹב, לְהַקְשִׁיב מֵחֵלֶב אֵילִים.    22 And Samuel said: 'Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in hearkening to the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.
15.23 כג  כִּי חַטַּאת-קֶסֶם מֶרִי, וְאָוֶן וּתְרָפִים הַפְצַר:  יַעַן, מָאַסְתָּ אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, וַיִּמְאָסְךָ, מִמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    23 For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as idolatry and teraphim. Because thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, He hath also rejected thee from being king.' {S}
15.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל חָטָאתִי, כִּי-עָבַרְתִּי אֶת-פִּי-יְהוָה וְאֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ:  כִּי יָרֵאתִי אֶת-הָעָם, וָאֶשְׁמַע בְּקוֹלָם.    24 And Saul said unto Samuel: 'I have sinned; for I have transgressed the commandment of the LORD, and thy words; because I feared the people, and hearkened to their voice.
15.25 כה  וְעַתָּה, שָׂא נָא אֶת-חַטָּאתִי; וְשׁוּב עִמִּי, וְאֶשְׁתַּחֲוֶה לַיהוָה.    25 Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and return with me, that I may worship the LORD.'
15.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-שָׁאוּל, לֹא אָשׁוּב עִמָּךְ:  כִּי מָאַסְתָּה, אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, וַיִּמְאָסְךָ יְהוָה, מִהְיוֹת מֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    26 And Samuel said unto Saul: 'I will not return with thee; for thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.' {S}
15.27 כז  וַיִּסֹּב שְׁמוּאֵל, לָלֶכֶת; וַיַּחֲזֵק בִּכְנַף-מְעִילוֹ, וַיִּקָּרַע.  {ס}    27 And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his robe, and it rent. {S}
15.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, שְׁמוּאֵל, קָרַע יְהוָה אֶת-מַמְלְכוּת יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵעָלֶיךָ, הַיּוֹם; וּנְתָנָהּ, לְרֵעֲךָ הַטּוֹב מִמֶּךָּ.  {ס}    28 And Samuel said unto him: 'The LORD hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is better than thou. {S}
15.29 כט  וְגַם נֵצַח יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא יְשַׁקֵּר וְלֹא יִנָּחֵם:  כִּי לֹא אָדָם הוּא, לְהִנָּחֵם.    29 And also the Glory of Israel will not lie nor repent; for He is not a man, that He should repent.'
15.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר חָטָאתִי--עַתָּה כַּבְּדֵנִי נָא נֶגֶד זִקְנֵי-עַמִּי, וְנֶגֶד יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְשׁוּב עִמִּי, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֵיתִי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ.    30 Then he said: 'I have sinned; yet honour me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and return with me, that I may worship the LORD thy God.'
15.31 לא  וַיָּשָׁב שְׁמוּאֵל, אַחֲרֵי שָׁאוּל; וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ שָׁאוּל, לַיהוָה.  {ס}    31 So Samuel returned after Saul; and Saul worshipped the LORD. {S}
15.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, הַגִּישׁוּ אֵלַי אֶת-אֲגַג מֶלֶךְ עֲמָלֵק, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֵלָיו, אֲגַג מַעֲדַנֹּת; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲגָג, אָכֵן סָר מַר-הַמָּוֶת.  {ס}    32 Then said Samuel: 'Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the Amalekites.' And Agag came unto him in chains. And Agag said: 'Surely the bitterness of death is at hand.' {S}
15.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל--כַּאֲשֶׁר שִׁכְּלָה נָשִׁים חַרְבֶּךָ, כֵּן-תִּשְׁכַּל מִנָּשִׁים אִמֶּךָ; וַיְשַׁסֵּף שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-אֲגָג לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בַּגִּלְגָּל.  {ס}    33 And Samuel said: As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal. {S}
15.34 לד  וַיֵּלֶךְ שְׁמוּאֵל, הָרָמָתָה; וְשָׁאוּל עָלָה אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, גִּבְעַת שָׁאוּל.    34 Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeath-shaul.
15.35 לה  וְלֹא-יָסַף שְׁמוּאֵל לִרְאוֹת אֶת-שָׁאוּל, עַד-יוֹם מוֹתוֹ, כִּי-הִתְאַבֵּל שְׁמוּאֵל, אֶל-שָׁאוּל; וַיהוָה נִחָם, כִּי-הִמְלִיךְ אֶת-שָׁאוּל עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    35 And Samuel never beheld Saul again until the day of his death; for Samuel mourned for Saul; and the LORD repented that He had made Saul king over Israel. {P}
16.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, עַד-מָתַי אַתָּה מִתְאַבֵּל אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וַאֲנִי מְאַסְתִּיו, מִמְּלֹךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; מַלֵּא קַרְנְךָ שֶׁמֶן, וְלֵךְ אֶשְׁלָחֲךָ אֶל-יִשַׁי בֵּית-הַלַּחְמִי--כִּי-רָאִיתִי בְּבָנָיו לִי, מֶלֶךְ.    1 And the LORD said unto Samuel: 'How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from being king over Israel? fill thy horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Beth-lehemite; for I have provided Me a king among his sons.'
16.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֵיךְ אֵלֵךְ, וְשָׁמַע שָׁאוּל וַהֲרָגָנִי; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, עֶגְלַת בָּקָר תִּקַּח בְּיָדֶךָ, וְאָמַרְתָּ, לִזְבֹּחַ לַיהוָה בָּאתִי.    2 And Samuel said: 'How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me.' And the LORD said: 'Take a heifer with thee, and say: I am come to sacrifice to the LORD.
16.3 ג  וְקָרָאתָ לְיִשַׁי, בַּזָּבַח; וְאָנֹכִי, אוֹדִיעֲךָ אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תַּעֲשֶׂה, וּמָשַׁחְתָּ לִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-אֹמַר אֵלֶיךָ.    3 And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will tell thee what thou shalt do; and thou shalt anoint unto Me him whom I name unto thee.'
16.4 ד  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁמוּאֵל, אֵת אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, וַיָּבֹא, בֵּית לָחֶם; וַיֶּחֶרְדוּ זִקְנֵי הָעִיר, לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר, שָׁלֹם בּוֹאֶךָ.    4 And Samuel did that which the LORD spoke, and came to Beth-lehem. And the elders of the city came to meet him trembling, and said: 'Comest thou peaceably?'
16.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁלוֹם, לִזְבֹּחַ לַיהוָה בָּאתִי, הִתְקַדְּשׁוּ, וּבָאתֶם אִתִּי בַּזָּבַח; וַיְקַדֵּשׁ אֶת-יִשַׁי וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, וַיִּקְרָא לָהֶם לַזָּבַח.    5 And he said: 'Peaceably; I am come to sacrifice unto the LORD; sanctify yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice.' And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.
16.6 ו  וַיְהִי בְּבוֹאָם, וַיַּרְא אֶת-אֱלִיאָב; וַיֹּאמֶר, אַךְ נֶגֶד יְהוָה מְשִׁיחוֹ.  {ס}    6 And it came to pass, when they were come, that he beheld Eliab, and said: 'Surely the LORD'S anointed is before Him.' {S}
16.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל, אַל-תַּבֵּט אֶל-מַרְאֵהוּ וְאֶל-גְּבֹהַּ קוֹמָתוֹ--כִּי מְאַסְתִּיהוּ:  כִּי לֹא, אֲשֶׁר יִרְאֶה הָאָדָם--כִּי הָאָדָם יִרְאֶה לַעֵינַיִם, וַיהוָה יִרְאֶה לַלֵּבָב.    7 But the LORD said unto Samuel: 'Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have rejected him; for it is not as man seeth: for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the LORD looketh on the heart.'
16.8 ח  וַיִּקְרָא יִשַׁי אֶל-אֲבִינָדָב, וַיַּעֲבִרֵהוּ לִפְנֵי שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר, גַּם-בָּזֶה לֹא-בָחַר יְהוָה.    8 Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said: 'Neither hath the LORD chosen this.'
16.9 ט  וַיַּעֲבֵר יִשַׁי, שַׁמָּה; וַיֹּאמֶר, גַּם-בָּזֶה לֹא-בָחַר יְהוָה.    9 Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said: 'Neither hath the LORD chosen this.'
16.10 י  וַיַּעֲבֵר יִשַׁי שִׁבְעַת בָּנָיו, לִפְנֵי שְׁמוּאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-יִשַׁי, לֹא-בָחַר יְהוָה בָּאֵלֶּה.    10 And Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse: 'The LORD hath not chosen these.'
16.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-יִשַׁי, הֲתַמּוּ הַנְּעָרִים, וַיֹּאמֶר עוֹד שָׁאַר הַקָּטָן, וְהִנֵּה רֹעֶה בַּצֹּאן; וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-יִשַׁי שִׁלְחָה וְקָחֶנּוּ, כִּי לֹא-נָסֹב עַד-בֹּאוֹ פֹה.    11 And Samuel said unto Jesse: 'Are here all thy children?' And he said: 'There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep.' And Samuel said unto Jesse: 'Send and fetch him; for we will not sit down till he come hither.'
16.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁלַח וַיְבִיאֵהוּ וְהוּא אַדְמוֹנִי, עִם-יְפֵה עֵינַיִם וְטוֹב רֹאִי;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה קוּם מְשָׁחֵהוּ, כִּי-זֶה הוּא.    12 And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of beautiful eyes, and goodly to look upon. {P} And the LORD said: 'Arise, anoint him; for this is he.'
16.13 יג  וַיִּקַּח שְׁמוּאֵל אֶת-קֶרֶן הַשֶּׁמֶן, וַיִּמְשַׁח אֹתוֹ בְּקֶרֶב אֶחָיו, וַתִּצְלַח רוּחַ-יְהוָה אֶל-דָּוִד, מֵהַיּוֹם הַהוּא וָמָעְלָה; וַיָּקָם שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיֵּלֶךְ הָרָמָתָה.    13 Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren; and the spirit of the LORD came mightily upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.
16.14 יד  וְרוּחַ יְהוָה סָרָה, מֵעִם שָׁאוּל; וּבִעֲתַתּוּ רוּחַ-רָעָה, מֵאֵת יְהוָה.    14 Now the spirit of the LORD had departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the LORD terrified him.
16.15 טו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ עַבְדֵי-שָׁאוּל, אֵלָיו:  הִנֵּה-נָא רוּחַ-אֱלֹהִים רָעָה, מְבַעִתֶּךָ.    15 And Saul's servants said unto him: 'Behold now, an evil spirit from God terrifieth thee.
16.16 טז  יֹאמַר-נָא אֲדֹנֵנוּ, עֲבָדֶיךָ לְפָנֶיךָ--יְבַקְשׁוּ, אִישׁ יֹדֵעַ מְנַגֵּן בַּכִּנּוֹר; וְהָיָה, בִּהְיוֹת עָלֶיךָ רוּחַ-אֱלֹהִים רָעָה--וְנִגֵּן בְּיָדוֹ, וְטוֹב לָךְ.  {פ}    16 Let our lord now command thy servants, that are before thee, to seek out a man who is a skilful player on the harp; and it shall be, when the evil spirit from God cometh upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.' {P}
16.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, אֶל-עֲבָדָיו:  רְאוּ-נָא לִי, אִישׁ מֵיטִיב לְנַגֵּן, וַהֲבִיאוֹתֶם, אֵלָי.    17 And Saul said unto his servants: 'Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me.'
16.18 יח  וַיַּעַן אֶחָד מֵהַנְּעָרִים וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה רָאִיתִי בֵּן לְיִשַׁי בֵּית הַלַּחְמִי, יֹדֵעַ נַגֵּן וְגִבּוֹר חַיִל וְאִישׁ מִלְחָמָה וּנְבוֹן דָּבָר, וְאִישׁ תֹּאַר; וַיהוָה, עִמּוֹ.    18 Then answered one of the young men, and said: 'Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Beth-lehemite, that is skilful in playing, and a mighty man of valour, and a man of war, and prudent in affairs, and a comely person, and the LORD is with him.'
16.19 יט  וַיִּשְׁלַח שָׁאוּל מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-יִשָׁי; וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁלְחָה אֵלַי אֶת-דָּוִד בִּנְךָ אֲשֶׁר בַּצֹּאן.    19 Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said: 'Send me David thy son, who is with the sheep.'
16.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח יִשַׁי חֲמוֹר לֶחֶם, וְנֹאד יַיִן, וּגְדִי עִזִּים, אֶחָד; וַיִּשְׁלַח בְּיַד-דָּוִד בְּנוֹ, אֶל-שָׁאוּל.    20 And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.
16.21 כא  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וַיַּעֲמֹד לְפָנָיו; וַיֶּאֱהָבֵהוּ מְאֹד, וַיְהִי-לוֹ נֹשֵׂא כֵלִים.    21 And David came to Saul, and stood before him; and he loved him greatly; and he became his armour-bearer.
16.22 כב  וַיִּשְׁלַח שָׁאוּל, אֶל-יִשַׁי לֵאמֹר:  יַעֲמָד-נָא דָוִד לְפָנַי, כִּי-מָצָא חֵן בְּעֵינָי.    22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying: 'Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.'
16.23 כג  וְהָיָה, בִּהְיוֹת רוּחַ-אֱלֹהִים אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וְלָקַח דָּוִד אֶת-הַכִּנּוֹר, וְנִגֵּן בְּיָדוֹ; וְרָוַח לְשָׁאוּל וְטוֹב לוֹ, וְסָרָה מֵעָלָיו רוּחַ הָרָעָה.  {פ}    23 And it came to pass, when the [evil] spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took the harp, and played with his hand; so Saul found relief, and it was well with him, and the evil spirit departed from him. {P}
17.1 א  וַיַּאַסְפוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים אֶת-מַחֲנֵיהֶם, לַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיֵּאָסְפוּ, שֹׂכֹה אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ בֵּין-שׂוֹכֹה וּבֵין-עֲזֵקָה, בְּאֶפֶס דַּמִּים.    1 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and they were gathered together at Socoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim.
17.2 ב  וְשָׁאוּל וְאִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל נֶאֶסְפוּ, וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּעֵמֶק הָאֵלָה; וַיַּעַרְכוּ מִלְחָמָה, לִקְרַאת פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    2 And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched in the vale of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.
17.3 ג  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים עֹמְדִים אֶל-הָהָר, מִזֶּה, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל עֹמְדִים אֶל-הָהָר, מִזֶּה; וְהַגַּיְא, בֵּינֵיהֶם.    3 And the Philistines stood on the mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other side; and there was a valley between them.
17.4 ד  וַיֵּצֵא אִישׁ-הַבֵּנַיִם מִמַּחֲנוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים, גָּלְיָת שְׁמוֹ מִגַּת:  גָּבְהוֹ, שֵׁשׁ אַמּוֹת וָזָרֶת.    4 And there went out a champion from the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.
17.5 ה  וְכוֹבַע נְחֹשֶׁת עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְשִׁרְיוֹן קַשְׂקַשִּׂים הוּא לָבוּשׁ; וּמִשְׁקַל, הַשִּׁרְיוֹן--חֲמֵשֶׁת-אֲלָפִים שְׁקָלִים, נְחֹשֶׁת.    5 And he had a helmet of brass upon his head, and he was clad with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.
17.6 ו  וּמִצְחַת נְחֹשֶׁת, עַל-רַגְלָיו; וְכִידוֹן נְחֹשֶׁת, בֵּין כְּתֵפָיו.    6 And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a javelin of brass between his shoulders.
17.7 ז  וחץ (וְעֵץ) חֲנִיתוֹ, כִּמְנוֹר אֹרְגִים, וְלַהֶבֶת חֲנִיתוֹ, שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת שְׁקָלִים בַּרְזֶל; וְנֹשֵׂא הַצִּנָּה, הֹלֵךְ לְפָנָיו.    7 And the shaft of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron; and his shield-bearer went before him.
17.8 ח  וַיַּעֲמֹד, וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-מַעַרְכֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, לָמָּה תֵצְאוּ לַעֲרֹךְ מִלְחָמָה:  הֲלוֹא אָנֹכִי הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, וְאַתֶּם עֲבָדִים לְשָׁאוּל--בְּרוּ-לָכֶם אִישׁ, וְיֵרֵד אֵלָי.    8 And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them: 'Why do ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me.
17.9 ט  אִם-יוּכַל לְהִלָּחֵם אִתִּי, וְהִכָּנִי--וְהָיִינוּ לָכֶם, לַעֲבָדִים; וְאִם-אֲנִי אוּכַל-לוֹ, וְהִכִּיתִיו--וִהְיִיתֶם לָנוּ לַעֲבָדִים, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֹתָנוּ.    9 If he be able to fight with me, and kill me, then will we be your servants; but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us.'
17.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, אֲנִי חֵרַפְתִּי אֶת-מַעַרְכוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; תְּנוּ-לִי אִישׁ, וְנִלָּחֲמָה יָחַד.    10 And the Philistine said: 'I do taunt the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we may fight together.'
17.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמַע שָׁאוּל וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הָאֵלֶּה; וַיֵּחַתּוּ וַיִּרְאוּ, מְאֹד.  {פ}    11 And when Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. {P}
17.12 יב  וְדָוִד בֶּן-אִישׁ אֶפְרָתִי הַזֶּה, מִבֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה, וּשְׁמוֹ יִשַׁי, וְלוֹ שְׁמֹנָה בָנִים; וְהָאִישׁ בִּימֵי שָׁאוּל, זָקֵן בָּא בַאֲנָשִׁים.    12 Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Beth-lehem in Judah, whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons; and the man was an old man in the days of Saul, stricken in years among men.
17.13 יג  וַיֵּלְכוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת בְּנֵי-יִשַׁי, הַגְּדֹלִים--הָלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי-שָׁאוּל, לַמִּלְחָמָה; וְשֵׁם שְׁלֹשֶׁת בָּנָיו, אֲשֶׁר הָלְכוּ בַּמִּלְחָמָה--אֱלִיאָב הַבְּכוֹר וּמִשְׁנֵהוּ אֲבִינָדָב, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁי שַׁמָּה.    13 And the three eldest sons of Jesse had gone after Saul to the battle; and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were Eliab the first-born, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.
17.14 יד  וְדָוִד, הוּא הַקָּטָן; וּשְׁלֹשָׁה, הַגְּדֹלִים, הָלְכוּ, אַחֲרֵי שָׁאוּל.  {ס}    14 And David was the youngest; and the three eldest followed Saul.-- {S}
17.15 טו  וְדָוִד הֹלֵךְ וָשָׁב, מֵעַל שָׁאוּל, לִרְעוֹת אֶת-צֹאן אָבִיו, בֵּית-לָחֶם.    15 Now David went to and fro from Saul to feed his father's sheep at Beth-lehem.--
17.16 טז  וַיִּגַּשׁ הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, הַשְׁכֵּם וְהַעֲרֵב; וַיִּתְיַצֵּב, אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם.  {פ}    16 And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days. {P}
17.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר יִשַׁי לְדָוִד בְּנוֹ, קַח-נָא לְאַחֶיךָ אֵיפַת הַקָּלִיא הַזֶּה, וַעֲשָׂרָה לֶחֶם, הַזֶּה; וְהָרֵץ הַמַּחֲנֶה, לְאַחֶיךָ.    17 And Jesse said unto David his son: 'Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and carry them quickly to the camp to thy brethren.
17.18 יח  וְאֵת עֲשֶׂרֶת חֲרִצֵי הֶחָלָב, הָאֵלֶּה, תָּבִיא, לְשַׂר-הָאָלֶף; וְאֶת-אַחֶיךָ תִּפְקֹד לְשָׁלוֹם, וְאֶת-עֲרֻבָּתָם תִּקָּח.    18 And bring these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and to thy brethren shalt thou bring greetings, and take their pledge;
17.19 יט  וְשָׁאוּל וְהֵמָּה וְכָל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּעֵמֶק הָאֵלָה; נִלְחָמִים, עִם-פְּלִשְׁתִּים.  {ס}    19 now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, are in the vale of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.' {S}
17.20 כ  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם דָּוִד בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיִּטֹּשׁ אֶת-הַצֹּאן עַל-שֹׁמֵר, וַיִּשָּׂא וַיֵּלֶךְ, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּהוּ יִשָׁי; וַיָּבֹא, הַמַּעְגָּלָה, וְהַחַיִל הַיֹּצֵא אֶל-הַמַּעֲרָכָה, וְהֵרֵעוּ בַּמִּלְחָמָה.    20 And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came to the barricade, as the host which was going forth to the fight shouted for the battle.
17.21 כא  וַתַּעֲרֹךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, מַעֲרָכָה לִקְרַאת מַעֲרָכָה.    21 And Israel and the Philistines put the battle in array, army against army.
17.22 כב  וַיִּטֹּשׁ דָּוִד אֶת-הַכֵּלִים מֵעָלָיו, עַל-יַד שׁוֹמֵר הַכֵּלִים, וַיָּרָץ, הַמַּעֲרָכָה; וַיָּבֹא, וַיִּשְׁאַל לְאֶחָיו לְשָׁלוֹם.    22 And David left his baggage in the hand of the keeper of the baggage, and ran to the army, and came and greeted his brethren.
17.23 כג  וְהוּא מְדַבֵּר עִמָּם, וְהִנֵּה אִישׁ הַבֵּנַיִם עוֹלֶה גָּלְיָת הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי שְׁמוֹ מִגַּת ממערות (מִמַּעַרְכוֹת) פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיְדַבֵּר, כַּדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיִּשְׁמַע, דָּוִד.    23 And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the ranks of the Philistines, and spoke according to the same words; and David heard them.
17.24 כד  וְכֹל אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּרְאוֹתָם אֶת-הָאִישׁ; וַיָּנֻסוּ, מִפָּנָיו, וַיִּירְאוּ, מְאֹד.    24 And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were sore afraid.
17.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַרְּאִיתֶם הָאִישׁ הָעֹלֶה הַזֶּה--כִּי לְחָרֵף אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֹלֶה; וְהָיָה הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יַכֶּנּוּ יַעְשְׁרֶנּוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ עֹשֶׁר גָּדוֹל, וְאֶת-בִּתּוֹ יִתֶּן-לוֹ, וְאֵת בֵּית אָבִיו, יַעֲשֶׂה חָפְשִׁי בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    25 And the men of Israel said: 'Have ye seen this man that is come up? surely to taunt Israel is he come up; and it shall be, that the man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in Israel.' {P}
17.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-הָאֲנָשִׁים הָעֹמְדִים עִמּוֹ לֵאמֹר, מַה-יֵּעָשֶׂה לָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר יַכֶּה אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הַלָּז, וְהֵסִיר חֶרְפָּה מֵעַל יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי מִי, הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הֶעָרֵל הַזֶּה, כִּי חֵרֵף, מַעַרְכוֹת אֱלֹהִים חַיִּים.    26 And David spoke to the men that stood by him, saying: 'What shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the taunt from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should have taunted the armies of the living God?'
17.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הָעָם, כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה יֵעָשֶׂה, לָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר יַכֶּנּוּ.    27 And the people answered him after this manner, saying: 'So shall it be done to the man that killeth him.'
17.28 כח  וַיִּשְׁמַע אֱלִיאָב אָחִיו הַגָּדוֹל, בְּדַבְּרוֹ אֶל-הָאֲנָשִׁים; וַיִּחַר-אַף אֱלִיאָב בְּדָוִד וַיֹּאמֶר לָמָּה-זֶּה יָרַדְתָּ, וְעַל-מִי נָטַשְׁתָּ מְעַט הַצֹּאן הָהֵנָּה בַּמִּדְבָּר--אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי אֶת-זְדֹנְךָ וְאֵת רֹעַ לְבָבֶךָ, כִּי לְמַעַן רְאוֹת הַמִּלְחָמָה יָרָדְתָּ.    28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke unto the men; and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said: 'Why art thou come down? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy presumptuousness, and the naughtiness of thy heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.'
17.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, מֶה עָשִׂיתִי עָתָּה; הֲלוֹא, דָּבָר הוּא.    29 And David said: 'What have I now done? Was it not but a word?'
17.30 ל  וַיִּסֹּב מֵאֶצְלוֹ אֶל-מוּל אַחֵר, וַיֹּאמֶר כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיְשִׁבֻהוּ הָעָם דָּבָר, כַּדָּבָר הָרִאשׁוֹן.    30 And he turned away from him toward another, and spoke after the same manner; and the people answered him after the former manner.
17.31 לא  וַיִּשָּׁמְעוּ, הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר דָּוִד; וַיַּגִּדוּ לִפְנֵי-שָׁאוּל, וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ.    31 And when the words were heard which David spoke, they rehearsed them before Saul; and he was taken to him.
17.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-שָׁאוּל, אַל-יִפֹּל לֵב-אָדָם עָלָיו; עַבְדְּךָ יֵלֵךְ, וְנִלְחַם עִם-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הַזֶּה.    32 And David said to Saul: 'Let no man's heart fail within him; thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.'
17.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-דָּוִד, לֹא תוּכַל לָלֶכֶת אֶל-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הַזֶּה, לְהִלָּחֵם, עִמּוֹ:  כִּי-נַעַר אַתָּה, וְהוּא אִישׁ מִלְחָמָה מִנְּעֻרָיו.  {ס}    33 And Saul said to David: 'Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him; for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.' {S}
17.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-שָׁאוּל, רֹעֶה הָיָה עַבְדְּךָ לְאָבִיו בַּצֹּאן; וּבָא הָאֲרִי וְאֶת-הַדּוֹב, וְנָשָׂא שֶׂה מֵהָעֵדֶר.    34 And David said unto Saul: 'Thy servant kept his father's sheep; and when there came a lion, or a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock,
17.35 לה  וְיָצָאתִי אַחֲרָיו וְהִכִּתִיו, וְהִצַּלְתִּי מִפִּיו; וַיָּקָם עָלַי--וְהֶחֱזַקְתִּי בִּזְקָנוֹ, וְהִכִּתִיו וַהֲמִיתִּיו.    35 I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth; and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him.
17.36 לו  גַּם אֶת-הָאֲרִי גַּם-הַדֹּב, הִכָּה עַבְדֶּךָ; וְהָיָה הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הֶעָרֵל הַזֶּה, כְּאַחַד מֵהֶם, כִּי חֵרֵף, מַעַרְכֹת אֱלֹהִים חַיִּים.  {ס}    36 Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear; and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath taunted the armies of the living God.' {S}
17.37 לז  וַיֹּאמֶר, דָּוִד, יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר הִצִּלַנִי מִיַּד הָאֲרִי וּמִיַּד הַדֹּב, הוּא יַצִּילֵנִי מִיַּד הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי הַזֶּה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-דָּוִד לֵךְ, וַיהוָה יִהְיֶה עִמָּךְ.    37 And David said: 'The LORD that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, He will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine.' {S} And Saul said unto David: 'Go, and the LORD shall be with thee.'
17.38 לח  וַיַּלְבֵּשׁ שָׁאוּל אֶת-דָּוִד מַדָּיו, וְנָתַן קוֹבַע נְחֹשֶׁת עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיַּלְבֵּשׁ אֹתוֹ, שִׁרְיוֹן.    38 And Saul clad David with his apparel, and he put a helmet of brass upon his head, and he clad him with a coat of mail.
17.39 לט  וַיַּחְגֹּר דָּוִד אֶת-חַרְבּוֹ מֵעַל לְמַדָּיו וַיֹּאֶל לָלֶכֶת, כִּי לֹא-נִסָּה, וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-שָׁאוּל לֹא אוּכַל לָלֶכֶת בָּאֵלֶּה, כִּי לֹא נִסִּיתִי; וַיְסִרֵם דָּוִד, מֵעָלָיו.    39 And David girded his sword upon his apparel, and he essayed to go[, but could not]; for he had not tried it. And David said unto Saul: 'I cannot go with these; for I have not tried them.' And David put them off him.
17.40 מ  וַיִּקַּח מַקְלוֹ בְּיָדוֹ, וַיִּבְחַר-לוֹ חֲמִשָּׁה חַלֻּקֵי-אֲבָנִים מִן-הַנַּחַל וַיָּשֶׂם אֹתָם בִּכְלִי הָרֹעִים אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ וּבַיַּלְקוּט--וְקַלְעוֹ בְיָדוֹ; וַיִּגַּשׁ, אֶל-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי.    40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in the shepherd's bag which he had, even in his scrip; and his sling was in his hand; and he drew near to the Philistine.
17.41 מא  וַיֵּלֶךְ, הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, הֹלֵךְ וְקָרֵב, אֶל-דָּוִד; וְהָאִישׁ נֹשֵׂא הַצִּנָּה, לְפָנָיו.    41 And the Philistine came nearer and nearer unto David; and the man that bore the shield went before him.
17.42 מב  וַיַּבֵּט הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי וַיִּרְאֶה אֶת-דָּוִד, וַיִּבְזֵהוּ:  כִּי-הָיָה נַעַר, וְאַדְמֹנִי עִם-יְפֵה מַרְאֶה.    42 And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him; for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and withal of a fair countenance.
17.43 מג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, אֶל-דָּוִד, הֲכֶלֶב אָנֹכִי, כִּי-אַתָּה בָא-אֵלַי בַּמַּקְלוֹת; וַיְקַלֵּל הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי אֶת-דָּוִד, בֵּאלֹהָיו.    43 And the Philistine said unto David: 'Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves?' And the Philistine cursed David by his god.
17.44 מד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, אֶל-דָּוִד:  לְכָה אֵלַי--וְאֶתְּנָה אֶת-בְּשָׂרְךָ, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וּלְבֶהֱמַת הַשָּׂדֶה.  {ס}    44 And the Philistine said to David: 'Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.' {S}
17.45 מה  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, אַתָּה בָּא אֵלַי, בְּחֶרֶב וּבַחֲנִית וּבְכִידוֹן; וְאָנֹכִי בָא-אֵלֶיךָ, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי מַעַרְכוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר חֵרַפְתָּ.    45 Then said David to the Philistine: 'Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a javelin; but I come to thee in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast taunted.
17.46 מו  הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה יְסַגֶּרְךָ יְהוָה בְּיָדִי וְהִכִּיתִךָ, וַהֲסִרֹתִי אֶת-רֹאשְׁךָ מֵעָלֶיךָ, וְנָתַתִּי פֶּגֶר מַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וּלְחַיַּת הָאָרֶץ; וְיֵדְעוּ, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, כִּי יֵשׁ אֱלֹהִים, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.    46 This day will the LORD deliver thee into my hand; and I will smite thee, and take thy head from off thee; and I will give the carcasses of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel;
17.47 מז  וְיֵדְעוּ כָּל-הַקָּהָל הַזֶּה, כִּי-לֹא בְּחֶרֶב וּבַחֲנִית יְהוֹשִׁיעַ יְהוָה:  כִּי לַיהוָה הַמִּלְחָמָה, וְנָתַן אֶתְכֶם בְּיָדֵנוּ.  {ס}    47 and that all this assembly may know that the LORD saveth not with sword and spear; for the battle is the LORD'S, and He will give you into our hand.' {S}
17.48 מח  וְהָיָה כִּי-קָם הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיִּקְרַב לִקְרַאת דָּוִד; וַיְמַהֵר דָּוִד, וַיָּרָץ הַמַּעֲרָכָה לִקְרַאת הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי.    48 And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came and drew nigh to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.
17.49 מט  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד אֶת-יָדוֹ אֶל-הַכֶּלִי, וַיִּקַּח מִשָּׁם אֶבֶן וַיְקַלַּע, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, אֶל-מִצְחוֹ; וַתִּטְבַּע הָאֶבֶן בְּמִצְחוֹ, וַיִּפֹּל עַל-פָּנָיו אָרְצָה.    49 And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slung it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead; and the stone sank into his forehead, and he fell upon his face to the earth.
17.50 נ  וַיֶּחֱזַק דָּוִד מִן-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי בַּקֶּלַע וּבָאֶבֶן, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי וַיְמִתֵהוּ; וְחֶרֶב, אֵין בְּיַד-דָּוִד.    50 So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword in the hand of David.
17.51 נא  וַיָּרָץ דָּוִד וַיַּעֲמֹד אֶל-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי וַיִּקַּח אֶת-חַרְבּוֹ וַיִּשְׁלְפָהּ מִתַּעְרָהּ, וַיְמֹתְתֵהוּ, וַיִּכְרָת-בָּהּ, אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיִּרְאוּ הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים כִּי-מֵת גִּבּוֹרָם, וַיָּנֻסוּ.    51 And David ran, and stood over the Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw that their mighty man was dead, they fled.
17.52 נב  וַיָּקֻמוּ אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה וַיָּרִעוּ, וַיִּרְדְּפוּ אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים, עַד-בּוֹאֲךָ גַיְא, וְעַד שַׁעֲרֵי עֶקְרוֹן; וַיִּפְּלוּ חַלְלֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, בְּדֶרֶךְ שַׁעֲרַיִם, וְעַד-גַּת, וְעַד-עֶקְרוֹן.    52 And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until thou comest to Gai, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.
17.53 נג  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִדְּלֹק אַחֲרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; וַיָּשֹׁסּוּ, אֶת-מַחֲנֵיהֶם.    53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their camp.
17.54 נד  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד אֶת-רֹאשׁ הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, וַיְבִאֵהוּ יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְאֶת-כֵּלָיו, שָׂם בְּאָהֳלוֹ.  {ס}    54 And David took the head of the philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent. {S}
17.55 נה  וְכִרְאוֹת שָׁאוּל אֶת-דָּוִד, יֹצֵא לִקְרַאת הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, אָמַר אֶל-אַבְנֵר שַׂר הַצָּבָא, בֶּן-מִי-זֶה הַנַּעַר אַבְנֵר; וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְנֵר, חֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ הַמֶּלֶךְ אִם-יָדָעְתִּי.    55 And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, the captain of the host: 'Abner, whose son is this youth?' And Abner said: 'As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.'
17.56 נו  וַיֹּאמֶר, הַמֶּלֶךְ:  שְׁאַל אַתָּה, בֶּן-מִי-זֶה הָעָלֶם.  {ס}    56 And the king said: 'Inquire thou whose son the stripling is.' {S}
17.57 נז  וּכְשׁוּב דָּוִד, מֵהַכּוֹת אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, וַיִּקַּח אֹתוֹ אַבְנֵר, וַיְבִאֵהוּ לִפְנֵי שָׁאוּל; וְרֹאשׁ הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, בְּיָדוֹ.    57 And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
17.58 נח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו שָׁאוּל, בֶּן-מִי אַתָּה הַנָּעַר; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, בֶּן-עַבְדְּךָ יִשַׁי בֵּית הַלַּחְמִי.    58 And Saul said to him: 'Whose son art thou, thou young man?' And David answered: 'I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Beth-lehemite.'
18.1 א  וַיְהִי, כְּכַלֹּתוֹ לְדַבֵּר אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וְנֶפֶשׁ יְהוֹנָתָן, נִקְשְׁרָה בְּנֶפֶשׁ דָּוִד; ויאהבו (וַיֶּאֱהָבֵהוּ) יְהוֹנָתָן, כְּנַפְשׁוֹ.    1 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
18.2 ב  וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ שָׁאוּל, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וְלֹא נְתָנוֹ, לָשׁוּב בֵּית אָבִיו.    2 And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father's house.
18.3 ג  וַיִּכְרֹת יְהוֹנָתָן וְדָוִד, בְּרִית, בְּאַהֲבָתוֹ אֹתוֹ, כְּנַפְשׁוֹ.    3 Then Jonathan made a covenant with David, because he loved him as his own soul.
18.4 ד  וַיִּתְפַּשֵּׁט יְהוֹנָתָן, אֶת-הַמְּעִיל אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ, לְדָוִד; וּמַדָּיו, וְעַד-חַרְבּוֹ וְעַד-קַשְׁתּוֹ וְעַד-חֲגֹרוֹ.    4 And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his apparel, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.
18.5 ה  וַיֵּצֵא דָוִד בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁלָחֶנּוּ שָׁאוּל, יַשְׂכִּיל, וַיְשִׂמֵהוּ שָׁאוּל, עַל אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה; וַיִּיטַב, בְּעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם, וְגַם, בְּעֵינֵי עַבְדֵי שָׁאוּל.  {פ}    5 And David went out; whithersoever Saul sent him, he had good success; and Saul set him over the men of war; and it was good in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants. {P}
18.6 ו  וַיְהִי בְּבוֹאָם, בְּשׁוּב דָּוִד מֵהַכּוֹת אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, וַתֵּצֶאנָה הַנָּשִׁים מִכָּל-עָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לשור (לָשִׁיר) וְהַמְּחֹלוֹת, לִקְרַאת שָׁאוּל הַמֶּלֶךְ--בְּתֻפִּים בְּשִׂמְחָה, וּבְשָׁלִשִׁים.    6 And it came to pass as they came, when David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with timbrels, with joy, and with three-stringed instruments.
18.7 ז  וַתַּעֲנֶינָה הַנָּשִׁים הַמְשַׂחֲקוֹת, וַתֹּאמַרְןָ:  הִכָּה שָׁאוּל בַּאֲלָפָו, וְדָוִד בְּרִבְבֹתָיו.    7 And the women sang one to another in their play, and said: Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.
18.8 ח  וַיִּחַר לְשָׁאוּל מְאֹד, וַיֵּרַע בְּעֵינָיו הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, וַיֹּאמֶר נָתְנוּ לְדָוִד רְבָבוֹת, וְלִי נָתְנוּ הָאֲלָפִים; וְעוֹד לוֹ, אַךְ הַמְּלוּכָה.    8 And Saul was very wroth, and this saying displeased him; and he said: 'They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands; and all he lacketh is the kingdom!'
18.9 ט  וַיְהִי שָׁאוּל, עון (עוֹיֵן) אֶת-דָּוִד, מֵהַיּוֹם הַהוּא, וָהָלְאָה.  {ס}    9 And Saul eyed David from that day and forward. {S}
18.10 י  וַיְהִי מִמָּחֳרָת, וַתִּצְלַח רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים רָעָה אֶל-שָׁאוּל וַיִּתְנַבֵּא בְתוֹךְ-הַבַּיִת, וְדָוִד מְנַגֵּן בְּיָדוֹ, כְּיוֹם בְּיוֹם; וְהַחֲנִית, בְּיַד-שָׁאוּל.    10 And it came to pass on the morrow, that an evil spirit from God came mightily upon Saul, and he raved in the midst of the house; and David played with his hand, as he did day by day; and Saul had his spear in his hand.
18.11 יא  וַיָּטֶל שָׁאוּל, אֶת-הַחֲנִית, וַיֹּאמֶר, אַכֶּה בְדָוִד וּבַקִּיר; וַיִּסֹּב דָּוִד מִפָּנָיו, פַּעֲמָיִם.    11 And Saul cast the spear; for he said: 'I will smite David even to the wall.' And David stepped aside out of his presence twice.
18.12 יב  וַיִּרָא שָׁאוּל, מִלִּפְנֵי דָוִד:  כִּי-הָיָה יְהוָה עִמּוֹ, וּמֵעִם שָׁאוּל סָר.    12 And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and was departed from Saul.
18.13 יג  וַיְסִרֵהוּ שָׁאוּל מֵעִמּוֹ, וַיְשִׂמֵהוּ לוֹ שַׂר-אָלֶף; וַיֵּצֵא וַיָּבֹא, לִפְנֵי הָעָם.  {ס}    13 Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people. {S}
18.14 יד  וַיְהִי דָוִד לְכָל-דְּרָכָו, מַשְׂכִּיל; וַיהוָה, עִמּוֹ.    14 And David had great success in all his ways; and the LORD was with him.
18.15 טו  וַיַּרְא שָׁאוּל, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא מַשְׂכִּיל מְאֹד; וַיָּגָר, מִפָּנָיו.    15 And when Saul saw that he had great success, he stood in awe of him.
18.16 טז  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה, אֹהֵב אֶת-דָּוִד:  כִּי-הוּא יוֹצֵא וָבָא, לִפְנֵיהֶם.  {פ}    16 But all Israel and Judah loved David; for he went out and came in before them. {P}
18.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-דָּוִד, הִנֵּה בִתִּי הַגְּדוֹלָה מֵרַב אֹתָהּ אֶתֶּן-לְךָ לְאִשָּׁה--אַךְ הֱיֵה-לִי לְבֶן-חַיִל, וְהִלָּחֵם מִלְחֲמוֹת יְהוָה; וְשָׁאוּל אָמַר, אַל-תְּהִי יָדִי בּוֹ, וּתְהִי-בוֹ, יַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים.  {ס}    17 And Saul said to David: 'Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee to wife; only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD'S battles.' For Saul said: 'Let not my hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.' {S}
18.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-שָׁאוּל, מִי אָנֹכִי וּמִי חַיַּי, מִשְׁפַּחַת אָבִי, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי-אֶהְיֶה חָתָן, לַמֶּלֶךְ.    18 And David said unto Saul: 'Who am I, and what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law to the king?'
18.19 יט  וַיְהִי, בְּעֵת תֵּת אֶת-מֵרַב בַּת-שָׁאוּל--לְדָוִד; וְהִיא נִתְּנָה לְעַדְרִיאֵל הַמְּחֹלָתִי, לְאִשָּׁה.    19 But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife.
18.20 כ  וַתֶּאֱהַב מִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל, אֶת-דָּוִד; וַיַּגִּדוּ לְשָׁאוּל, וַיִּשַׁר הַדָּבָר בְּעֵינָיו.    20 And Michal Saul's daughter loved David; and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him.
18.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶתְּנֶנָּה לּוֹ, וּתְהִי-לוֹ לְמוֹקֵשׁ, וּתְהִי-בוֹ, יַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-דָּוִד, בִּשְׁתַּיִם תִּתְחַתֵּן בִּי הַיּוֹם.    21 And Saul said: 'I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.' Wherefore Saul said to David: 'Thou shalt this day be my son-in-law through the one of the twain.'
18.22 כב  וַיְצַו שָׁאוּל אֶת-עֲבָדָו, דַּבְּרוּ אֶל-דָּוִד בַּלָּט לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה חָפֵץ בְּךָ הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו אֲהֵבוּךָ; וְעַתָּה, הִתְחַתֵּן בַּמֶּלֶךְ.    22 And Saul commanded his servants: 'Speak with David secretly, and say: Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee; now therefore be the king's son-in-law.'
18.23 כג  וַיְדַבְּרוּ עַבְדֵי שָׁאוּל, בְּאָזְנֵי דָוִד, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, הַנְקַלָּה בְעֵינֵיכֶם הִתְחַתֵּן בַּמֶּלֶךְ, וְאָנֹכִי, אִישׁ-רָשׁ וְנִקְלֶה.    23 And Saul's servants spoke those words in the ears of David. And David said: 'Seemeth it to you a light thing to be the king's son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?'
18.24 כד  וַיַּגִּדוּ עַבְדֵי שָׁאוּל, לוֹ--לֵאמֹר:  כַּדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, דִּבֶּר דָּוִד.    24 And the servants of Saul told him, saying: 'On this manner spoke David.'
18.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל כֹּה-תֹאמְרוּ לְדָוִד, אֵין-חֵפֶץ לַמֶּלֶךְ בְּמֹהַר, כִּי בְּמֵאָה עָרְלוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים, לְהִנָּקֵם בְּאֹיְבֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְשָׁאוּל חָשַׁב, לְהַפִּיל אֶת-דָּוִד בְּיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    25 And Saul said: 'Thus shall ye say to David: The king desireth not any dowry, but a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies.' For Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.
18.26 כו  וַיַּגִּדוּ עֲבָדָיו לְדָוִד, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וַיִּשַׁר הַדָּבָר בְּעֵינֵי דָוִד, לְהִתְחַתֵּן בַּמֶּלֶךְ; וְלֹא מָלְאוּ, הַיָּמִים.    26 And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king's son-in-law. And the days were not expired;
18.27 כז  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד וַיֵּלֶךְ הוּא וַאֲנָשָׁיו, וַיַּךְ בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים מָאתַיִם אִישׁ, וַיָּבֵא דָוִד אֶת-עָרְלֹתֵיהֶם, וַיְמַלְאוּם לַמֶּלֶךְ לְהִתְחַתֵּן בַּמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ שָׁאוּל אֶת-מִיכַל בִּתּוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה.  {ס}    27 and David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full number to the king, that he might be the king's son-in-law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife. {S}
18.28 כח  וַיַּרְא שָׁאוּל וַיֵּדַע, כִּי יְהוָה עִם-דָּוִד; וּמִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל, אֲהֵבַתְהוּ.    28 And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David; and Michal Saul's daughter loved him.
18.29 כט  וַיֹּאסֶף שָׁאוּל, לֵרֹא מִפְּנֵי דָוִד--עוֹד; וַיְהִי שָׁאוּל אֹיֵב אֶת-דָּוִד, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {פ}    29 And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul was David's enemy continually. {P}
18.30 ל  וַיֵּצְאוּ, שָׂרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; וַיְהִי מִדֵּי צֵאתָם, שָׂכַל דָּוִד מִכֹּל עַבְדֵי שָׁאוּל, וַיִּיקַר שְׁמוֹ, מְאֹד.  {ס}    30 Then the princes of the Philistines went forth; and it came to pass, as often as they went forth, that David prospered more than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by. {S}
19.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר שָׁאוּל, אֶל-יוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ וְאֶל-כָּל-עֲבָדָיו, לְהָמִית, אֶת-דָּוִד; וִיהוֹנָתָן, בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, חָפֵץ בְּדָוִד, מְאֹד.    1 And Saul spoke to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should slay David; but Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David.
19.2 ב  וַיַּגֵּד יְהוֹנָתָן לְדָוִד לֵאמֹר, מְבַקֵּשׁ שָׁאוּל אָבִי לַהֲמִיתֶךָ; וְעַתָּה הִשָּׁמֶר-נָא בַבֹּקֶר, וְיָשַׁבְתָּ בַסֵּתֶר וְנַחְבֵּאתָ.    2 And Jonathan told David, saying: 'Saul my father seeketh to slay thee; now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself in the morning, and abide in a secret place, and hide thyself.
19.3 ג  וַאֲנִי אֵצֵא וְעָמַדְתִּי לְיַד-אָבִי, בַּשָּׂדֶה אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה שָׁם, וַאֲנִי, אֲדַבֵּר בְּךָ אֶל-אָבִי; וְרָאִיתִי מָה, וְהִגַּדְתִּי לָךְ.  {ס}    3 And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will speak with my father of thee; and if I see aught, I will tell thee.' {S}
19.4 ד  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוֹנָתָן בְּדָוִד טוֹב, אֶל-שָׁאוּל אָבִיו; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אַל-יֶחֱטָא הַמֶּלֶךְ בְּעַבְדּוֹ בְדָוִד, כִּי לוֹא חָטָא לָךְ, וְכִי מַעֲשָׂיו, טוֹב-לְךָ מְאֹד.    4 And Jonathan spoke good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him: 'Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his work hath been very good towards thee;
19.5 ה  וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ בְכַפּוֹ וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי, וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה תְּשׁוּעָה גְדוֹלָה לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--רָאִיתָ, וַתִּשְׂמָח; וְלָמָּה תֶחֱטָא בְּדָם נָקִי, לְהָמִית אֶת-דָּוִד חִנָּם.    5 for he put his life in his hand, and smote the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great victory for all Israel; thou sawest it, and didst rejoice; wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?'
19.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁמַע שָׁאוּל, בְּקוֹל יְהוֹנָתָן; וַיִּשָּׁבַע שָׁאוּל, חַי-יְהוָה אִם-יוּמָת.    6 And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan; and Saul swore: 'As the LORD liveth, he shall not be put to death.'
19.7 ז  וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹנָתָן, לְדָוִד, וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ יְהוֹנָתָן, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיָּבֵא יְהוֹנָתָן אֶת-דָּוִד אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וַיְהִי לְפָנָיו כְּאֶתְמוֹל שִׁלְשׁוֹם.  {ס}    7 And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan told him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as beforetime. {S}
19.8 ח  וַתּוֹסֶף הַמִּלְחָמָה, לִהְיוֹת; וַיֵּצֵא דָוִד וַיִּלָּחֶם בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיַּךְ בָּהֶם מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה, וַיָּנֻסוּ, מִפָּנָיו.    8 And there was war again; and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled before him.
19.9 ט  וַתְּהִי רוּחַ יְהוָה רָעָה, אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וְהוּא בְּבֵיתוֹ יֹשֵׁב, וַחֲנִיתוֹ בְּיָדוֹ; וְדָוִד, מְנַגֵּן בְּיָד.    9 And an evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his spear in his hand; and David was playing with his hand.
19.10 י  וַיְבַקֵּשׁ שָׁאוּל לְהַכּוֹת בַּחֲנִית, בְּדָוִד וּבַקִּיר, וַיִּפְטַר מִפְּנֵי שָׁאוּל, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַחֲנִית בַּקִּיר; וְדָוִד נָס וַיִּמָּלֵט, בַּלַּיְלָה הוּא.  {פ}    10 And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the spear; but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the spear into the wall; and David fled, and escaped that night. {P}
19.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁלַח שָׁאוּל מַלְאָכִים אֶל-בֵּית דָּוִד, לְשָׁמְרוֹ, וְלַהֲמִיתוֹ, בַּבֹּקֶר; וַתַּגֵּד לְדָוִד, מִיכַל אִשְׁתּוֹ לֵאמֹר, אִם-אֵינְךָ מְמַלֵּט אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ הַלַּיְלָה, מָחָר אַתָּה מוּמָת.    11 And Saul sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to slay him in the morning; and Michal David's wife told him, saying: 'If thou save not thy life to-night, to-morrow thou shalt be slain.'
19.12 יב  וַתֹּרֶד מִיכַל אֶת-דָּוִד, בְּעַד הַחַלּוֹן; וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיִּבְרַח, וַיִּמָּלֵט.    12 So Michal let David down through the window; and he went, and fled, and escaped.
19.13 יג  וַתִּקַּח מִיכַל אֶת-הַתְּרָפִים, וַתָּשֶׂם אֶל-הַמִּטָּה, וְאֵת כְּבִיר הָעִזִּים, שָׂמָה מְרַאֲשֹׁתָיו; וַתְּכַס, בַּבָּגֶד.  {ס}    13 And Michal took the teraphim, and laid it in the bed, and put a quilt of goats' hair at the head thereof, and covered it with a cloth. {S}
19.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח שָׁאוּל מַלְאָכִים, לָקַחַת אֶת-דָּוִד; וַתֹּאמֶר, חֹלֶה הוּא.  {ס}    14 And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said: 'He is sick.' {S}
19.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁלַח שָׁאוּל אֶת-הַמַּלְאָכִים, לִרְאוֹת אֶת-דָּוִד לֵאמֹר:  הַעֲלוּ אֹתוֹ בַמִּטָּה אֵלַי, לַהֲמִתוֹ.    15 And Saul sent the messengers to see David, saying: 'Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.'
19.16 טז  וַיָּבֹאוּ, הַמַּלְאָכִים, וְהִנֵּה הַתְּרָפִים, אֶל-הַמִּטָּה; וּכְבִיר הָעִזִּים, מְרַאֲשֹׁתָיו.  {ס}    16 And when the messengers came in, behold, the teraphim was in the bed, with the quilt of goats' hair at the head thereof. {S}
19.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-מִיכַל, לָמָּה כָּכָה רִמִּיתִנִי, וַתְּשַׁלְּחִי אֶת-אֹיְבִי, וַיִּמָּלֵט; וַתֹּאמֶר מִיכַל אֶל-שָׁאוּל, הוּא-אָמַר אֵלַי שַׁלְּחִנִי לָמָה אֲמִיתֵךְ.    17 And Saul said unto Michal: 'Why hast thou deceived me thus, and let mine enemy go, that he is escaped?' And Michal answered Saul: 'He said unto me: Let me go; why should I kill thee?'
19.18 יח  וְדָוִד בָּרַח וַיִּמָּלֵט, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-שְׁמוּאֵל הָרָמָתָה, וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה-לוֹ שָׁאוּל; וַיֵּלֶךְ הוּא וּשְׁמוּאֵל, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בנוית (בְּנָיוֹת).    18 Now David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
19.19 יט  וַיֻּגַּד לְשָׁאוּל, לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה דָוִד, בנוית (בְּנָיוֹת) בָּרָמָה.    19 And it was told Saul, saying: 'Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.'
19.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁלַח שָׁאוּל מַלְאָכִים, לָקַחַת אֶת-דָּוִד, וַיַּרְא אֶת-לַהֲקַת הַנְּבִיאִים נִבְּאִים, וּשְׁמוּאֵל עֹמֵד נִצָּב עֲלֵיהֶם; וַתְּהִי עַל-מַלְאֲכֵי שָׁאוּל, רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים, וַיִּתְנַבְּאוּ, גַּם-הֵמָּה.    20 And Saul sent messengers to take David; and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as head over them, the spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied.
19.21 כא  וַיַּגִּדוּ לְשָׁאוּל, וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיִּתְנַבְּאוּ, גַּם-הֵמָּה;  {ס}  וַיֹּסֶף שָׁאוּל, וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים שְׁלִשִׁים, וַיִּתְנַבְּאוּ, גַּם-הֵמָּה.    21 And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they also prophesied. {S} And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they also prophesied.
19.22 כב  וַיֵּלֶךְ גַּם-הוּא הָרָמָתָה, וַיָּבֹא עַד-בּוֹר הַגָּדוֹל אֲשֶׁר בַּשֶּׂכוּ, וַיִּשְׁאַל וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵיפֹה שְׁמוּאֵל וְדָוִד; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה בנוית (בְּנָיוֹת) בָּרָמָה.    22 Then went he also to Ramah, and came to the great cistern that is in Secu; and he asked and said: 'Where are Samuel and David?' And one said: 'Behold, they are at Naioth in Ramah.'
19.23 כג  וַיֵּלֶךְ שָׁם, אֶל-נוית (נָיוֹת) בָּרָמָה; וַתְּהִי עָלָיו גַּם-הוּא רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים, וַיֵּלֶךְ הָלוֹךְ וַיִּתְנַבֵּא, עַד-בֹּאוֹ, בנוית (בְּנָיוֹת) בָּרָמָה.    23 And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah; and the spirit of God came upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
19.24 כד  וַיִּפְשַׁט גַּם-הוּא בְּגָדָיו, וַיִּתְנַבֵּא גַם-הוּא לִפְנֵי שְׁמוּאֵל, וַיִּפֹּל עָרֹם, כָּל-הַיּוֹם הַהוּא וְכָל-הַלָּיְלָה; עַל-כֵּן, יֹאמְרוּ--הֲגַם שָׁאוּל, בַּנְּבִיאִם.  {פ}    24 And he also stripped off his clothes, and he also prophesied before Samuel, and lay down naked all that day and all that night. Wherefore they say: 'Is Saul also among the prophets?' {P}
20.1 א  וַיִּבְרַח דָּוִד, מנוות (מִנָּיוֹת) בָּרָמָה; וַיָּבֹא וַיֹּאמֶר לִפְנֵי יְהוֹנָתָן, מֶה עָשִׂיתִי מֶה-עֲוֺנִי וּמֶה-חַטָּאתִי לִפְנֵי אָבִיךָ--כִּי מְבַקֵּשׁ, אֶת-נַפְשִׁי.    1 And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan: 'What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life?'
20.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ חָלִילָה, לֹא תָמוּת--הִנֵּה לו-עשה (לֹא-יַעֲשֶׂה) אָבִי דָּבָר גָּדוֹל אוֹ דָּבָר קָטֹן, וְלֹא יִגְלֶה אֶת-אָזְנִי; וּמַדּוּעַ יַסְתִּיר אָבִי מִמֶּנִּי אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אֵין זֹאת.    2 And he said unto him: 'Far from it; thou shalt not die; behold, my father doeth nothing either great or small, but that he discloseth it unto me; and why should my father hide this thing from me? it is not so.'
20.3 ג  וַיִּשָּׁבַע עוֹד דָּוִד, וַיֹּאמֶר יָדֹעַ יָדַע אָבִיךָ כִּי-מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ, וַיֹּאמֶר אַל-יֵדַע-זֹאת יְהוֹנָתָן, פֶּן-יֵעָצֵב; וְאוּלָם, חַי-יְהוָה וְחֵי נַפְשֶׁךָ--כִּי כְפֶשַׂע, בֵּינִי וּבֵין הַמָּוֶת.    3 And David swore moreover, and said: 'Thy father knoweth well that I have found favour in thine eyes; and he saith: Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved; but truly as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.'
20.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָתָן, אֶל-דָּוִד:  מַה-תֹּאמַר נַפְשְׁךָ, וְאֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ.  {פ}    4 Then said Jonathan unto David: 'What doth thy soul desire, that I should do it for thee?' {P}
20.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-יְהוֹנָתָן, הִנֵּה-חֹדֶשׁ מָחָר, וְאָנֹכִי יָשֹׁב-אֵשֵׁב עִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֶאֱכוֹל; וְשִׁלַּחְתַּנִי וְנִסְתַּרְתִּי בַשָּׂדֶה, עַד הָעֶרֶב הַשְּׁלִשִׁית.    5 And David said unto Jonathan: 'Behold, to-morrow is the new moon, when I should sit with the king to eat; so let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.
20.6 ו  אִם-פָּקֹד יִפְקְדֵנִי, אָבִיךָ:  וְאָמַרְתָּ, נִשְׁאֹל נִשְׁאַל מִמֶּנִּי דָוִד לָרוּץ בֵּית-לֶחֶם עִירוֹ--כִּי זֶבַח הַיָּמִים שָׁם, לְכָל-הַמִּשְׁפָּחָה.    6 If thy father miss me at all, then say: David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Beth-lehem his city; for it is the yearly sacrifice there for all the family.
20.7 ז  אִם-כֹּה יֹאמַר טוֹב, שָׁלוֹם לְעַבְדֶּךָ; וְאִם-חָרֹה יֶחֱרֶה, לוֹ--דַּע, כִּי-כָלְתָה הָרָעָה מֵעִמּוֹ.    7 If he say thus: It is well; thy servant shall have peace; but if he be wroth, then know that evil is determined by him.
20.8 ח  וְעָשִׂיתָ חֶסֶד, עַל-עַבְדֶּךָ, כִּי בִּבְרִית יְהוָה, הֵבֵאתָ אֶת-עַבְדְּךָ עִמָּךְ; וְאִם-יֶשׁ-בִּי עָוֺן הֲמִיתֵנִי אַתָּה, וְעַד-אָבִיךָ לָמָּה-זֶּה תְבִיאֵנִי.  {פ}    8 Therefore deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thee; but if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?' {P}
20.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָתָן, חָלִילָה לָּךְ:  כִּי אִם-יָדֹעַ אֵדַע, כִּי-כָלְתָה הָרָעָה מֵעִם אָבִי לָבוֹא עָלֶיךָ--וְלֹא אֹתָהּ, אַגִּיד לָךְ.  {ס}    9 And Jonathan said: 'Far be it from thee; for if I should at all know that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee? {S}
20.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-יְהוֹנָתָן, מִי יַגִּיד לִי; אוֹ מַה-יַּעַנְךָ אָבִיךָ, קָשָׁה.  {ס}    10 Then said David to Jonathan: 'Who shall tell me if perchance thy father answer thee roughly?' {S}
20.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָתָן אֶל-דָּוִד, לְכָה וְנֵצֵא הַשָּׂדֶה; וַיֵּצְאוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם, הַשָּׂדֶה.  {ס}    11 And Jonathan said unto David: 'Come and let us go out into the field.' And they went out both of them into the field. {S}
20.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָתָן אֶל-דָּוִד, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי-אֶחְקֹר אֶת-אָבִי כָּעֵת מָחָר הַשְּׁלִשִׁית, וְהִנֵּה-טוֹב, אֶל-דָּוִד--וְלֹא-אָז אֶשְׁלַח אֵלֶיךָ, וְגָלִיתִי אֶת-אָזְנֶךָ.    12 And Jonathan said unto David: 'The LORD, the God of Israel--when I have sounded my father about this time to-morrow, or the third day, behold, if there be good toward David, shall I not then send unto thee, and disclose it unto thee?
20.13 יג  כֹּה-יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה לִיהוֹנָתָן וְכֹה יֹסִיף, כִּי-יֵיטִב אֶל-אָבִי אֶת-הָרָעָה עָלֶיךָ--וְגָלִיתִי אֶת-אָזְנֶךָ, וְשִׁלַּחְתִּיךָ וְהָלַכְתָּ לְשָׁלוֹם; וִיהִי יְהוָה עִמָּךְ, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיָה עִם-אָבִי.    13 The LORD do so to Jonathan, and more also, should it please my father to do thee evil, if I disclose it not unto thee, and send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace; and the LORD be with thee, as He hath been with my father.
20.14 יד  וְלֹא, אִם-עוֹדֶנִּי חָי; וְלֹא-תַעֲשֶׂה עִמָּדִי חֶסֶד יְהוָה, וְלֹא אָמוּת.    14 And thou shalt not only while yet I live show me the kindness of the LORD, that I die not;
20.15 טו  וְלֹא-תַכְרִית אֶת-חַסְדְּךָ מֵעִם בֵּיתִי, עַד-עוֹלָם; וְלֹא, בְּהַכְרִת יְהוָה אֶת-אֹיְבֵי דָוִד, אִישׁ, מֵעַל פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.    15 but also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever; no, not when the LORD hath cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.'
20.16 טז  וַיִּכְרֹת יְהוֹנָתָן, עִם-בֵּית דָּוִד; וּבִקֵּשׁ יְהוָה, מִיַּד אֹיְבֵי דָוִד.    16 So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David: 'The LORD even require it at the hand of David's enemies.'
20.17 יז  וַיּוֹסֶף יְהוֹנָתָן לְהַשְׁבִּיעַ אֶת-דָּוִד, בְּאַהֲבָתוֹ אֹתוֹ:  כִּי-אַהֲבַת נַפְשׁוֹ, אֲהֵבוֹ.  {ס}    17 And Jonathan caused David to swear again, for the love that he had to him; for he loved him as he loved his own soul. {S}
20.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר-לוֹ יְהוֹנָתָן, מָחָר חֹדֶשׁ; וְנִפְקַדְתָּ, כִּי יִפָּקֵד מוֹשָׁבֶךָ.    18 And Jonathan said unto him: 'To-morrow is the new moon; and thou wilt be missed, thy seat will be empty.
20.19 יט  וְשִׁלַּשְׁתָּ, תֵּרֵד מְאֹד, וּבָאתָ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר-נִסְתַּרְתָּ שָּׁם בְּיוֹם הַמַּעֲשֶׂה; וְיָשַׁבְתָּ, אֵצֶל הָאֶבֶן הָאָזֶל.    19 And in the third day thou shalt hide thyself well, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself in the day of work, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.
20.20 כ  וַאֲנִי, שְׁלֹשֶׁת הַחִצִּים צִדָּה אוֹרֶה, לְשַׁלַּח-לִי, לְמַטָּרָה.    20 And I will shoot three arrows to the side-ward, as though I shot at a mark.
20.21 כא  וְהִנֵּה אֶשְׁלַח אֶת-הַנַּעַר, לֵךְ מְצָא אֶת-הַחִצִּים:  אִם-אָמֹר אֹמַר לַנַּעַר הִנֵּה הַחִצִּים מִמְּךָ וָהֵנָּה, קָחֶנּוּ וָבֹאָה כִּי-שָׁלוֹם לְךָ וְאֵין דָּבָר--חַי-יְהוָה.    21 And, behold, I will send the lad: Go, find the arrows. If I say unto the lad: Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee; take them, and come; for there is peace to thee and no hurt, as the LORD liveth.
20.22 כב  וְאִם-כֹּה אֹמַר לָעֶלֶם, הִנֵּה הַחִצִּים מִמְּךָ וָהָלְאָה--לֵךְ, כִּי שִׁלַּחֲךָ יְהוָה.    22 But if I say thus unto the boy: Behold, the arrows are beyond thee; go thy way; for the LORD hath sent thee away.
20.23 כג  וְהַדָּבָר--אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְנוּ, אֲנִי וָאָתָּה:  הִנֵּה יְהוָה בֵּינִי וּבֵינְךָ, עַד-עוֹלָם.  {ס}    23 And as touching the matter which I and thou have spoken of, behold, the LORD is between me and thee for ever.' {S}
20.24 כד  וַיִּסָּתֵר דָּוִד, בַּשָּׂדֶה; וַיְהִי הַחֹדֶשׁ, וַיֵּשֶׁב הַמֶּלֶךְ על- (אֶל-) הַלֶּחֶם לֶאֱכוֹל.    24 So David hid himself in the field; and when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to the meal to eat.
20.25 כה  וַיֵּשֶׁב הַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-מוֹשָׁבוֹ כְּפַעַם בְּפַעַם, אֶל-מוֹשַׁב הַקִּיר, וַיָּקָם יְהוֹנָתָן, וַיֵּשֶׁב אַבְנֵר מִצַּד שָׁאוּל; וַיִּפָּקֵד, מְקוֹם דָּוִד.    25 And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon the seat by the wall; and Jonathan stood up, and Abner sat by Saul's side; but David's place was empty.
20.26 כו  וְלֹא-דִבֶּר שָׁאוּל מְאוּמָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא:  כִּי אָמַר מִקְרֶה הוּא, בִּלְתִּי טָהוֹר הוּא כִּי-לֹא טָהוֹר.  {ס}    26 Nevertheless Saul spoke not any thing that day; for he thought: 'Something hath befallen him, he is unclean; surely he is not clean.' {S}
20.27 כז  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרַת הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, וַיִּפָּקֵד, מְקוֹם דָּוִד;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, אֶל-יְהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ, מַדּוּעַ לֹא-בָא בֶן-יִשַׁי גַּם-תְּמוֹל גַּם-הַיּוֹם, אֶל-הַלָּחֶם.    27 And it came to pass on the morrow after the new moon, which was the second day, that David's place was empty; {P} and Saul said unto Jonathan his son: 'Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to the meal, neither yesterday, nor to-day?'
20.28 כח  וַיַּעַן יְהוֹנָתָן, אֶת-שָׁאוּל:  נִשְׁאֹל נִשְׁאַל דָּוִד מֵעִמָּדִי, עַד-בֵּית לָחֶם.    28 And Jonathan answered Saul: 'David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Beth-lehem;
20.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר שַׁלְּחֵנִי נָא כִּי זֶבַח מִשְׁפָּחָה לָנוּ בָּעִיר, וְהוּא צִוָּה-לִי אָחִי, וְעַתָּה אִם-מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ, אִמָּלְטָה נָּא וְאֶרְאֶה אֶת-אֶחָי; עַל-כֵּן לֹא-בָא, אֶל-שֻׁלְחַן הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    29 and he said: Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me; and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he is not come unto the king's table.' {S}
20.30 ל  וַיִּחַר-אַף שָׁאוּל, בִּיהוֹנָתָן, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, בֶּן-נַעֲוַת הַמַּרְדּוּת:  הֲלוֹא יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-בֹחֵר אַתָּה לְבֶן-יִשַׁי, לְבָשְׁתְּךָ, וּלְבֹשֶׁת עֶרְוַת אִמֶּךָ.    30 Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him: 'Thou son of perverse rebellion, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own shame, and unto the shame of thy mother's nakedness?
20.31 לא  כִּי כָל-הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר בֶּן-יִשַׁי חַי עַל-הָאֲדָמָה, לֹא תִכּוֹן, אַתָּה וּמַלְכוּתֶךָ; וְעַתָּה, שְׁלַח וְקַח אֹתוֹ אֵלַי--כִּי בֶן-מָוֶת, הוּא.  {ס}    31 For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the earth, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he deserveth to die.' {S}
20.32 לב  וַיַּעַן, יְהוֹנָתָן, אֶת-שָׁאוּל, אָבִיו; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו לָמָּה יוּמַת, מֶה עָשָׂה.    32 And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him: 'Wherefore should he be put to death? what hath he done?'
20.33 לג  וַיָּטֶל שָׁאוּל אֶת-הַחֲנִית עָלָיו, לְהַכֹּתוֹ; וַיֵּדַע, יְהוֹנָתָן, כִּי-כָלָה הִיא מֵעִם אָבִיו, לְהָמִית אֶת-דָּוִד.  {ס}    33 And Saul cast his spear at him to smite him; whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to put David to death. {S}
20.34 לד  וַיָּקָם יְהוֹנָתָן מֵעִם הַשֻּׁלְחָן, בָּחֳרִי-אָף; וְלֹא-אָכַל בְּיוֹם-הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, לֶחֶם--כִּי נֶעְצַב אֶל-דָּוִד, כִּי הִכְלִמוֹ אָבִיו.  {ס}    34 So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no food the second day of the month; for he was grieved for David, and because his father had put him to shame. {S}
20.35 לה  וַיְהִי בַבֹּקֶר, וַיֵּצֵא יְהוֹנָתָן הַשָּׂדֶה לְמוֹעֵד דָּוִד; וְנַעַר קָטֹן, עִמּוֹ.    35 And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.
20.36 לו  וַיֹּאמֶר לְנַעֲרוֹ--רֻץ מְצָא נָא אֶת-הַחִצִּים, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי מוֹרֶה; הַנַּעַר רָץ, וְהוּא-יָרָה הַחֵצִי לְהַעֲבִרוֹ.    36 And he said unto his lad: 'Run, find now the arrows which I shoot.' And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.
20.37 לז  וַיָּבֹא הַנַּעַר עַד-מְקוֹם הַחֵצִי, אֲשֶׁר יָרָה יְהוֹנָתָן; וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹנָתָן אַחֲרֵי הַנַּעַר, וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲלוֹא הַחֵצִי, מִמְּךָ וָהָלְאָה.    37 And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said: 'Is not the arrow beyond thee?'
20.38 לח  וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹנָתָן אַחֲרֵי הַנַּעַר, מְהֵרָה חוּשָׁה אַל-תַּעֲמֹד; וַיְלַקֵּט נַעַר יְהוֹנָתָן, אֶת-החצי (הַחִצִּים), וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-אֲדֹנָיו.    38 And Jonathan cried after the lad: 'Make speed, hasten, stay not.' And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.
20.39 לט  וְהַנַּעַר, לֹא-יָדַע מְאוּמָה; אַךְ יְהוֹנָתָן וְדָוִד, יָדְעוּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר.  {ס}    39 But the lad knew not any thing; only Jonathan and David knew the matter. {S}
20.40 מ  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוֹנָתָן אֶת-כֵּלָיו, אֶל-הַנַּעַר אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, לֵךְ הָבֵיא הָעִיר.    40 And Jonathan gave his weapons unto his lad, and said unto him: 'Go, carry them to the city.'
20.41 מא  הַנַּעַר, בָּא, וְדָוִד קָם מֵאֵצֶל הַנֶּגֶב, וַיִּפֹּל לְאַפָּיו אַרְצָה וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים; וַיִּשְּׁקוּ אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ, וַיִּבְכּוּ אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ, עַד-דָּוִד, הִגְדִּיל.    41 And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the South, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed down three times; and they kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded.
20.42 מב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָתָן לְדָוִד, לֵךְ לְשָׁלוֹם:  אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְנוּ שְׁנֵינוּ אֲנַחְנוּ, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה יִהְיֶה בֵּינִי וּבֵינֶךָ וּבֵין זַרְעִי וּבֵין זַרְעֲךָ, עַד-עוֹלָם.  {פ}    42 And Jonathan said to David: 'Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying: The LORD shall be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed, for ever.' {P}
21.1 א  וַיָּקָם, וַיֵּלַךְ; וִיהוֹנָתָן, בָּא הָעִיר.    1 And he arose and departed; and Jonathan went into the city.
21.2 ב  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד נֹבֶה, אֶל-אֲחִימֶלֶךְ הַכֹּהֵן; וַיֶּחֱרַד אֲחִימֶלֶךְ לִקְרַאת דָּוִד, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ מַדּוּעַ אַתָּה לְבַדֶּךָ, וְאִישׁ, אֵין אִתָּךְ.    2 Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest; and Ahimelech came to meet David trembling, and said unto him: 'Why art thou alone, and no man with thee?'
21.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ הַכֹּהֵן, הַמֶּלֶךְ צִוַּנִי דָבָר, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי אִישׁ אַל-יֵדַע מְאוּמָה אֶת-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-אָנֹכִי שֹׁלֵחֲךָ, וַאֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִךָ; וְאֶת-הַנְּעָרִים יוֹדַעְתִּי, אֶל-מְקוֹם פְּלֹנִי אַלְמוֹנִי.    3 And David said unto Ahimelech the priest: 'The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me: Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee; and the young men have I appointed to such and such a place.
21.4 ד  וְעַתָּה, מַה-יֵּשׁ תַּחַת-יָדְךָ חֲמִשָּׁה-לֶחֶם--תְּנָה בְיָדִי; אוֹ, הַנִּמְצָא.    4 Now therefore what is under thy hand? five loaves of bread? give them in my hand, or whatsoever there is present.'
21.5 ה  וַיַּעַן הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-דָּוִד וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵין-לֶחֶם חֹל אֶל-תַּחַת יָדִי:  כִּי-אִם-לֶחֶם קֹדֶשׁ יֵשׁ, אִם-נִשְׁמְרוּ הַנְּעָרִים אַךְ מֵאִשָּׁה.  {פ}    5 And the priest answered David, and said: 'There is no common bread under my hand, but there is holy bread; if only the young men have kept themselves from women.' {P}
21.6 ו  וַיַּעַן דָּוִד אֶת-הַכֹּהֵן וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, כִּי אִם-אִשָּׁה עֲצֻרָה-לָנוּ כִּתְמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם, בְּצֵאתִי, וַיִּהְיוּ כְלֵי-הַנְּעָרִים קֹדֶשׁ:  וְהוּא, דֶּרֶךְ חֹל--וְאַף, כִּי הַיּוֹם יִקְדַּשׁ בַּכֶּלִי.    6 And David answered the priest, and said unto him: 'Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days; when I came out, the vessels of the young men were holy, though it was but a common journey; how much more then to-day, when there shall be holy bread in their vessels?'
21.7 ז  וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, קֹדֶשׁ:  כִּי לֹא-הָיָה שָׁם לֶחֶם, כִּי-אִם-לֶחֶם הַפָּנִים הַמּוּסָרִים מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, לָשׂוּם לֶחֶם חֹם, בְּיוֹם הִלָּקְחוֹ.    7 So the priest gave him holy bread; for there was no bread there but the showbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.--
21.8 ח  וְשָׁם אִישׁ מֵעַבְדֵי שָׁאוּל בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, נֶעְצָר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וּשְׁמוֹ, דֹּאֵג הָאֲדֹמִי--אַבִּיר הָרֹעִים, אֲשֶׁר לְשָׁאוּל.    8 Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg the Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.--
21.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ, וְאִין יֶשׁ-פֹּה תַחַת-יָדְךָ חֲנִית אוֹ-חָרֶב:  כִּי גַם-חַרְבִּי וְגַם-כֵּלַי לֹא-לָקַחְתִּי בְיָדִי, כִּי-הָיָה דְבַר-הַמֶּלֶךְ נָחוּץ.  {ס}    9 And David said unto Ahimelech: 'And is there peradventure here under thy hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.' {S}
21.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר הַכֹּהֵן, חֶרֶב גָּלְיָת הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי אֲשֶׁר-הִכִּיתָ בְּעֵמֶק הָאֵלָה הִנֵּה-הִיא לוּטָה בַשִּׂמְלָה אַחֲרֵי הָאֵפוֹד--אִם-אֹתָהּ תִּקַּח-לְךָ קָח, כִּי אֵין אַחֶרֶת זוּלָתָהּ בָּזֶה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֵין כָּמוֹהָ, תְּנֶנָּה לִּי.    10 And the priest said: 'The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the vale of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod; if thou wilt take that, take it; for there is no other save that here.' {S} And David said: 'There is none like that; give it me.'
21.11 יא  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד, וַיִּבְרַח בַּיּוֹם-הַהוּא מִפְּנֵי שָׁאוּל; וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-אָכִישׁ מֶלֶךְ גַּת.    11 And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.
21.12 יב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ עַבְדֵי אָכִישׁ, אֵלָיו, הֲלוֹא-זֶה דָוִד, מֶלֶךְ הָאָרֶץ; הֲלוֹא לָזֶה, יַעֲנוּ בַמְּחֹלוֹת לֵאמֹר, הִכָּה שָׁאוּל בַּאֲלָפָו, וְדָוִד בְּרִבְבֹתָו.    12 And the servants of Achish said unto him: 'Is not this David the king of the land? Did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying: Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?'
21.13 יג  וַיָּשֶׂם דָּוִד אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, בִּלְבָבוֹ; וַיִּרָא מְאֹד, מִפְּנֵי אָכִישׁ מֶלֶךְ-גַּת.    13 And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
21.14 יד  וַיְשַׁנּוֹ אֶת-טַעְמוֹ בְּעֵינֵיהֶם, וַיִּתְהֹלֵל בְּיָדָם; וַיְתָו עַל-דַּלְתוֹת הַשַּׁעַר, וַיּוֹרֶד רִירוֹ אֶל-זְקָנוֹ.  {ס}    14 And he changed his demeanour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard. {S}
21.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אָכִישׁ, אֶל-עֲבָדָיו:  הִנֵּה תִרְאוּ אִישׁ מִשְׁתַּגֵּעַ, לָמָּה תָּבִיאוּ אֹתוֹ אֵלָי.  חֲסַר מְשֻׁגָּעִים, אָנִי, כִּי-הֲבֵאתֶם אֶת-זֶה, לְהִשְׁתַּגֵּעַ עָלָי; הֲזֶה, יָבוֹא אֶל-בֵּיתִי.  {פ}    15 Then said Achish unto his servants: 'Lo, when ye see a man that is mad, wherefore do ye bring him to me? Do I lack madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the madman in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?' {P}
22.1 א  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד מִשָּׁם, וַיִּמָּלֵט אֶל-מְעָרַת עֲדֻלָּם; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶחָיו וְכָל-בֵּית אָבִיו, וַיֵּרְדוּ אֵלָיו שָׁמָּה.    1 David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave of Adullam; and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him.
22.2 ב  וַיִּתְקַבְּצוּ אֵלָיו כָּל-אִישׁ מָצוֹק וְכָל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ נֹשֶׁא, וְכָל-אִישׁ מַר-נֶפֶשׁ, וַיְהִי עֲלֵיהֶם, לְשָׂר; וַיִּהְיוּ עִמּוֹ, כְּאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אִישׁ.    2 And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became captain over them; and there were with him about four hundred men.
22.3 ג  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד מִשָּׁם, מִצְפֵּה מוֹאָב; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב, יֵצֵא-נָא אָבִי וְאִמִּי אִתְּכֶם, עַד אֲשֶׁר אֵדַע, מַה-יַּעֲשֶׂה-לִּי אֱלֹהִים.    3 And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab; and he said unto the king of Moab: 'Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.'
22.4 ד  וַיַּנְחֵם, אֶת-פְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ עִמּוֹ, כָּל-יְמֵי הֱיוֹת-דָּוִד בַּמְּצוּדָה.  {ס}    4 And he brought them before the king of Moab; and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the stronghold. {S}
22.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר גָּד הַנָּבִיא אֶל-דָּוִד, לֹא תֵשֵׁב בַּמְּצוּדָה--לֵךְ וּבָאתָ-לְּךָ, אֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד, וַיָּבֹא יַעַר חָרֶת.  {ס}    5 And the prophet Gad said unto David: 'Abide not in the stronghold; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah.' Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hereth. {S}
22.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁמַע שָׁאוּל--כִּי נוֹדַע דָּוִד, וַאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ; וְשָׁאוּל יוֹשֵׁב בַּגִּבְעָה תַּחַת-הָאֶשֶׁל בָּרָמָה, וַחֲנִיתוֹ בְיָדוֹ, וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו, נִצָּבִים עָלָיו.    6 And Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with him; now Saul was sitting in Gibeah, under the tamarisk-tree in Ramah, with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him.
22.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, לַעֲבָדָיו הַנִּצָּבִים עָלָיו, שִׁמְעוּ-נָא, בְּנֵי יְמִינִי:  גַּם-לְכֻלְּכֶם, יִתֵּן בֶּן-יִשַׁי שָׂדוֹת וּכְרָמִים--לְכֻלְּכֶם יָשִׂים, שָׂרֵי אֲלָפִים וְשָׂרֵי מֵאוֹת.    7 And Saul said unto his servants that stood about him: 'Hear now, ye Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, will he make you all captains of thousands and captains of hundreds;
22.8 ח  כִּי קְשַׁרְתֶּם כֻּלְּכֶם עָלַי, וְאֵין-גֹּלֶה אֶת-אָזְנִי בִּכְרָת-בְּנִי עִם-בֶּן-יִשַׁי, וְאֵין-חֹלֶה מִכֶּם עָלַי, וְגֹלֶה אֶת-אָזְנִי:  כִּי הֵקִים בְּנִי אֶת-עַבְדִּי עָלַי לְאֹרֵב, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}    8 that all of you have conspired against me, and there was none that disclosed it to me when my son made a league with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or discloseth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?' {S}
22.9 ט  וַיַּעַן דֹּאֵג הָאֲדֹמִי, וְהוּא נִצָּב עַל-עַבְדֵי-שָׁאוּל--וַיֹּאמַר:  רָאִיתִי, אֶת-בֶּן-יִשַׁי, בָּא נֹבֶה, אֶל-אֲחִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֲחִטוּב.    9 Then answered Doeg the Edomite, who was set over the servants of Saul, and said: 'I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.
22.10 י  וַיִּשְׁאַל-לוֹ, בַּיהוָה, וְצֵידָה, נָתַן לוֹ; וְאֵת, חֶרֶב גָּלְיָת הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי--נָתַן לוֹ.    10 And he inquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.'
22.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ לִקְרֹא אֶת-אֲחִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֵת כָּל-בֵּית אָבִיו הַכֹּהֲנִים--אֲשֶׁר בְּנֹב; וַיָּבֹאוּ כֻלָּם, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    11 Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in Nob; and they came all of them to the king. {S}
22.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, שְׁמַע-נָא בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנְנִי אֲדֹנִי.    12 And Saul said: 'Hear now, thou son of Ahitub.' And he answered: 'Here I am, my lord.'
22.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָו, שָׁאוּל, לָמָּה קְשַׁרְתֶּם עָלַי, אַתָּה וּבֶן-יִשָׁי--בְּתִתְּךָ לוֹ לֶחֶם וְחֶרֶב, וְשָׁאוֹל לוֹ בֵּאלֹהִים, לָקוּם אֵלַי לְאֹרֵב, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}    13 And Saul said unto him: 'Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast inquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?' {S}
22.14 יד  וַיַּעַן אֲחִימֶלֶךְ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמַר:  וּמִי בְכָל-עֲבָדֶיךָ כְּדָוִד נֶאֱמָן, וַחֲתַן הַמֶּלֶךְ וְסָר אֶל-מִשְׁמַעְתֶּךָ וְנִכְבָּד בְּבֵיתֶךָ.    14 Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said: 'And who among all thy servants is so trusted as David, who is the king's son-in-law, and giveth heed unto thy bidding, and is honourable in thy house?
22.15 טו  הַיּוֹם הַחִלֹּתִי לשאול- (לִשְׁאָל-) לוֹ בֵאלֹהִים, חָלִילָה לִּי:  אַל-יָשֵׂם הַמֶּלֶךְ בְּעַבְדּוֹ דָבָר, בְּכָל-בֵּית אָבִי--כִּי לֹא-יָדַע עַבְדְּךָ בְּכָל-זֹאת, דָּבָר קָטֹן אוֹ גָדוֹל.    15 Have I to-day begun to inquire of God for him? be it far from me; let not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father; for thy servant knoweth nothing of all this, less or more.'
22.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, מוֹת תָּמוּת אֲחִימֶלֶךְ:  אַתָּה, וְכָל-בֵּית אָבִיךָ.    16 And the king said: 'Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father's house.'
22.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ לָרָצִים הַנִּצָּבִים עָלָיו סֹבּוּ וְהָמִיתוּ כֹּהֲנֵי יְהוָה, כִּי גַם-יָדָם עִם-דָּוִד, וְכִי יָדְעוּ כִּי-בֹרֵחַ הוּא, וְלֹא גָלוּ אֶת-אזנו (אָזְנִי); וְלֹא-אָבוּ עַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לִשְׁלֹחַ אֶת-יָדָם, לִפְגֹעַ, בְּכֹהֲנֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}    17 And the king said unto the guard that stood about him: 'Turn, and slay the priests of the LORD; because their hand also is with David, and because they knew that he fled, and did not disclose it to me.' But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of the LORD. {S}
22.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, לדויג (לְדוֹאֵג), סֹב אַתָּה, וּפְגַע בַּכֹּהֲנִים; וַיִּסֹּב דויג (דּוֹאֵג) הָאֲדֹמִי, וַיִּפְגַּע-הוּא בַּכֹּהֲנִים, וַיָּמֶת בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא שְׁמֹנִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה אִישׁ, נֹשֵׂא אֵפוֹד בָּד.    18 And the king said to Doeg: 'Turn thou, and fall upon the priests.' And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and he slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.
22.19 יט  וְאֵת נֹב עִיר-הַכֹּהֲנִים, הִכָּה לְפִי-חֶרֶב, מֵאִישׁ וְעַד-אִשָּׁה, מֵעוֹלֵל וְעַד-יוֹנֵק; וְשׁוֹר וַחֲמוֹר וָשֶׂה, לְפִי-חָרֶב.    19 And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen and asses and sheep, with the edge of the sword.
22.20 כ  וַיִּמָּלֵט בֵּן-אֶחָד, לַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֲחִטוּב, וּשְׁמוֹ, אֶבְיָתָר; וַיִּבְרַח, אַחֲרֵי דָוִד.    20 And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.
22.21 כא  וַיַּגֵּד אֶבְיָתָר, לְדָוִד:  כִּי הָרַג שָׁאוּל, אֵת כֹּהֲנֵי יְהוָה.    21 And Abiathar told David that Saul had slain the LORD'S priests.
22.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לְאֶבְיָתָר, יָדַעְתִּי בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא כִּי-שָׁם דויג (דּוֹאֵג) הָאֲדֹמִי, כִּי-הַגֵּד יַגִּיד, לְשָׁאוּל:  אָנֹכִי סַבֹּתִי, בְּכָל-נֶפֶשׁ בֵּית אָבִיךָ.    22 And David said unto Abiathar: 'I knew on that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul; I have brought about the death of all the persons of thy father's house.
22.23 כג  שְׁבָה אִתִּי אַל-תִּירָא, כִּי אֲשֶׁר-יְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-נַפְשִׁי יְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ:  כִּי-מִשְׁמֶרֶת אַתָּה, עִמָּדִי.  {ס}    23 Abide thou with me, fear not; for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life; for with me thou shalt be in safeguard.' {S}
23.1 א  וַיַּגִּדוּ לְדָוִד, לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה פְלִשְׁתִּים נִלְחָמִים בִּקְעִילָה, וְהֵמָּה שֹׁסִים אֶת-הַגֳּרָנוֹת.    1 And they told David, saying: 'Behold, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and they rob the threshing-floors.'
23.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִד בַּיהוָה, לֵאמֹר, הַאֵלֵךְ וְהִכֵּיתִי, בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים הָאֵלֶּה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-דָּוִד, לֵךְ וְהִכִּיתָ בַפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְהוֹשַׁעְתָּ, אֶת-קְעִילָה.    2 Therefore David inquired of the LORD, saying: 'Shall I go and smite these Philistines?' {S} And the LORD said unto David: 'Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.'
23.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אַנְשֵׁי דָוִד, אֵלָיו, הִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ פֹה בִּיהוּדָה, יְרֵאִים; וְאַף כִּי-נֵלֵךְ קְעִלָה, אֶל-מַעַרְכוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים.  {ס}    3 And David's men said unto him: 'Behold, we are afraid here in Judah; how much more then if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?' {S}
23.4 ד  וַיּוֹסֶף עוֹד דָּוִד לִשְׁאוֹל בַּיהוָה, וַיַּעֲנֵהוּ יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, קוּם רֵד קְעִילָה--כִּי-אֲנִי נֹתֵן אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, בְּיָדֶךָ.    4 Then David inquired of the LORD yet again. And the LORD answered him and said: 'Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines into thy hand.'
23.5 ה  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד וַאֲנָשָׁו קְעִילָה וַיִּלָּחֶם בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּנְהַג אֶת-מִקְנֵיהֶם, וַיַּךְ בָּהֶם, מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה; וַיֹּשַׁע דָּוִד, אֵת יֹשְׁבֵי קְעִילָה.  {ס}    5 And David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and slew them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah. {S}
23.6 ו  וַיְהִי, בִּבְרֹחַ אֶבְיָתָר בֶּן-אֲחִימֶלֶךְ אֶל-דָּוִד--קְעִילָה; אֵפוֹד, יָרַד בְּיָדוֹ.    6 And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.
23.7 ז  וַיֻּגַּד לְשָׁאוּל, כִּי-בָא דָוִד קְעִילָה; וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, נִכַּר אֹתוֹ אֱלֹהִים בְּיָדִי--כִּי נִסְגַּר לָבוֹא, בְּעִיר דְּלָתַיִם וּבְרִיחַ.    7 And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said: 'God hath delivered him into my hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars.'
23.8 ח  וַיְשַׁמַּע שָׁאוּל אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, לַמִּלְחָמָה, לָרֶדֶת קְעִילָה, לָצוּר אֶל-דָּוִד וְאֶל-אֲנָשָׁיו.    8 And Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.
23.9 ט  וַיֵּדַע דָּוִד--כִּי עָלָיו, שָׁאוּל מַחֲרִישׁ הָרָעָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-אֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן, הַגִּישָׁה הָאֵפוֹד.  {ס}    9 And David knew that Saul devised mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest: 'Bring hither the ephod.' {S}
23.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, דָּוִד, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שָׁמֹעַ שָׁמַע עַבְדְּךָ כִּי-מְבַקֵּשׁ שָׁאוּל לָבוֹא אֶל-קְעִילָה--לְשַׁחֵת לָעִיר, בַּעֲבוּרִי.    10 Then said David: 'O LORD, the God of Israel, Thy servant hath surely heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake.
23.11 יא  הֲיַסְגִּרֻנִי בַעֲלֵי קְעִילָה בְיָדוֹ הֲיֵרֵד שָׁאוּל, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמַע עַבְדֶּךָ--יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַגֶּד-נָא לְעַבְדֶּךָ;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, יֵרֵד.  {ס}    11 Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul come down, as Thy servant hath heard?' O LORD, the God of Israel, I beseech Thee, tell Thy servant.' {S} And the LORD said: 'He will come down.' {S}
23.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד--הֲיַסְגִּרוּ בַּעֲלֵי קְעִילָה אֹתִי וְאֶת-אֲנָשַׁי, בְּיַד-שָׁאוּל; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, יַסְגִּירוּ.  {ס}    12 Then said David: 'Will the men of Keilah deliver up me and my men into the hand of Saul?' And the LORD said: 'They will deliver thee up.' {S}
23.13 יג  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו כְּשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, וַיֵּצְאוּ מִקְּעִלָה, וַיִּתְהַלְּכוּ, בַּאֲשֶׁר יִתְהַלָּכוּ; וּלְשָׁאוּל הֻגַּד, כִּי-נִמְלַט דָּוִד מִקְּעִילָה, וַיֶּחְדַּל, לָצֵאת.    13 Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbore to go forth.
23.14 יד  וַיֵּשֶׁב דָּוִד בַּמִּדְבָּר בַּמְּצָדוֹת, וַיֵּשֶׁב בָּהָר בְּמִדְבַּר-זִיף; וַיְבַקְשֵׁהוּ שָׁאוּל כָּל-הַיָּמִים, וְלֹא-נְתָנוֹ אֱלֹהִים בְּיָדוֹ.    14 And David abode in the wilderness in the strongholds, and remained in the hill-country in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand.
23.15 טו  וַיַּרְא דָּוִד, כִּי-יָצָא שָׁאוּל לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ; וְדָוִד בְּמִדְבַּר-זִיף, בַּחֹרְשָׁה.  {ס}    15 And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life; and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in the wood. {S}
23.16 טז  וַיָּקָם יְהוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-דָּוִד חֹרְשָׁה; וַיְחַזֵּק אֶת-יָדוֹ, בֵּאלֹהִים.    16 And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wood, and strengthened his hand in God.
23.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אַל-תִּירָא, כִּי לֹא תִמְצָאֲךָ יַד שָׁאוּל אָבִי, וְאַתָּה תִּמְלֹךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָנֹכִי אֶהְיֶה-לְּךָ לְמִשְׁנֶה; וְגַם-שָׁאוּל אָבִי, יֹדֵעַ כֵּן.    17 And he said unto him: 'Fear not; for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.'
23.18 יח  וַיִּכְרְתוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם בְּרִית, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּשֶׁב דָּוִד בַּחֹרְשָׁה, וִיהוֹנָתָן הָלַךְ לְבֵיתוֹ.  {ס}    18 And they two made a covenant before the LORD; and David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house. {S}
23.19 יט  וַיַּעֲלוּ זִפִים אֶל-שָׁאוּל, הַגִּבְעָתָה לֵאמֹר:  הֲלוֹא דָוִד מִסְתַּתֵּר עִמָּנוּ בַמְּצָדוֹת, בַּחֹרְשָׁה--בְּגִבְעַת הַחֲכִילָה, אֲשֶׁר מִימִין הַיְשִׁימוֹן.    19 Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying: 'Doth not David hide himself with us in the strongholds in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?
23.20 כ  וְעַתָּה לְכָל-אַוַּת נַפְשְׁךָ הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָרֶדֶת--רֵד; וְלָנוּ הַסְגִּירוֹ, בְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.    20 Now therefore, O king, come down, according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shall be to deliver him up into the king's hand.'
23.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, בְּרוּכִים אַתֶּם לַיהוָה:  כִּי חֲמַלְתֶּם, עָלָי.    21 And Saul said: 'Blessed be ye of the LORD; for ye have had compassion on me.
23.22 כב  לְכוּ-נָא הָכִינוּ עוֹד, וּדְעוּ וּרְאוּ אֶת-מְקוֹמוֹ אֲשֶׁר תִּהְיֶה רַגְלוֹ--מִי רָאָהוּ, שָׁם:  כִּי אָמַר אֵלַי, עָרוֹם יַעְרִם הוּא.    22 Go, I pray you, make yet more sure, and know and see his place where his haunt is, and who hath seen him there; for it is told me that he dealeth very subtly.
23.23 כג  וּרְאוּ וּדְעוּ, מִכֹּל הַמַּחֲבֹאִים אֲשֶׁר יִתְחַבֵּא שָׁם, וְשַׁבְתֶּם אֵלַי אֶל-נָכוֹן, וְהָלַכְתִּי אִתְּכֶם; וְהָיָה, אִם-יֶשְׁנוֹ בָאָרֶץ--וְחִפַּשְׂתִּי אֹתוֹ, בְּכֹל אַלְפֵי יְהוּדָה.    23 See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking-places where he hideth himself, and come ye back to me with the certainty, and I will go with you; and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, that I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.'
23.24 כד  וַיָּקוּמוּ וַיֵּלְכוּ זִיפָה, לִפְנֵי שָׁאוּל; וְדָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו בְּמִדְבַּר מָעוֹן, בָּעֲרָבָה--אֶל, יְמִין הַיְשִׁימוֹן.    24 And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul; but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah on the south of Jeshimon.
23.25 כה  וַיֵּלֶךְ שָׁאוּל וַאֲנָשָׁיו, לְבַקֵּשׁ, וַיַּגִּדוּ לְדָוִד, וַיֵּרֶד הַסֶּלַע וַיֵּשֶׁב בְּמִדְבַּר מָעוֹן; וַיִּשְׁמַע שָׁאוּל, וַיִּרְדֹּף אַחֲרֵי-דָוִד מִדְבַּר מָעוֹן.    25 And Saul and his men went to seek him. And they told David; wherefore he came down to the rock, and abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.
23.26 כו  וַיֵּלֶךְ שָׁאוּל מִצַּד הָהָר, מִזֶּה, וְדָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו מִצַּד הָהָר, מִזֶּה; וַיְהִי דָוִד נֶחְפָּז לָלֶכֶת, מִפְּנֵי שָׁאוּל, וְשָׁאוּל וַאֲנָשָׁיו עֹטְרִים אֶל-דָּוִד וְאֶל-אֲנָשָׁיו, לְתָפְשָׂם.    26 And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain; and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them.
23.27 כז  וּמַלְאָךְ בָּא, אֶל-שָׁאוּל לֵאמֹר:  מַהֲרָה וְלֵכָה, כִּי-פָשְׁטוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים עַל-הָאָרֶץ.    27 But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying: 'Haste thee, and come; for the Philistines have made a raid upon the land.'
23.28 כח  וַיָּשָׁב שָׁאוּל, מִרְדֹף אַחֲרֵי דָוִד, וַיֵּלֶךְ, לִקְרַאת פְּלִשְׁתִּים; עַל-כֵּן, קָרְאוּ לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, סֶלַע, הַמַּחְלְקוֹת.    28 So Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines; therefore they called that place Sela-hammahlekoth.
23.29 כט  וַיַּעַל דָּוִד, מִשָּׁם; וַיֵּשֶׁב, בִּמְצָדוֹת עֵין-גֶּדִי.  {ס}    29 And David went up from thence, and dwelt in the strongholds of En-gedi. {S}
24.1 א  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁב שָׁאוּל, מֵאַחֲרֵי, פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּגִּדוּ לוֹ, לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה דָוִד, בְּמִדְבַּר עֵין גֶּדִי.  {ס}    1 And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying: 'Behold, David is in the wilderness of En-gedi.' {S}
24.2 ב  וַיִּקַּח שָׁאוּל, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ בָּחוּר--מִכָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּלֶךְ, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-דָּוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, עַל-פְּנֵי, צוּרֵי הַיְּעֵלִים.    2 Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.
24.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא אֶל-גִּדְרוֹת הַצֹּאן עַל-הַדֶּרֶךְ, וְשָׁם מְעָרָה, וַיָּבֹא שָׁאוּל, לְהָסֵךְ אֶת-רַגְלָיו; וְדָוִד, וַאֲנָשָׁיו, בְּיַרְכְּתֵי הַמְּעָרָה, יֹשְׁבִים.    3 And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet. Now David and his men were sitting in the innermost parts of the cave.
24.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אַנְשֵׁי דָוִד אֵלָיו, הִנֵּה הַיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר-אָמַר יְהוָה אֵלֶיךָ הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי נֹתֵן אֶת-איביך (אֹיִבְךָ) בְּיָדֶךָ, וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִטַב בְּעֵינֶיךָ; וַיָּקָם דָּוִד, וַיִּכְרֹת אֶת-כְּנַף-הַמְּעִיל אֲשֶׁר-לְשָׁאוּל--בַּלָּט.    4 And the men of David said unto him: 'Behold the day in which the LORD hath said unto thee: Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thy hand, and thou shalt do to him as it shall seem good unto thee.' Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily.
24.5 ה  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיַּךְ לֵב-דָּוִד, אֹתוֹ--עַל אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת, אֶת-כָּנָף אֲשֶׁר לְשָׁאוּל.    5 And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.
24.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לַאֲנָשָׁיו חָלִילָה לִּי מֵיְהוָה, אִם-אֶעֱשֶׂה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה לַאדֹנִי לִמְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה--לִשְׁלֹחַ יָדִי, בּוֹ:  כִּי-מְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה, הוּא.    6 And he said unto his men: 'The LORD forbid it me, that I should do this thing unto my lord, the LORD'S anointed, to put forth my hand against him, seeing he is the LORD'S anointed.'
24.7 ז  וַיְשַׁסַּע דָּוִד אֶת-אֲנָשָׁיו בַּדְּבָרִים, וְלֹא נְתָנָם לָקוּם אֶל-שָׁאוּל; וְשָׁאוּל קָם מֵהַמְּעָרָה, וַיֵּלֶךְ בַּדָּרֶךְ.  {ס}    7 So David checked his men with these words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul. And Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way. {S}
24.8 ח  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיֵּצֵא מן המערה (מֵהַמְּעָרָה), וַיִּקְרָא אַחֲרֵי-שָׁאוּל לֵאמֹר, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיַּבֵּט שָׁאוּל אַחֲרָיו, וַיִּקֹּד דָּוִד אַפַּיִם אַרְצָה וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ.  {ס}    8 David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying: 'My lord the king.' And when Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the earth, and prostrated himself. {S}
24.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לְשָׁאוּל, לָמָּה תִשְׁמַע אֶת-דִּבְרֵי אָדָם לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה דָוִד, מְבַקֵּשׁ רָעָתֶךָ.    9 And David said to Saul: 'Wherefore hearkenest thou to men's words, saying: Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?
24.10 י  הִנֵּה הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה רָאוּ עֵינֶיךָ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-נְתָנְךָ יְהוָה הַיּוֹם בְּיָדִי בַּמְּעָרָה, וְאָמַר לַהֲרָגְךָ, וַתָּחָס עָלֶיךָ; וָאֹמַר, לֹא-אֶשְׁלַח יָדִי בַּאדֹנִי--כִּי-מְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה, הוּא.    10 Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the LORD had delivered thee to-day into my hand in the cave; and some bade me kill thee; but mine eye spared thee; and I said: I will not put forth my hand against my lord; for he is the LORD'S anointed.
24.11 יא  וְאָבִי רְאֵה--גַּם רְאֵה אֶת-כְּנַף מְעִילְךָ, בְּיָדִי:  כִּי בְּכָרְתִי אֶת-כְּנַף מְעִילְךָ וְלֹא הֲרַגְתִּיךָ, דַּע וּרְאֵה כִּי אֵין בְּיָדִי רָעָה וָפֶשַׁע וְלֹא-חָטָאתִי לָךְ--וְאַתָּה צֹדֶה אֶת-נַפְשִׁי, לְקַחְתָּהּ.    11 Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand; for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in my hand, and I have not sinned against thee, though thou layest wait for my soul to take it.
24.12 יב  יִשְׁפֹּט יְהוָה בֵּינִי וּבֵינֶךָ, וּנְקָמַנִי יְהוָה מִמֶּךָּ; וְיָדִי, לֹא תִהְיֶה-בָּךְ.    12 The LORD judge between me and thee, and the LORD avenge me of thee; but my hand shall not be upon thee.
24.13 יג  כַּאֲשֶׁר יֹאמַר, מְשַׁל הַקַּדְמֹנִי, מֵרְשָׁעִים, יֵצֵא רֶשַׁע; וְיָדִי, לֹא תִהְיֶה-בָּךְ.    13 As saith the proverb of the ancients: Out of the wicked cometh forth wickedness; but my hand shall not be upon thee.
24.14 יד  אַחֲרֵי מִי יָצָא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַחֲרֵי מִי אַתָּה רֹדֵף:  אַחֲרֵי כֶּלֶב מֵת, אַחֲרֵי פַּרְעֹשׁ אֶחָד.    14 After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.
24.15 טו  וְהָיָה יְהוָה לְדַיָּן, וְשָׁפַט בֵּינִי וּבֵינֶךָ; וְיֵרֶא וְיָרֵב אֶת-רִיבִי, וְיִשְׁפְּטֵנִי מִיָּדֶךָ.  {פ}    15 The LORD therefore be judge, and give sentence between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thy hand.' {P}
24.16 טז  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת דָּוִד, לְדַבֵּר אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל, הֲקֹלְךָ זֶה בְּנִי דָוִד; וַיִּשָּׂא שָׁאוּל קֹלוֹ, וַיֵּבְךְּ.    16 And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said: 'Is this thy voice, my son David?' And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.
24.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-דָּוִד, צַדִּיק אַתָּה, מִמֶּנִּי:  כִּי אַתָּה גְּמַלְתַּנִי הַטּוֹבָה, וַאֲנִי גְּמַלְתִּיךָ הָרָעָה.    17 And he said to David: 'Thou art more righteous than I; for thou hast rendered unto me good, whereas I have rendered unto thee evil.
24.18 יח  ואת (וְאַתָּה) הִגַּדְתָּ הַיּוֹם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתָה אִתִּי טוֹבָה--אֵת אֲשֶׁר סִגְּרַנִי יְהוָה בְּיָדְךָ, וְלֹא הֲרַגְתָּנִי.    18 And thou hast declared this day how that thou hast dealt well with me; forasmuch as when the LORD had delivered me up into thy hand, thou didst not kill me.
24.19 יט  וְכִי-יִמְצָא אִישׁ אֶת-אֹיְבוֹ, וְשִׁלְּחוֹ בְּדֶרֶךְ טוֹבָה; וַיהוָה, יְשַׁלֶּמְךָ טוֹבָה, תַּחַת הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָה לִי.    19 For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore the LORD reward thee good for that which thou hast done unto me this day.
24.20 כ  וְעַתָּה הִנֵּה יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי מָלֹךְ תִּמְלוֹךְ; וְקָמָה, בְּיָדְךָ, מַמְלֶכֶת, יִשְׂרָאֵל.    20 And now, behold, I know that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thy hand.
24.21 כא  וְעַתָּה, הִשָּׁבְעָה לִּי בַּיהוָה, אִם-תַּכְרִית אֶת-זַרְעִי, אַחֲרָי; וְאִם-תַּשְׁמִיד אֶת-שְׁמִי, מִבֵּית אָבִי.    21 Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's house.'
24.22 כב  וַיִּשָּׁבַע דָּוִד, לְשָׁאוּל; וַיֵּלֶךְ שָׁאוּל, אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, וְדָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, עָלוּ עַל-הַמְּצוּדָה.  {ס}    22 And David swore unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men got them up unto the stronghold. {S}
25.1 א  וַיָּמָת שְׁמוּאֵל--וַיִּקָּבְצוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיִּסְפְּדוּ-לוֹ, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְּבֵיתוֹ בָּרָמָה; וַיָּקָם דָּוִד, וַיֵּרֶד אֶל-מִדְבַּר פָּארָן.  {פ}    1 And Samuel died; and all Israel gathered themselves together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran. {P}
25.2 ב  וְאִישׁ בְּמָעוֹן וּמַעֲשֵׂהוּ בַכַּרְמֶל, וְהָאִישׁ גָּדוֹל מְאֹד, וְלוֹ צֹאן שְׁלֹשֶׁת-אֲלָפִים, וְאֶלֶף עִזִּים; וַיְהִי בִּגְזֹז אֶת-צֹאנוֹ, בַּכַּרְמֶל.    2 And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats; and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
25.3 ג  וְשֵׁם הָאִישׁ נָבָל, וְשֵׁם אִשְׁתּוֹ אֲבִגָיִל; וְהָאִשָּׁה טוֹבַת-שֶׂכֶל וִיפַת תֹּאַר, וְהָאִישׁ קָשֶׁה וְרַע מַעֲלָלִים וְהוּא כלבו (כָלִבִּי).    3 Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail; and the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful form; but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was of the house of Caleb.
25.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁמַע דָּוִד, בַּמִּדְבָּר:  כִּי-גֹזֵז נָבָל, אֶת-צֹאנוֹ.    4 And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep.
25.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד, עֲשָׂרָה נְעָרִים; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לַנְּעָרִים, עֲלוּ כַרְמֶלָה וּבָאתֶם אֶל-נָבָל, וּשְׁאֶלְתֶּם-לוֹ בִשְׁמִי, לְשָׁלוֹם.    5 And David sent ten young men, and David said unto the young men: 'Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name;
25.6 ו  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם כֹּה, לֶחָי; וְאַתָּה שָׁלוֹם וּבֵיתְךָ שָׁלוֹם, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-לְךָ שָׁלוֹם.    6 and thus ye shall say: All hail! and peace be both unto thee, and peace be to thy house, and peace be unto all that thou hast.
25.7 ז  וְעַתָּה שָׁמַעְתִּי, כִּי גֹזְזִים לָךְ; עַתָּה, הָרֹעִים אֲשֶׁר-לְךָ הָיוּ עִמָּנוּ--לֹא הֶכְלַמְנוּם וְלֹא-נִפְקַד לָהֶם מְאוּמָה, כָּל-יְמֵי הֱיוֹתָם בַּכַּרְמֶל.    7 And now I have heard that thou hast shearers; thy shepherds have now been with us, and we did them no hurt, neither was there aught missing unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.
25.8 ח  שְׁאַל אֶת-נְעָרֶיךָ וְיַגִּידוּ לָךְ, וְיִמְצְאוּ הַנְּעָרִים חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ--כִּי-עַל-יוֹם טוֹב, בָּנוּ; תְּנָה-נָּא, אֵת אֲשֶׁר תִּמְצָא יָדְךָ לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, וּלְבִנְךָ, לְדָוִד.    8 Ask thy young men, and they will tell thee; wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes; for we come on a good day; give, I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thy hand, unto thy servants, and to thy son David.'
25.9 ט  וַיָּבֹאוּ נַעֲרֵי דָוִד, וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֶל-נָבָל כְּכָל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה בְּשֵׁם דָּוִד; וַיָּנוּחוּ.    9 And when David's young men came, they spoke to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased.
25.10 י  וַיַּעַן נָבָל אֶת-עַבְדֵי דָוִד, וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי דָוִד, וּמִי בֶן-יִשָׁי; הַיּוֹם, רַבּוּ עֲבָדִים, הַמִּתְפָּרְצִים, אִישׁ מִפְּנֵי אֲדֹנָיו.    10 And Nabal answered David's servants, and said: 'Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there are many servants now-a-days that break away every man from his master;
25.11 יא  וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶת-לַחְמִי, וְאֶת-מֵימַי, וְאֵת טִבְחָתִי, אֲשֶׁר טָבַחְתִּי לְגֹזְזָי; וְנָתַתִּי, לַאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא יָדַעְתִּי, אֵי מִזֶּה הֵמָּה.    11 shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men of whom I know not whence they are?'
25.12 יב  וַיַּהַפְכוּ נַעֲרֵי-דָוִד, לְדַרְכָּם; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ, וַיַּגִּדוּ לוֹ, כְּכֹל הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.    12 So David's young men turned on their way, and went back, and came and told him according to all these words.
25.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לַאֲנָשָׁיו חִגְרוּ אִישׁ אֶת-חַרְבּוֹ, וַיַּחְגְּרוּ אִישׁ אֶת-חַרְבּוֹ, וַיַּחְגֹּר גַּם-דָּוִד, אֶת-חַרְבּוֹ; וַיַּעֲלוּ אַחֲרֵי דָוִד, כְּאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, וּמָאתַיִם, יָשְׁבוּ עַל-הַכֵּלִים.    13 And David said unto his men: 'Gird ye on every man his sword.' And they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword; and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred abode by the baggage.
25.14 יד  וְלַאֲבִיגַיִל אֵשֶׁת נָבָל, הִגִּיד נַעַר-אֶחָד מֵהַנְּעָרִים לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה שָׁלַח דָּוִד מַלְאָכִים מֵהַמִּדְבָּר לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-אֲדֹנֵינוּ, וַיָּעַט בָּהֶם.    14 But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying: 'Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and he flew upon them.
25.15 טו  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים, טֹבִים לָנוּ מְאֹד; וְלֹא הָכְלַמְנוּ, וְלֹא-פָקַדְנוּ מְאוּמָה, כָּל-יְמֵי הִתְהַלַּכְנוּ אִתָּם, בִּהְיוֹתֵנוּ בַּשָּׂדֶה.    15 But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we any thing, as long as we went with them, when we were in the fields;
25.16 טז  חוֹמָה הָיוּ עָלֵינוּ, גַּם-לַיְלָה גַּם-יוֹמָם, כָּל-יְמֵי הֱיוֹתֵנוּ עִמָּם, רֹעִים הַצֹּאן.    16 they were a wall unto us both by night and by day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.
25.17 יז  וְעַתָּה, דְּעִי וּרְאִי מַה-תַּעֲשִׂי--כִּי-כָלְתָה הָרָעָה אֶל-אֲדֹנֵינוּ, וְעַל כָּל-בֵּיתוֹ; וְהוּא, בֶּן-בְּלִיַּעַל, מִדַּבֵּר, אֵלָיו.    17 Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is determined against our master, and against all his house; for he is such a base fellow, that one cannot speak to him.'
25.18 יח  וַתְּמַהֵר אבוגיל (אֲבִיגַיִל) וַתִּקַּח מָאתַיִם לֶחֶם וּשְׁנַיִם נִבְלֵי-יַיִן, וְחָמֵשׁ צֹאן עשוות (עֲשׂוּיוֹת) וְחָמֵשׁ סְאִים קָלִי, וּמֵאָה צִמֻּקִים, וּמָאתַיִם דְּבֵלִים; וַתָּשֶׂם, עַל-הַחֲמֹרִים.    18 Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.
25.19 יט  וַתֹּאמֶר לִנְעָרֶיהָ עִבְרוּ לְפָנַי, הִנְנִי אַחֲרֵיכֶם בָּאָה; וּלְאִישָׁהּ נָבָל, לֹא הִגִּידָה.    19 And she said unto her young men: 'Go on before me; behold, I come after you.' But she told not her husband Nabal.
25.20 כ  וְהָיָה הִיא רֹכֶבֶת עַל-הַחֲמוֹר, וְיֹרֶדֶת בְּסֵתֶר הָהָר, וְהִנֵּה דָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, יֹרְדִים לִקְרָאתָהּ; וַתִּפְגֹשׁ, אֹתָם.    20 And it was so, as she rode on her ass, and came down by the covert of the mountain, that, behold, David and his men came down towards her; and she met them.--
25.21 כא  וְדָוִד אָמַר, אַךְ לַשֶּׁקֶר שָׁמַרְתִּי אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לָזֶה בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְלֹא-נִפְקַד מִכָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, מְאוּמָה; וַיָּשֶׁב-לִי רָעָה, תַּחַת טוֹבָה.    21 Now David had said: 'Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him; and he hath returned me evil for good.
25.22 כב  כֹּה-יַעֲשֶׂה אֱלֹהִים לְאֹיְבֵי דָוִד, וְכֹה יֹסִיף:  אִם-אַשְׁאִיר מִכָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ עַד-הַבֹּקֶר, מַשְׁתִּין בְּקִיר.    22 God do so unto the enemies of David, and more also, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning light so much as one male.'--
25.23 כג  וַתֵּרֶא אֲבִיגַיִל, אֶת-דָּוִד, וַתְּמַהֵר, וַתֵּרֶד מֵעַל הַחֲמוֹר; וַתִּפֹּל לְאַפֵּי דָוִד, עַל-פָּנֶיהָ, וַתִּשְׁתַּחוּ, אָרֶץ.    23 And when Abigail saw David, she made haste, and alighted from her ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed down to the ground.
25.24 כד  וַתִּפֹּל, עַל-רַגְלָיו, וַתֹּאמֶר, בִּי-אֲנִי אֲדֹנִי הֶעָוֺן; וּתְדַבֶּר-נָא אֲמָתְךָ, בְּאָזְנֶיךָ, וּשְׁמַע, אֵת דִּבְרֵי אֲמָתֶךָ.    24 And she fell at his feet, and said: 'Upon me, my lord, upon me be the iniquity; and let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine ears, and hear thou the words of thy handmaid.
25.25 כה  אַל-נָא יָשִׂים אֲדֹנִי אֶת-לִבּוֹ אֶל-אִישׁ הַבְּלִיַּעַל הַזֶּה עַל-נָבָל, כִּי כִשְׁמוֹ כֶּן-הוּא--נָבָל שְׁמוֹ, וּנְבָלָה עִמּוֹ; וַאֲנִי, אֲמָתְךָ--לֹא רָאִיתִי אֶת-נַעֲרֵי אֲדֹנִי, אֲשֶׁר שָׁלָחְתָּ.    25 Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this base fellow, even Nabal; for as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name, and churlishness is with him; but I thy handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send.
25.26 כו  וְעַתָּה אֲדֹנִי, חַי-יְהוָה וְחֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ אֲשֶׁר מְנָעֲךָ יְהוָה מִבּוֹא בְדָמִים, וְהוֹשֵׁעַ יָדְךָ, לָךְ; וְעַתָּה, יִהְיוּ כְנָבָל אֹיְבֶיךָ, וְהַמְבַקְשִׁים אֶל-אֲדֹנִי, רָעָה.    26 Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, seeing the LORD hath withholden thee from bloodguiltiness, and from finding redress for thyself with thine own hand, now therefore let thine enemies, and them that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.
25.27 כז  וְעַתָּה הַבְּרָכָה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר-הֵבִיא שִׁפְחָתְךָ לַאדֹנִי; וְנִתְּנָה, לַנְּעָרִים, הַמִּתְהַלְּכִים, בְּרַגְלֵי אֲדֹנִי.    27 And now this present which thy servant hath brought unto my lord, let it be given unto the young men that follow my lord.
25.28 כח  שָׂא נָא, לְפֶשַׁע אֲמָתֶךָ:  כִּי עָשֹׂה-יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה לַאדֹנִי בַּיִת נֶאֱמָן, כִּי-מִלְחֲמוֹת יְהוָה אֲדֹנִי נִלְחָם, וְרָעָה לֹא-תִמָּצֵא בְךָ, מִיָּמֶיךָ.    28 Forgive, I pray thee, the trespass of thy handmaid; for the LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house, because my lord fighteth the battles of the LORD; and evil is not found in thee all thy days.
25.29 כט  וַיָּקָם אָדָם לִרְדָפְךָ, וּלְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ; וְהָיְתָה נֶפֶשׁ אֲדֹנִי צְרוּרָה בִּצְרוֹר הַחַיִּים, אֵת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, וְאֵת נֶפֶשׁ אֹיְבֶיךָ יְקַלְּעֶנָּה, בְּתוֹךְ כַּף הַקָּלַע.    29 And though man be risen up to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul, yet the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as from the hollow of a sling.
25.30 ל  וְהָיָה, כִּי-יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה לַאדֹנִי, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֶת-הַטּוֹבָה, עָלֶיךָ--וְצִוְּךָ לְנָגִיד, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    30 And it shall come to pass, when the LORD shall have done to my lord according to all the good that He hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee prince over Israel;
25.31 לא  וְלֹא תִהְיֶה זֹאת לְךָ לְפוּקָה וּלְמִכְשׁוֹל לֵב לַאדֹנִי, וְלִשְׁפָּךְ-דָּם חִנָּם, וּלְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֲדֹנִי, לוֹ; וְהֵיטִב יְהוָה לַאדֹנִי, וְזָכַרְתָּ אֶת-אֲמָתֶךָ.  {ס}    31 that this shall be no stumbling-block unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood without cause, or that my lord hath found redress for himself. And when the LORD shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thy handmaid.' {S}
25.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, לַאֲבִיגַל:  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחֵךְ הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה לִקְרָאתִי.    32 And David said to Abigail: 'Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me;
25.33 לג  וּבָרוּךְ טַעְמֵךְ, וּבְרוּכָה אָתְּ:  אֲשֶׁר כְּלִתִנִי הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, מִבּוֹא בְדָמִים, וְהֹשֵׁעַ יָדִי, לִי.    33 and blessed be thy discretion, and blessed be thou, that hast kept me this day from bloodguiltiness, and from finding redress for myself with mine own hand.
25.34 לד  וְאוּלָם, חַי-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר מְנָעַנִי, מֵהָרַע אֹתָךְ:  כִּי לוּלֵי מִהַרְתְּ, ותבאתי (וַתָּבֹאת) לִקְרָאתִי--כִּי אִם-נוֹתַר לְנָבָל עַד-אוֹר הַבֹּקֶר, מַשְׁתִּין בְּקִיר.    34 For in very deed, as the LORD, the God of Israel, liveth, who hath withholden me from hurting thee, except thou hadst made haste and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light so much as one male.'
25.35 לה  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד מִיָּדָהּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הֵבִיאָה לוֹ; וְלָהּ אָמַר, עֲלִי לְשָׁלוֹם לְבֵיתֵךְ--רְאִי שָׁמַעְתִּי בְקוֹלֵךְ, וָאֶשָּׂא פָּנָיִךְ.    35 So David received of her hand that which she had brought him; and he said unto her: 'Go up in peace to thy house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.'
25.36 לו  וַתָּבֹא אֲבִיגַיִל אֶל-נָבָל וְהִנֵּה-לוֹ מִשְׁתֶּה בְּבֵיתוֹ כְּמִשְׁתֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְלֵב נָבָל טוֹב עָלָיו, וְהוּא שִׁכֹּר, עַד-מְאֹד; וְלֹא-הִגִּידָה לּוֹ, דָּבָר קָטֹן וְגָדוֹל--עַד-אוֹר הַבֹּקֶר.    36 And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken; wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.
25.37 לז  וַיְהִי בַבֹּקֶר, בְּצֵאת הַיַּיִן מִנָּבָל, וַתַּגֶּד-לוֹ אִשְׁתּוֹ, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיָּמָת לִבּוֹ בְּקִרְבּוֹ, וְהוּא הָיָה לְאָבֶן.    37 And it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things, and his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.
25.38 לח  וַיְהִי, כַּעֲשֶׂרֶת הַיָּמִים; וַיִּגֹּף יְהוָה אֶת-נָבָל, וַיָּמֹת.    38 And it came to pass about ten days after, that the LORD smote Nabal, so that he died.
25.39 לט  וַיִּשְׁמַע דָּוִד, כִּי מֵת נָבָל, וַיֹּאמֶר בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר רָב אֶת-רִיב חֶרְפָּתִי מִיַּד נָבָל וְאֶת-עַבְדּוֹ חָשַׂךְ מֵרָעָה, וְאֵת רָעַת נָבָל הֵשִׁיב יְהוָה בְּרֹאשׁוֹ; וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד וַיְדַבֵּר בַּאֲבִיגַיִל, לְקַחְתָּהּ לוֹ לְאִשָּׁה.    39 And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said: 'Blessed be the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept back His servant from evil; and the evil-doing of Nabal hath the LORD returned upon his own head.' And David sent and spoke concerning Abigail, to take her to him to wife.
25.40 מ  וַיָּבֹאוּ עַבְדֵי דָוִד, אֶל-אֲבִיגַיִל--הַכַּרְמֶלָה; וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֵלֶיהָ, לֵאמֹר, דָּוִד שְׁלָחָנוּ אֵלַיִךְ, לְקַחְתֵּךְ לוֹ לְאִשָּׁה.    40 And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spoke unto her, saying: 'David hath sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife.'
25.41 מא  וַתָּקָם, וַתִּשְׁתַּחוּ אַפַּיִם אָרְצָה; וַתֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה אֲמָתְךָ לְשִׁפְחָה, לִרְחֹץ, רַגְלֵי עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנִי.    41 And she arose, and bowed down with her face to the earth, and said: 'Behold, thy handmaid is a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.'
25.42 מב  וַתְּמַהֵר וַתָּקָם אֲבִיגַיִל, וַתִּרְכַּב עַל-הַחֲמוֹר, וְחָמֵשׁ נַעֲרֹתֶיהָ, הַהֹלְכוֹת לְרַגְלָהּ; וַתֵּלֶךְ, אַחֲרֵי מַלְאֲכֵי דָוִד, וַתְּהִי-לוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה.    42 And Abigail hastened, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that followed her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.
25.43 מג  וְאֶת-אֲחִינֹעַם לָקַח דָּוִד, מִיִּזְרְעֶאל; וַתִּהְיֶיןָ גַּם-שְׁתֵּיהֶן לוֹ, לְנָשִׁים.  {ס}    43 David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they became both of them his wives. {S}
25.44 מד  וְשָׁאוּל, נָתַן אֶת-מִיכַל בִּתּוֹ--אֵשֶׁת דָּוִד:  לְפַלְטִי בֶן-לַיִשׁ, אֲשֶׁר מִגַּלִּים.    44 Now Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was of Gallim.
26.1 א  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַזִּפִים אֶל-שָׁאוּל, הַגִּבְעָתָה לֵאמֹר:  הֲלוֹא דָוִד מִסְתַּתֵּר בְּגִבְעַת הַחֲכִילָה, עַל פְּנֵי הַיְשִׁימֹן.    1 And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying: 'Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?'
26.2 ב  וַיָּקָם שָׁאוּל, וַיֵּרֶד אֶל-מִדְבַּר-זִיף, וְאִתּוֹ שְׁלֹשֶׁת-אֲלָפִים אִישׁ, בְּחוּרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-דָּוִד, בְּמִדְבַּר-זִיף.    2 Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
26.3 ג  וַיִּחַן שָׁאוּל בְּגִבְעַת הַחֲכִילָה, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הַיְשִׁימֹן--עַל-הַדָּרֶךְ; וְדָוִד, יֹשֵׁב בַּמִּדְבָּר, וַיַּרְא, כִּי בָא שָׁאוּל אַחֲרָיו הַמִּדְבָּרָה.    3 And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
26.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד, מְרַגְּלִים; וַיֵּדַע, כִּי-בָא שָׁאוּל אֶל-נָכוֹן.    4 David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come of a certainty.
26.5 ה  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר חָנָה-שָׁם שָׁאוּל, וַיַּרְא דָּוִד אֶת-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר שָׁכַב-שָׁם שָׁאוּל, וְאַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר שַׂר-צְבָאוֹ; וְשָׁאוּל שֹׁכֵב בַּמַּעְגָּל, וְהָעָם חֹנִים סְבִיבֹתָו.    5 And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched; and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host; and Saul lay within the barricade, and the people pitched round about him.
26.6 ו  וַיַּעַן דָּוִד וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-אֲחִימֶלֶךְ הַחִתִּי, וְאֶל-אֲבִישַׁי בֶּן-צְרוּיָה אֲחִי יוֹאָב לֵאמֹר, מִי-יֵרֵד אִתִּי אֶל-שָׁאוּל, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲבִישַׁי, אֲנִי אֵרֵד עִמָּךְ.    6 Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying: 'Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp?' And Abishai said: 'I will go down with thee.'
26.7 ז  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד וַאֲבִישַׁי אֶל-הָעָם, לַיְלָה, וְהִנֵּה שָׁאוּל שֹׁכֵב יָשֵׁן בַּמַּעְגָּל, וַחֲנִיתוֹ מְעוּכָה-בָאָרֶץ מְרַאֲשֹׁתָו; וְאַבְנֵר וְהָעָם, שֹׁכְבִים סְבִיבֹתָו.  {ס}    7 So David and Abishai came to the people by night; and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the barricade, with his spear stuck in the ground at his head; and Abner and the people lay round about him. {S}
26.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲבִישַׁי אֶל-דָּוִד, סִגַּר אֱלֹהִים הַיּוֹם אֶת-אוֹיִבְךָ בְּיָדֶךָ; וְעַתָּה אַכֶּנּוּ נָא בַּחֲנִית וּבָאָרֶץ, פַּעַם אַחַת, וְלֹא אֶשְׁנֶה, לוֹ.    8 Then said Abishai to David: 'God hath delivered up thine enemy into thy hand this day; now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear to the earth at one stroke, and I will not smite him the second time.'
26.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אֲבִישַׁי, אַל-תַּשְׁחִיתֵהוּ:  כִּי מִי שָׁלַח יָדוֹ, בִּמְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה--וְנִקָּה.  {פ}    9 And David said to Abishai: 'Destroy him not; for who can put forth his hand against the LORD'S anointed, and be guiltless?' {P}
26.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד חַי-יְהוָה, כִּי אִם-יְהוָה יִגֳּפֶנּוּ; אוֹ-יוֹמוֹ יָבוֹא וָמֵת, אוֹ בַמִּלְחָמָה יֵרֵד וְנִסְפָּה.    10 And David said: 'As the LORD liveth, nay, but the LORD shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall go down into battle, and be swept away.
26.11 יא  חָלִילָה לִּי מֵיְהוָה, מִשְּׁלֹחַ יָדִי בִּמְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה; וְעַתָּה קַח-נָא אֶת-הַחֲנִית אֲשֶׁר מְרַאֲשֹׁתָו, וְאֶת-צַפַּחַת הַמַּיִם--וְנֵלְכָה-לָּנוּ.    11 The LORD forbid it me, that I should put forth my hand against the LORD'S anointed; but now take, I pray thee, the spear that is at his head, and the cruse of water and let us go.'
26.12 יב  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד אֶת-הַחֲנִית וְאֶת-צַפַּחַת הַמַּיִם, מֵרַאֲשֹׁתֵי שָׁאוּל, וַיֵּלְכוּ, לָהֶם; וְאֵין רֹאֶה וְאֵין יוֹדֵעַ וְאֵין מֵקִיץ, כִּי כֻלָּם יְשֵׁנִים--כִּי תַּרְדֵּמַת יְהוָה, נָפְלָה עֲלֵיהֶם.    12 So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's head; and they got them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither did any awake; for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the LORD was fallen upon them.
26.13 יג  וַיַּעֲבֹר דָּוִד הָעֵבֶר, וַיַּעֲמֹד עַל-רֹאשׁ-הָהָר מֵרָחֹק:  רַב הַמָּקוֹם, בֵּינֵיהֶם.    13 Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of the mountain afar off; a great space being between them.
26.14 יד  וַיִּקְרָא דָוִד אֶל-הָעָם, וְאֶל-אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר לֵאמֹר, הֲלוֹא תַעֲנֶה, אַבְנֵר; וַיַּעַן אַבְנֵר וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי אַתָּה קָרָאתָ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {פ}    14 And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying: 'Answerest thou not, Abner?' Then Abner answered and said: 'Who art thou that criest to the king?' {P}
26.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אַבְנֵר הֲלוֹא-אִישׁ אַתָּה, וּמִי כָמוֹךָ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלָמָּה לֹא שָׁמַרְתָּ, אֶל-אֲדֹנֶיךָ הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כִּי-בָא אַחַד הָעָם, לְהַשְׁחִית אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲדֹנֶיךָ.    15 And David said to Abner: 'Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept watch over thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.
26.16 טז  לֹא-טוֹב הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ--חַי-יְהוָה כִּי בְנֵי-מָוֶת אַתֶּם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שְׁמַרְתֶּם עַל-אֲדֹנֵיכֶם עַל-מְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה; וְעַתָּה רְאֵה, אֵי-חֲנִית הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-צַפַּחַת הַמַּיִם--אֲשֶׁר מְרַאֲשֹׁתָו.    16 This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth, ye deserve to die, because ye have not kept watch over your lord, the LORD'S anointed. And now, see, where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his head.'
26.17 יז  וַיַּכֵּר שָׁאוּל, אֶת-קוֹל דָּוִד, וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲקוֹלְךָ זֶה בְּנִי דָוִד; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, קוֹלִי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    17 And Saul knew David's voice, and said: 'Is this thy voice, my son David?' And David said: 'It is my voice, my lord, O king.'
26.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר, לָמָּה זֶּה אֲדֹנִי רֹדֵף אַחֲרֵי עַבְדּוֹ:  כִּי מֶה עָשִׂיתִי, וּמַה-בְּיָדִי רָעָה.    18 And he said: 'Wherefore doth my lord pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in my hand?
26.19 יט  וְעַתָּה, יִשְׁמַע-נָא אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת, דִּבְרֵי עַבְדּוֹ:  אִם-יְהוָה הֱסִיתְךָ בִי, יָרַח מִנְחָה, וְאִם בְּנֵי הָאָדָם אֲרוּרִים הֵם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, כִּי-גֵרְשׁוּנִי הַיּוֹם מֵהִסְתַּפֵּחַ בְּנַחֲלַת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר לֵךְ עֲבֹד אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.    19 Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If it be the LORD that hath stirred thee up against me, let Him accept an offering; but if it be the children of men, cursed be they before the LORD; for they have driven me out this day that I should not cleave unto the inheritance of the LORD, saying: Go, serve other gods.
26.20 כ  וְעַתָּה, אַל-יִפֹּל דָּמִי אַרְצָה, מִנֶּגֶד, פְּנֵי יְהוָה:  כִּי-יָצָא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-פַּרְעֹשׁ אֶחָד, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִרְדֹּף הַקֹּרֵא, בֶּהָרִים.    20 Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth away from the presence of the LORD; for the king of Israel is come out to seek a single flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.'
26.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל חָטָאתִי שׁוּב בְּנִי-דָוִד, כִּי לֹא-אָרַע לְךָ עוֹד, תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר יָקְרָה נַפְשִׁי בְּעֵינֶיךָ, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  הִנֵּה הִסְכַּלְתִּי וָאֶשְׁגֶּה, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.    21 Then said Saul: 'I have sinned; return, my son David; for I will no more do thee harm, because my life was precious in thine eyes this day; behold, I have played the fool and erred exceedingly.'
26.22 כב  וַיַּעַן דָּוִד וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה החנית (חֲנִית) הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְיַעֲבֹר אֶחָד מֵהַנְּעָרִים, וְיִקָּחֶהָ.    22 And David answered and said: 'Behold the king's spear! let then one of the young men come over and fetch it.
26.23 כג  וַיהוָה יָשִׁיב לָאִישׁ, אֶת-צִדְקָתוֹ וְאֶת-אֱמֻנָתוֹ--אֲשֶׁר נְתָנְךָ יְהוָה הַיּוֹם, בְּיָד, וְלֹא אָבִיתִי, לִשְׁלֹחַ יָדִי בִּמְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה.    23 And the LORD will render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness; forasmuch as the LORD delivered thee into my hand to-day, and I would not put forth my hand against the LORD'S anointed.
26.24 כד  וְהִנֵּה, כַּאֲשֶׁר גָּדְלָה נַפְשְׁךָ הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--בְּעֵינָי:  כֵּן תִּגְדַּל נַפְשִׁי בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, וְיַצִּלֵנִי מִכָּל-צָרָה.  {פ}    24 And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let Him deliver me out of all tribulation.' {P}
26.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל אֶל-דָּוִד, בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה בְּנִי דָוִד--גַּם עָשֹׂה תַעֲשֶׂה, וְגַם יָכֹל תּוּכָל; וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד לְדַרְכּוֹ, וְשָׁאוּל שָׁב לִמְקוֹמוֹ.  {פ}    25 Then Saul said to David: 'Blessed be thou, my son David; thou shalt both do mightily, and shalt surely prevail.' So David went his way, and Saul returned to his place. {P}
27.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-לִבּוֹ, עַתָּה אֶסָּפֶה יוֹם-אֶחָד בְּיַד-שָׁאוּל; אֵין-לִי טוֹב כִּי הִמָּלֵט אִמָּלֵט אֶל-אֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְנוֹאַשׁ מִמֶּנִּי שָׁאוּל לְבַקְשֵׁנִי עוֹד בְּכָל-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְנִמְלַטְתִּי, מִיָּדוֹ.    1 And David said in his heart: 'I shall now be swept away one day by the hand of Saul; there is nothing better for me than that I should escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul will despair of me, to seek me any more in all the borders of Israel; so shall I escape out of his hand.'
27.2 ב  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד--וַיַּעֲבֹר הוּא, וְשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר עִמּוֹ:  אֶל-אָכִישׁ בֶּן-מָעוֹךְ, מֶלֶךְ גַּת.    2 And David arose, and passed over, he and the six hundred men that were with him, unto Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
27.3 ג  וַיֵּשֶׁב דָּוִד עִם-אָכִישׁ בְּגַת הוּא וַאֲנָשָׁיו, אִישׁ וּבֵיתוֹ:  דָּוִד, וּשְׁתֵּי נָשָׁיו, אֲחִינֹעַם הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִת, וַאֲבִיגַיִל אֵשֶׁת-נָבָל הַכַּרְמְלִית.    3 And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.
27.4 ד  וַיֻּגַּד לְשָׁאוּל, כִּי-בָרַח דָּוִד גַּת; וְלֹא-יוסף (יָסַף) עוֹד, לְבַקְשׁוֹ.  {ס}    4 And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath; and he sought no more again for him. {S}
27.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אָכִישׁ, אִם-נָא מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ יִתְּנוּ-לִי מָקוֹם בְּאַחַת עָרֵי הַשָּׂדֶה--וְאֵשְׁבָה שָּׁם; וְלָמָּה יֵשֵׁב עַבְדְּךָ בְּעִיר הַמַּמְלָכָה, עִמָּךְ.    5 And David said unto Achish: 'If now I have found favour in thine eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities in the country, that I may dwell there; for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?'
27.6 ו  וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ אָכִישׁ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֶת-צִקְלָג; לָכֵן הָיְתָה צִקְלַג לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    6 Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day; wherefore Ziklag belongeth unto the kings of Judah unto this day. {P}
27.7 ז  וַיְהִי מִסְפַּר הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר-יָשַׁב דָּוִד בִּשְׂדֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים--יָמִים, וְאַרְבָּעָה חֳדָשִׁים.    7 And the number of the days that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.
27.8 ח  וַיַּעַל דָּוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, וַיִּפְשְׁטוּ אֶל-הַגְּשׁוּרִי והגרזי (וְהַגִּזְרִי) וְהָעֲמָלֵקִי:  כִּי הֵנָּה יֹשְׁבוֹת הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר מֵעוֹלָם, בּוֹאֲךָ שׁוּרָה, וְעַד-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    8 And David and his men went up, and made a raid upon the Geshurites, and the Gizrites, and the Amalekites; for those were the inhabitants of the land, who were of old, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.
27.9 ט  וְהִכָּה דָוִד אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְלֹא יְחַיֶּה אִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה; וְלָקַח צֹאן וּבָקָר וַחֲמֹרִים וּגְמַלִּים, וּבְגָדִים, וַיָּשָׁב, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-אָכִישׁ.    9 And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel. And he returned, and came to Achish.
27.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר אָכִישׁ, אַל-פְּשַׁטְתֶּם הַיּוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, עַל-נֶגֶב יְהוּדָה וְעַל-נֶגֶב הַיְּרַחְמְאֵלִי, וְאֶל-נֶגֶב, הַקֵּינִי.    10 And Achish said: 'Whither have ye made a raid to-day?' And David said: 'Against the South of Judah, and against the South of the Jerahmeelites, and against the South of the Kenites.'
27.11 יא  וְאִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה לֹא-יְחַיֶּה דָוִד, לְהָבִיא גַת לֵאמֹר--פֶּן-יַגִּדוּ עָלֵינוּ, לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה-עָשָׂה דָוִד, וְכֹה מִשְׁפָּטוֹ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר יָשַׁב בִּשְׂדֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים.    11 And David left neither man nor woman alive, to bring them to Gath, saying: 'Lest they should tell on us, saying: So did David, and so hath been his manner all the while he hath dwelt in the country of the Philistines.'
27.12 יב  וַיַּאֲמֵן אָכִישׁ, בְּדָוִד לֵאמֹר:  הַבְאֵשׁ הִבְאִישׁ בְּעַמּוֹ בְיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהָיָה לִי לְעֶבֶד עוֹלָם.  {פ}    12 And Achish believed David, saying: 'He hath made his people Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.' {P}
28.1 א  וַיְהִי, בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, וַיִּקְבְּצוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים אֶת-מַחֲנֵיהֶם לַצָּבָא, לְהִלָּחֵם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר אָכִישׁ, אֶל-דָּוִד, יָדֹעַ תֵּדַע כִּי אִתִּי תֵּצֵא בַמַּחֲנֶה, אַתָּה וַאֲנָשֶׁיךָ.    1 And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their hosts together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David: 'Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me in the host, thou and thy men.'
28.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-אָכִישׁ, לָכֵן אַתָּה תֵדַע, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה עַבְדֶּךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר אָכִישׁ, אֶל-דָּוִד, לָכֵן שֹׁמֵר לְרֹאשִׁי אֲשִׂימְךָ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {פ}    2 And David said to Achish: 'Therefore thou shalt know what thy servant will do.' And Achish said to David: 'Therefore will I make thee keeper of my head for ever.' {P}
28.3 ג  וּשְׁמוּאֵל מֵת--וַיִּסְפְּדוּ-לוֹ כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בָרָמָה וּבְעִירוֹ; וְשָׁאוּל, הֵסִיר הָאֹבוֹת וְאֶת-הַיִּדְּעֹנִים--מֵהָאָרֶץ.    3 Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit out of the land.
28.4 ד  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיָּבֹאוּ וַיַּחֲנוּ בְשׁוּנֵם; וַיִּקְבֹּץ שָׁאוּל אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּחֲנוּ בַּגִּלְבֹּעַ.    4 And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem; and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa.
28.5 ה  וַיַּרְא שָׁאוּל, אֶת-מַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים; וַיִּרָא, וַיֶּחֱרַד לִבּוֹ מְאֹד.    5 And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly.
28.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁאַל שָׁאוּל בַּיהוָה, וְלֹא עָנָהוּ יְהוָה--גַּם בַּחֲלֹמוֹת גַּם בָּאוּרִים, גַּם בַּנְּבִיאִם.    6 And when Saul inquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.
28.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל לַעֲבָדָיו, בַּקְּשׁוּ-לִי אֵשֶׁת בַּעֲלַת-אוֹב, וְאֵלְכָה אֵלֶיהָ, וְאֶדְרְשָׁה-בָּהּ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ עֲבָדָיו אֵלָיו, הִנֵּה אֵשֶׁת בַּעֲלַת-אוֹב בְּעֵין דּוֹר.    7 Then said Saul unto his servants: 'Seek me a woman that divineth by a ghost, that I may go to her, and inquire of her.' And his servants said to him: 'Behold, there is a woman that divineth by a ghost at En-dor.'
28.8 ח  וַיִּתְחַפֵּשׂ שָׁאוּל, וַיִּלְבַּשׁ בְּגָדִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיֵּלֶךְ הוּא וּשְׁנֵי אֲנָשִׁים עִמּוֹ, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה לָיְלָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, קסומי- (קָסֳמִי-) נָא לִי בָּאוֹב, וְהַעֲלִי לִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-אֹמַר אֵלָיִךְ.    8 And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and went, he and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night; and he said: 'Divine unto me, I pray thee, by a ghost, and bring me up whomsoever I shall name unto thee.'
28.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה אֵלָיו, הִנֵּה אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה שָׁאוּל, אֲשֶׁר הִכְרִית אֶת-הָאֹבוֹת וְאֶת-הַיִּדְּעֹנִי, מִן-הָאָרֶץ; וְלָמָה אַתָּה מִתְנַקֵּשׁ בְּנַפְשִׁי, לַהֲמִיתֵנִי.    9 And the woman said unto him: 'Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that divine by a ghost or a familiar spirit out of the land; wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?'
28.10 י  וַיִּשָּׁבַע לָהּ שָׁאוּל, בַּיהוָה לֵאמֹר:  חַי-יְהוָה, אִם-יִקְּרֵךְ עָוֺן בַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    10 And Saul swore to her by the LORD, saying: 'As the LORD liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.'
28.11 יא  וַתֹּאמֶר, הָאִשָּׁה, אֶת-מִי, אַעֲלֶה-לָּךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶת-שְׁמוּאֵל הַעֲלִי-לִי.    11 Then said the woman: 'Whom shall I bring up unto thee?' And he said: 'Bring me up Samuel.'
28.12 יב  וַתֵּרֶא הָאִשָּׁה אֶת-שְׁמוּאֵל, וַתִּזְעַק בְּקוֹל גָּדוֹל; וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה אֶל-שָׁאוּל לֵאמֹר לָמָּה רִמִּיתָנִי, וְאַתָּה שָׁאוּל.    12 And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice; and the woman spoke to Saul, saying: 'Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.'
28.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ הַמֶּלֶךְ אַל-תִּירְאִי, כִּי מָה רָאִית; וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה אֶל-שָׁאוּל, אֱלֹהִים רָאִיתִי עֹלִים מִן-הָאָרֶץ.    13 And the king said unto her: 'Be not afraid; for what seest thou?' And the woman said unto Saul: 'I see a godlike being coming up out of the earth.'
28.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ, מַה-תָּאֳרוֹ, וַתֹּאמֶר אִישׁ זָקֵן עֹלֶה, וְהוּא עֹטֶה מְעִיל; וַיֵּדַע שָׁאוּל כִּי-שְׁמוּאֵל הוּא, וַיִּקֹּד אַפַּיִם אַרְצָה וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ.  {ס}    14 And he said unto her: 'What form is he of?' And she said: 'An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a robe.' And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground, and prostrated himself. {S}
28.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל אֶל-שָׁאוּל, לָמָּה הִרְגַּזְתַּנִי לְהַעֲלוֹת אֹתִי; וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל צַר-לִי מְאֹד וּפְלִשְׁתִּים נִלְחָמִים בִּי, וֵאלֹהִים סָר מֵעָלַי וְלֹא-עָנָנִי עוֹד גַּם בְּיַד-הַנְּבִיאִים גַּם-בַּחֲלֹמוֹת, וָאֶקְרָאֶה לְךָ, לְהוֹדִיעֵנִי מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה.  {ס}    15 And Samuel said to Saul: 'Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up?' And Saul answered: 'I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams; therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.' {S}
28.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמוּאֵל, וְלָמָּה תִּשְׁאָלֵנִי:  וַיהוָה סָר מֵעָלֶיךָ, וַיְהִי עָרֶךָ.    16 And Samuel said: 'Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the LORD is departed from thee, and is become thine adversary?
28.17 יז  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה לוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּיָדִי; וַיִּקְרַע יְהוָה אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה מִיָּדֶךָ, וַיִּתְּנָהּ לְרֵעֲךָ לְדָוִד.    17 And the LORD hath wrought for Himself; as He spoke by me; and the LORD hath rent the kingdom out of thy hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David.
28.18 יח  כַּאֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ בְּקוֹל יְהוָה, וְלֹא-עָשִׂיתָ חֲרוֹן-אַפּוֹ בַּעֲמָלֵק; עַל-כֵּן הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, עָשָׂה-לְךָ יְהוָה הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    18 Because thou didst not hearken to the voice of the LORD, and didst not execute His fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto thee this day.
28.19 יט  וְיִתֵּן יְהוָה גַּם אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמְּךָ, בְּיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּמָחָר, אַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ עִמִּי; גַּם אֶת-מַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, יִתֵּן יְהוָה בְּיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    19 Moreover the LORD will deliver Israel also with thee into the hand of the Philistines; and to-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me; the LORD will deliver the host of Israel also into the hand of the Philistines.'
28.20 כ  וַיְמַהֵר שָׁאוּל, וַיִּפֹּל מְלֹא-קוֹמָתוֹ אַרְצָה, וַיִּרָא מְאֹד, מִדִּבְרֵי שְׁמוּאֵל; גַּם-כֹּחַ, לֹא-הָיָה בוֹ--כִּי לֹא אָכַל לֶחֶם, כָּל-הַיּוֹם וְכָל-הַלָּיְלָה.    20 Then Saul fell straightway his full length upon the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel; and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.
28.21 כא  וַתָּבוֹא הָאִשָּׁה אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וַתֵּרֶא כִּי-נִבְהַל מְאֹד; וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, הִנֵּה שָׁמְעָה שִׁפְחָתְךָ בְּקוֹלֶךָ, וָאָשִׂים נַפְשִׁי בְּכַפִּי, וָאֶשְׁמַע אֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ אֵלָי.    21 And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore affrighted, and said unto him: 'Behold, thy handmaid hath hearkened unto thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spokest unto me.
28.22 כב  וְעַתָּה, שְׁמַע-נָא גַם-אַתָּה בְּקוֹל שִׁפְחָתֶךָ, וְאָשִׂמָה לְפָנֶיךָ פַּת-לֶחֶם, וֶאֱכוֹל; וִיהִי בְךָ כֹּחַ, כִּי תֵלֵךְ בַּדָּרֶךְ.    22 Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thy handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.'
28.23 כג  וַיְמָאֵן, וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא אֹכַל, וַיִּפְרְצוּ-בוֹ עֲבָדָיו וְגַם-הָאִשָּׁה, וַיִּשְׁמַע לְקֹלָם; וַיָּקָם, מֵהָאָרֶץ, וַיֵּשֶׁב, אֶל-הַמִּטָּה.    23 But he refused, and said: 'I will not eat.' But his servants, together with the woman, urged him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.
28.24 כד  וְלָאִשָּׁה עֵגֶל-מַרְבֵּק בַּבַּיִת, וַתְּמַהֵר וַתִּזְבָּחֵהוּ; וַתִּקַּח-קֶמַח וַתָּלָשׁ, וַתֹּפֵהוּ מַצּוֹת.    24 And the woman had a fatted calf in the house; and she made haste, and killed it; and she took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof;
28.25 כה  וַתַּגֵּשׁ לִפְנֵי-שָׁאוּל וְלִפְנֵי עֲבָדָיו, וַיֹּאכֵלוּ; וַיָּקֻמוּ וַיֵּלְכוּ, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא.  {פ}    25 and she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night. {P}
29.1 א  וַיִּקְבְּצוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים אֶת-כָּל-מַחֲנֵיהֶם, אֲפֵקָה; וְיִשְׂרָאֵל חֹנִים, בַּעַיִן אֲשֶׁר בְּיִזְרְעֶאל.    1 Now the Philistines gathered together all their hosts to Aphek; and the Israelites pitched by the fountain which is in Jezreel.
29.2 ב  וְסַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים עֹבְרִים, לְמֵאוֹת וְלַאֲלָפִים; וְדָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, עֹבְרִים בָּאַחֲרֹנָה--עִם-אָכִישׁ.    2 And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands; and David and his men passed on in the rearward with Achish.
29.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ שָׂרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, מָה הָעִבְרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר אָכִישׁ אֶל-שָׂרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, הֲלוֹא-זֶה דָוִד עֶבֶד שָׁאוּל מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר הָיָה אִתִּי זֶה יָמִים אוֹ-זֶה שָׁנִים, וְלֹא-מָצָאתִי בוֹ מְאוּמָה, מִיּוֹם נָפְלוֹ עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    3 Then said the princes of the Philistines: 'What do these Hebrews here?' And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines: 'Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, who hath been with me these days or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell away unto me unto this day?' {P}
29.4 ד  וַיִּקְצְפוּ עָלָיו שָׂרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ שָׂרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים הָשֵׁב אֶת-הָאִישׁ וְיָשֹׁב אֶל-מְקוֹמוֹ אֲשֶׁר הִפְקַדְתּוֹ שָׁם, וְלֹא-יֵרֵד עִמָּנוּ בַּמִּלְחָמָה, וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה-לָּנוּ לְשָׂטָן בַּמִּלְחָמָה; וּבַמֶּה, יִתְרַצֶּה זֶה אֶל-אֲדֹנָיו--הֲלוֹא, בְּרָאשֵׁי הָאֲנָשִׁים הָהֵם.    4 But the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him: 'Make the man return, that he may go back to his place where thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he become an adversary to us; for wherewith should this fellow reconcile himself unto his lord? should it not be with the heads of these men?
29.5 ה  הֲלוֹא-זֶה דָוִד, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲנוּ-לוֹ בַּמְּחֹלוֹת לֵאמֹר:  הִכָּה שָׁאוּל בַּאֲלָפָיו, וְדָוִד בְּרִבְבֹתָו.  {ס}    5 Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying: Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?' {S}
29.6 ו  וַיִּקְרָא אָכִישׁ אֶל-דָּוִד, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו חַי-יְהוָה כִּי-יָשָׁר אַתָּה וְטוֹב בְּעֵינַי צֵאתְךָ וּבֹאֲךָ אִתִּי בַּמַּחֲנֶה--כִּי לֹא-מָצָאתִי בְךָ רָעָה, מִיּוֹם בֹּאֲךָ אֵלַי עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וּבְעֵינֵי הַסְּרָנִים, לֹא-טוֹב אָתָּה.    6 Then Achish called David, and said unto him: 'As the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is good in my sight; for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day; nevertheless the lords favour thee not.
29.7 ז  וְעַתָּה שׁוּב, וְלֵךְ בְּשָׁלוֹם; וְלֹא-תַעֲשֶׂה רָע, בְּעֵינֵי סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים.  {ס}    7 Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines.' {S}
29.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אָכִישׁ, כִּי מֶה עָשִׂיתִי וּמַה-מָּצָאתָ בְעַבְדְּךָ, מִיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר הָיִיתִי לְפָנֶיךָ, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי לֹא אָבוֹא וְנִלְחַמְתִּי, בְּאֹיְבֵי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    8 And David said unto Achish: 'But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been before thee unto this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?'
29.9 ט  וַיַּעַן אָכִישׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-דָּוִד, יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי טוֹב אַתָּה בְּעֵינַי כְּמַלְאַךְ אֱלֹהִים; אַךְ שָׂרֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים אָמְרוּ, לֹא-יַעֲלֶה עִמָּנוּ בַּמִּלְחָמָה.    9 And Achish answered and said to David: 'I know that thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God; notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said: He shall not go up with us to the battle.
29.10 י  וְעַתָּה הַשְׁכֵּם בַּבֹּקֶר, וְעַבְדֵי אֲדֹנֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ אִתָּךְ; וְהִשְׁכַּמְתֶּם בַּבֹּקֶר, וְאוֹר לָכֶם וָלֵכוּ.    10 Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with the servants of thy lord that are come with thee; and as soon as ye are up early in the morning, and have light, depart.'
29.11 יא  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם דָּוִד הוּא וַאֲנָשָׁיו, לָלֶכֶת בַּבֹּקֶר, לָשׁוּב, אֶל-אֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, עָלוּ יִזְרְעֶאל.  {ס}    11 So David rose up early, he and his men, to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel. {S}
30.1 א  וַיְהִי בְּבֹא דָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, צִקְלַג--בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי; וַעֲמָלֵקִי פָשְׁטוּ, אֶל-נֶגֶב וְאֶל-צִקְלַג, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-צִקְלַג, וַיִּשְׂרְפוּ אֹתָהּ בָּאֵשׁ.    1 And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had made a raid upon the South, and upon Ziklag, and had smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;
30.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁבּוּ אֶת-הַנָּשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ מִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל, לֹא הֵמִיתוּ אִישׁ; וַיִּנְהֲגוּ, וַיֵּלְכוּ לְדַרְכָּם.    2 and had taken captive the women and all that were therein, both small and great; they slew not any, but carried them off, and went their way.
30.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו אֶל-הָעִיר, וְהִנֵּה שְׂרוּפָה בָּאֵשׁ; וּנְשֵׁיהֶם וּבְנֵיהֶם וּבְנֹתֵיהֶם, נִשְׁבּוּ.    3 And when David and his men came to the city, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives.
30.4 ד  וַיִּשָּׂא דָוִד וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, אֶת-קוֹלָם--וַיִּבְכּוּ:  עַד אֲשֶׁר אֵין-בָּהֶם כֹּחַ, לִבְכּוֹת.    4 Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.
30.5 ה  וּשְׁתֵּי נְשֵׁי-דָוִד, נִשְׁבּוּ--אֲחִינֹעַם, הַיִּזְרְעֵלִית, וַאֲבִיגַיִל, אֵשֶׁת נָבָל הַכַּרְמְלִי.    5 And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
30.6 ו  וַתֵּצֶר לְדָוִד מְאֹד, כִּי-אָמְרוּ הָעָם לְסָקְלוֹ--כִּי-מָרָה נֶפֶשׁ כָּל-הָעָם, אִישׁ עַל-בָּנָו וְעַל-בְּנֹתָיו; וַיִּתְחַזֵּק דָּוִד, בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהָיו.  {ס}    6 And David was greatly distressed; for the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters; but David strengthened himself in the LORD his God. {S}
30.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-אֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֵן בֶּן-אֲחִימֶלֶךְ, הַגִּישָׁה-נָּא לִי, הָאֵפוֹד; וַיַּגֵּשׁ אֶבְיָתָר אֶת-הָאֵפוֹד, אֶל-דָּוִד.    7 And David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech: 'I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod.' And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.
30.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִד בַּיהוָה לֵאמֹר, אֶרְדֹּף אַחֲרֵי הַגְּדוּד-הַזֶּה הַאַשִּׂגֶנּוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ רְדֹף, כִּי-הַשֵּׂג תַּשִּׂיג וְהַצֵּל תַּצִּיל.    8 And David inquired of the LORD, saying: 'Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them?' And He answered him: 'Pursue; for thou shalt surely overtake them, and shalt without fail recover all.'
30.9 ט  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד, הוּא וְשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-נַחַל הַבְּשׂוֹר; וְהַנּוֹתָרִים, עָמָדוּ.    9 So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.
30.10 י  וַיִּרְדֹּף דָּוִד, הוּא וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ; וַיַּעַמְדוּ, מָאתַיִם אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר פִּגְּרוּ, מֵעֲבֹר אֶת-נַחַל הַבְּשׂוֹר.    10 But David pursued, he and four hundred men; for two hundred stayed behind, who were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.
30.11 יא  וַיִּמְצְאוּ אִישׁ-מִצְרִי בַּשָּׂדֶה, וַיִּקְחוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-דָּוִד; וַיִּתְּנוּ-לוֹ לֶחֶם וַיֹּאכַל, וַיַּשְׁקֻהוּ מָיִם.    11 And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they gave him water to drink;
30.12 יב  וַיִּתְּנוּ-לוֹ פֶלַח דְּבֵלָה וּשְׁנֵי צִמֻּקִים, וַיֹּאכַל, וַתָּשָׁב רוּחוֹ, אֵלָיו:  כִּי לֹא-אָכַל לֶחֶם, וְלֹא-שָׁתָה מַיִם, שְׁלֹשָׁה יָמִים, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה לֵילוֹת.  {ס}    12 and they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins; and when he had eaten, his spirit came back to him; for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights. {S}
30.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ דָוִד לְמִי-אַתָּה, וְאֵי מִזֶּה אָתָּה; וַיֹּאמֶר נַעַר מִצְרִי אָנֹכִי, עֶבֶד לְאִישׁ עֲמָלֵקִי, וַיַּעַזְבֵנִי אֲדֹנִי כִּי חָלִיתִי, הַיּוֹם שְׁלֹשָׁה.    13 And David said unto him: 'To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou?' And he said: 'I am a young Egyptian, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days ago I fell sick.
30.14 יד  אֲנַחְנוּ פָּשַׁטְנוּ נֶגֶב הַכְּרֵתִי, וְעַל-אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה--וְעַל-נֶגֶב כָּלֵב; וְאֶת-צִקְלַג, שָׂרַפְנוּ בָאֵשׁ.    14 We made a raid upon the South of the Cherethites, and upon that which belongeth to Judah, and upon the South of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.'
30.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו דָּוִד, הֲתוֹרִדֵנִי אֶל-הַגְּדוּד הַזֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר הִשָּׁבְעָה לִּי בֵאלֹהִים אִם-תְּמִיתֵנִי, וְאִם-תַּסְגִּרֵנִי בְּיַד-אֲדֹנִי, וְאוֹרִדְךָ, אֶל-הַגְּדוּד הַזֶּה.    15 And David said to him: 'Wilt thou bring me down to this troop?' And he said: 'Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me up into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this troop.'
30.16 טז  וַיֹּרִדֵהוּ, וְהִנֵּה נְטֻשִׁים עַל-פְּנֵי כָל-הָאָרֶץ; אֹכְלִים וְשֹׁתִים, וְחֹגְגִים, בְּכֹל הַשָּׁלָל הַגָּדוֹל, אֲשֶׁר לָקְחוּ מֵאֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים וּמֵאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה.    16 And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad over all the ground, eating and drinking, and feasting, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.
30.17 יז  וַיַּכֵּם דָּוִד מֵהַנֶּשֶׁף וְעַד-הָעֶרֶב, לְמָחֳרָתָם; וְלֹא-נִמְלַט מֵהֶם אִישׁ, כִּי אִם-אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אִישׁ-נַעַר אֲשֶׁר-רָכְבוּ עַל-הַגְּמַלִּים וַיָּנֻסוּ.    17 And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the next day; and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, who rode upon camels and fled.
30.18 יח  וַיַּצֵּל דָּוִד, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לָקְחוּ עֲמָלֵק; וְאֶת-שְׁתֵּי נָשָׁיו, הִצִּיל דָּוִד.    18 And David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken; and David rescued his two wives.
30.19 יט  וְלֹא נֶעְדַּר-לָהֶם מִן-הַקָּטֹן וְעַד-הַגָּדוֹל וְעַד-בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת, וּמִשָּׁלָל, וְעַד כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לָקְחוּ, לָהֶם:  הַכֹּל, הֵשִׁיב דָּוִד.    19 And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them; David brought back all.
30.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד, אֶת-כָּל-הַצֹּאן וְהַבָּקָר; נָהֲגוּ, לִפְנֵי הַמִּקְנֶה הַהוּא, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, זֶה שְׁלַל דָּוִד.    20 And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drove before those other cattle, and said: 'This is David's spoil.'
30.21 כא  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד, אֶל-מָאתַיִם הָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-פִּגְּרוּ מִלֶּכֶת אַחֲרֵי דָוִד וַיֹּשִׁיבֻם בְּנַחַל הַבְּשׂוֹר, וַיֵּצְאוּ לִקְרַאת דָּוִד, וְלִקְרַאת הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ; וַיִּגַּשׁ דָּוִד אֶת-הָעָם, וַיִּשְׁאַל לָהֶם לְשָׁלוֹם.  {ס}    21 And David came to the two hundred men, who were so faint that they could not follow David, whom also they had made to abide at the brook Besor; and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that were with him; and when David came near to the people, he saluted them. {S}
30.22 כב  וַיַּעַן כָּל-אִישׁ-רָע וּבְלִיַּעַל, מֵהָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר הָלְכוּ עִם-דָּוִד, וַיֹּאמְרוּ יַעַן אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָלְכוּ עִמִּי, לֹא-נִתֵּן לָהֶם מֵהַשָּׁלָל אֲשֶׁר הִצַּלְנוּ:  כִּי-אִם-אִישׁ אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, וְיִנְהֲגוּ וְיֵלֵכוּ.  {ס}    22 Then answered all the wicked men and base fellows, of those that went with David, and said: 'Because they went not with us, we will not give them aught of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart.' {S}
30.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, לֹא-תַעֲשׂוּ כֵן אֶחָי:  אֵת אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן יְהוָה לָנוּ, וַיִּשְׁמֹר אֹתָנוּ, וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הַגְּדוּד הַבָּא עָלֵינוּ, בְּיָדֵנוּ.    23 Then said David: 'Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which the LORD hath given unto us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the troop that came against us into our hand.
30.24 כד  וּמִי יִשְׁמַע לָכֶם, לַדָּבָר הַזֶּה:  כִּי כְּחֵלֶק הַיֹּרֵד בַּמִּלְחָמָה, וּכְחֵלֶק הַיֹּשֵׁב עַל-הַכֵּלִים--יַחְדָּו יַחֲלֹקוּ.  {ס}    24 And who will hearken unto you in this matter? for as is the share of him that goeth down to the battle, so shall be the share of him that tarrieth by the baggage; they shall share alike.' {S}
30.25 כה  וַיְהִי, מֵהַיּוֹם הַהוּא וָמָעְלָה; וַיְשִׂמֶהָ לְחֹק וּלְמִשְׁפָּט, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    25 And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day. {P}
30.26 כו  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד אֶל-צִקְלַג, וַיְשַׁלַּח מֵהַשָּׁלָל לְזִקְנֵי יְהוּדָה לְרֵעֵהוּ לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה לָכֶם  {ר}  בְּרָכָה, מִשְּׁלַל אֹיְבֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}    26 And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying: 'Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD';
30.27 כז  לַאֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית-אֵל  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר  {ר}  בְּרָמוֹת-נֶגֶב,  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר בְּיַתִּר.  {ס}    27 to them that were in Beth-el, and to them that were in Ramoth of the South, and to them that were in Jattir;
30.28 כח  וְלַאֲשֶׁר  {ר}  בַּעֲרֹעֵר  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר בְּשִׂפְמוֹת,  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר  {ר}  בְּאֶשְׁתְּמֹעַ.  {ס}    28 and to them that were in Aroer, and to them that were in Siphmoth, and to them that were in Eshtemoa;
30.29 כט  וְלַאֲשֶׁר בְּרָכָל,  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר  {ר}  בְּעָרֵי הַיְּרַחְמְאֵלִי,  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר, בְּעָרֵי הַקֵּינִי.  {ס}    29 and to them that were in Racal, and to them that were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them that were in the cities of the Kenites;
30.30 ל  וְלַאֲשֶׁר  {ר}  בְּחָרְמָה  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר בְּבוֹר-עָשָׁן,  {ס}  וְלַאֲשֶׁר  {ר}  בַּעֲתָךְ.  {ס}    30 and to them that were in Hormah, and to them that were in Bor-ashan, and to them that were in Athach;
30.31 לא  וְלַאֲשֶׁר, בְּחֶבְרוֹן; וּלְכָל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר-  {ר}  הִתְהַלֶּךְ-שָׁם דָּוִד, הוּא וַאֲנָשָׁיו.  {פ}    31 and to them that were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt. {P}
31.1 א  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, נִלְחָמִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּנֻסוּ אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִפְּנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּפְּלוּ חֲלָלִים, בְּהַר הַגִּלְבֹּעַ.    1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
31.2 ב  וַיַּדְבְּקוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, אֶת-שָׁאוּל וְאֶת-בָּנָיו; וַיַּכּוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, אֶת-יְהוֹנָתָן וְאֶת-אֲבִינָדָב וְאֶת-מַלְכִּישׁוּעַ--בְּנֵי שָׁאוּל.    2 And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, the sons of Saul.
31.3 ג  וַתִּכְבַּד הַמִּלְחָמָה אֶל-שָׁאוּל, וַיִּמְצָאֻהוּ הַמּוֹרִים אֲנָשִׁים בַּקָּשֶׁת; וַיָּחֶל מְאֹד, מֵהַמּוֹרִים.    3 And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers overtook him; and he was in great anguish by reason of the archers.
31.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁאוּל לְנֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו שְׁלֹף חַרְבְּךָ וְדָקְרֵנִי בָהּ, פֶּן-יָבוֹאוּ הָעֲרֵלִים הָאֵלֶּה וּדְקָרֻנִי וְהִתְעַלְּלוּ-בִי, וְלֹא אָבָה נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, כִּי יָרֵא מְאֹד; וַיִּקַּח שָׁאוּל אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, וַיִּפֹּל עָלֶיהָ.    4 Then said Saul to his armour-bearer: 'Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and make a mock of me.' But his armour-bearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell upon it.
31.5 ה  וַיַּרְא נֹשֵׂא-כֵלָיו, כִּי מֵת שָׁאוּל; וַיִּפֹּל גַּם-הוּא עַל-חַרְבּוֹ, וַיָּמָת עִמּוֹ.    5 And when his armour-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword, and died with him.
31.6 ו  וַיָּמָת שָׁאוּל וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת בָּנָיו וְנֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו גַּם כָּל-אֲנָשָׁיו, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--יַחְדָּו.    6 So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armour-bearer, and all his men, that same day together.
31.7 ז  וַיִּרְאוּ אַנְשֵׁי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר-בְּעֵבֶר הָעֵמֶק וַאֲשֶׁר בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן, כִּי-נָסוּ אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְכִי-מֵתוּ, שָׁאוּל וּבָנָיו; וַיַּעַזְבוּ אֶת-הֶעָרִים, וַיָּנֻסוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָּהֶן.  {פ}    7 And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley, and they that were beyond the Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them. {P}
31.8 ח  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיָּבֹאוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, לְפַשֵּׁט אֶת-הַחֲלָלִים; וַיִּמְצְאוּ אֶת-שָׁאוּל וְאֶת-שְׁלֹשֶׁת בָּנָיו, נֹפְלִים בְּהַר הַגִּלְבֹּעַ.    8 And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
31.9 ט  וַיִּכְרְתוּ, אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ, וַיַּפְשִׁטוּ, אֶת-כֵּלָיו; וַיְשַׁלְּחוּ בְאֶרֶץ-פְּלִשְׁתִּים סָבִיב, לְבַשֵּׂר בֵּית עֲצַבֵּיהֶם--וְאֶת-הָעָם.    9 And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to carry the tidings unto the house of their idols, and to the people.
31.10 י  וַיָּשִׂימוּ, אֶת-כֵּלָיו, בֵּית, עַשְׁתָּרוֹת; וְאֶת-גְּוִיָּתוֹ, תָּקְעוּ, בְּחוֹמַת, בֵּית שָׁן.    10 And they put his armour in the house of the Ashtaroth; and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan.
31.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ אֵלָיו, יֹשְׁבֵי יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, לְשָׁאוּל.    11 And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard concerning him that which the Philistines had done to Saul,
31.12 יב  וַיָּקוּמוּ כָּל-אִישׁ חַיִל, וַיֵּלְכוּ כָל-הַלַּיְלָה, וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-גְּוִיַּת שָׁאוּל וְאֵת גְּוִיֹּת בָּנָיו, מֵחוֹמַת בֵּית שָׁן; וַיָּבֹאוּ יָבֵשָׁה, וַיִּשְׂרְפוּ אֹתָם שָׁם.    12 all the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan; and they came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.
31.13 יג  וַיִּקְחוּ, אֶת-עַצְמֹתֵיהֶם, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ תַחַת-הָאֶשֶׁל, בְּיָבֵשָׁה; וַיָּצֻמוּ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.  {פ}    13 And they took their bones, and buried them under the tamarisk-tree in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. {P}
