
א  וַיִּתְחַזֵּק שְׁלֹמֹה בֶן-דָּוִיד, עַל-מַלְכוּתוֹ; וַיהוָה אֱלֹהָיו עִמּוֹ, וַיְגַדְּלֵהוּ לְמָעְלָה.	1 And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.
ב  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁלֹמֹה לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְשָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וְהַמֵּאוֹת וְלַשֹּׁפְטִים, וּלְכֹל נָשִׂיא לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת.	2 And Solomon spoke unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every prince in all Israel, the heads of the fathers' houses.
ג  וַיֵּלְכוּ, שְׁלֹמֹה וְכָל-הַקָּהָל עִמּוֹ, לַבָּמָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּגִבְעוֹן:  כִּי-שָׁם הָיָה, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה, בַּמִּדְבָּר.	3 So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon; for there was the tent of meeting of God, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderness.
ד  אֲבָל, אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים הֶעֱלָה דָוִיד מִקִּרְיַת יְעָרִים, בַּהֵכִין לוֹ, דָּוִיד:  כִּי נָטָה-לוֹ אֹהֶל, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	4 But the ark of God had David brought up from Kiriath-jearim to the place that David had prepared for it; for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.
ה  וּמִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה בְּצַלְאֵל בֶּן-אוּרִי בֶן-חוּר--שָׁם, לִפְנֵי מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה; וַיִּדְרְשֵׁהוּ שְׁלֹמֹה, וְהַקָּהָל.	5 Moreover the brazen altar, that Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, had been put before the tabernacle of the LORD; and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.
ו  וַיַּעַל שְׁלֹמֹה שָׁם עַל-מִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר, לְאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיַּעַל עָלָיו עֹלוֹת, אָלֶף.	6 And Solomon offered there, upon the brazen altar before the LORD, which was at the tent of meeting, he offered a thousand burnt-offerings upon it.
ז  בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, נִרְאָה אֱלֹהִים לִשְׁלֹמֹה; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, שְׁאַל מָה אֶתֶּן-לָךְ.	7 In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him: 'Ask what I shall give thee.'
ח  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁלֹמֹה, לֵאלֹהִים, אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ עִם-דָּוִיד אָבִי, חֶסֶד גָּדוֹל; וְהִמְלַכְתַּנִי, תַּחְתָּיו.	8 And Solomon said unto God: 'Thou hast shown great kindness unto David my father, and hast made me king in his stead.
ט  עַתָּה, יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים--יֵאָמֵן דְּבָרְךָ, עִם דָּוִיד אָבִי:  כִּי אַתָּה, הִמְלַכְתַּנִי, עַל-עַם, רַב כַּעֲפַר הָאָרֶץ.	9 Now, O LORD God, let Thy promise unto David my father be established; for Thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.
י  עַתָּה, חָכְמָה וּמַדָּע תֶּן-לִי, וְאֵצְאָה לִפְנֵי הָעָם-הַזֶּה, וְאָבוֹאָה:  כִּי-מִי יִשְׁפֹּט, אֶת-עַמְּךָ הַזֶּה הַגָּדוֹל.  {ס}	10 Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this Thy people, that is so great?' {S}
יא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים לִשְׁלֹמֹה יַעַן אֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה זֹאת עִם-לְבָבֶךָ, וְלֹא-שָׁאַלְתָּ עֹשֶׁר נְכָסִים וְכָבוֹד וְאֵת נֶפֶשׁ שֹׂנְאֶיךָ, וְגַם-יָמִים רַבִּים, לֹא שָׁאָלְתָּ; וַתִּשְׁאַל-לְךָ, חָכְמָה וּמַדָּע, אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁפּוֹט אֶת-עַמִּי, אֲשֶׁר הִמְלַכְתִּיךָ עָלָיו.	11 And God said to Solomon: 'Because this was in thy heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of them that hate thee, neither yet hast asked long life, but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge My people, over whom I have made thee king;
יב  הַחָכְמָה וְהַמַּדָּע, נָתוּן לָךְ; וְעֹשֶׁר וּנְכָסִים וְכָבוֹד, אֶתֶּן-לָךְ--אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיָה כֵן לַמְּלָכִים אֲשֶׁר לְפָנֶיךָ, וְאַחֲרֶיךָ לֹא יִהְיֶה-כֵּן.	12 wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee, and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like.'
יג  וַיָּבֹא שְׁלֹמֹה לַבָּמָה אֲשֶׁר-בְּגִבְעוֹן, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מִלִּפְנֵי, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	13 So Solomon came [from his journey] to the high place that was at Gibeon, from before the tent of meeting, unto Jerusalem; and he reigned over Israel. {P}
יד  וַיֶּאֱסֹף שְׁלֹמֹה, רֶכֶב וּפָרָשִׁים, וַיְהִי-לוֹ אֶלֶף וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת רֶכֶב, וּשְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף פָּרָשִׁים; וַיַּנִּיחֵם בְּעָרֵי הָרֶכֶב, וְעִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	14 And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen; and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.
טו  וַיִּתֵּן הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם--כָּאֲבָנִים; וְאֵת הָאֲרָזִים, נָתַן כַּשִּׁקְמִים אֲשֶׁר-בַּשְּׁפֵלָה--לָרֹב.	15 And the king made silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycamore-trees that are in the Lowland, for abundance.
טז  וּמוֹצָא הַסּוּסִים אֲשֶׁר לִשְׁלֹמֹה, מִמִּצְרָיִם; וּמִקְוֵא--סֹחֲרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, מִקְוֵא יִקְחוּ בִּמְחִיר.	16 And the horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt; also out of Keve, the king's merchants buying them of the men of Keve at a price.
יז  וַיַּעֲלוּ וַיּוֹצִיאוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם מֶרְכָּבָה, בְּשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת כֶּסֶף, וְסוּס, בַּחֲמִשִּׁים וּמֵאָה; וְכֵן לְכָל-מַלְכֵי הַחִתִּים, וּמַלְכֵי אֲרָם--בְּיָדָם יוֹצִיאוּ.	17 And they fetched up, and brought out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty; and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of Aram, did they bring them out by their means.
יח  וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁלֹמֹה, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לְשֵׁם יְהוָה, וּבַיִת, לְמַלְכוּתוֹ.	18 Now Solomon purposed to build a house for the name of the LORD, and a house for his kingdom.
א  וַיִּסְפֹּר שְׁלֹמֹה שִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, אִישׁ סַבָּל, וּשְׁמוֹנִים אֶלֶף אִישׁ, חֹצֵב בָּהָר; וּמְנַצְּחִים עֲלֵיהֶם, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	1 And Solomon counted out threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand men that were hewers in the mountains, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them. {P}
ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶל-חוּרָם מֶלֶךְ-צֹר לֵאמֹר:  כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ, עִם-דָּוִיד אָבִי, וַתִּשְׁלַח-לוֹ אֲרָזִים, לִבְנוֹת-לוֹ בַיִת לָשֶׁבֶת בּוֹ.	2 And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying: 'As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him a house to dwell therein [, even so deal with me].
ג  הִנֵּה אֲנִי בוֹנֶה-בַּיִת לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי, לְהַקְדִּישׁ לוֹ לְהַקְטִיר לְפָנָיו קְטֹרֶת-סַמִּים וּמַעֲרֶכֶת תָּמִיד וְעֹלוֹת לַבֹּקֶר וְלָעֶרֶב, לַשַּׁבָּתוֹת וְלֶחֳדָשִׁים, וּלְמוֹעֲדֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ:  לְעוֹלָם, זֹאת עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 Behold, I am about to build a house for the name of the LORD my God, to dedicate it to Him, and to burn before Him incense of sweet spices, and for the continual showbread, and for the burnt-offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the appointed seasons of the LORD our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel.
ד  וְהַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי בוֹנֶה, גָּדוֹל:  כִּי-גָדוֹל אֱלֹהֵינוּ, מִכָּל-הָאֱלֹהִים.	4 And the house which I build is great; for great is our God above all gods.
ה  וּמִי יַעֲצָר-כֹּחַ לִבְנוֹת-לוֹ בַיִת, כִּי הַשָּׁמַיִם וּשְׁמֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם לֹא יְכַלְכְּלֻהוּ; וּמִי אֲנִי אֲשֶׁר אֶבְנֶה-לּוֹ בַיִת, כִּי אִם-לְהַקְטִיר לְפָנָיו.	5 But who is able to build Him a house, seeing the heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain Him? who am I then, that I should build Him a house, save only to offer before Him?
ו  וְעַתָּה שְׁלַח-לִי אִישׁ-חָכָם לַעֲשׂוֹת בַּזָּהָב וּבַכֶּסֶף וּבַנְּחֹשֶׁת וּבַבַּרְזֶל, וּבָאַרְגְּוָן וְכַרְמִיל וּתְכֵלֶת, וְיֹדֵעַ, לְפַתֵּחַ פִּתּוּחִים:  עִם-הַחֲכָמִים, אֲשֶׁר עִמִּי בִּיהוּדָה וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם, אֲשֶׁר הֵכִין, דָּוִיד אָבִי.	6 Now therefore send me a man skilful to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that hath skill to grave all manner of gravings, to be with the skilful men that are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.
ז  וּשְׁלַח-לִי עֲצֵי אֲרָזִים בְּרוֹשִׁים וְאַלְגּוּמִּים, מֵהַלְּבָנוֹן--כִּי אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי, אֲשֶׁר עֲבָדֶיךָ יוֹדְעִים לִכְרוֹת עֲצֵי לְבָנוֹן; וְהִנֵּה עֲבָדַי, עִם-עֲבָדֶיךָ.	7 Send me also cedar-trees, cypress-trees, and sandal-wood, out of Lebanon; for I know that thy servants have skill to cut timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants,
ח  וּלְהָכִין לִי עֵצִים, לָרֹב:  כִּי הַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי בוֹנֶה, גָּדוֹל וְהַפְלֵא.	8 even to prepare me timber in abundance; for the house which I am about to build shall be great and wonderful.
ט  וְהִנֵּה לַחֹטְבִים לְכֹרְתֵי הָעֵצִים נָתַתִּי חִטִּים מַכּוֹת לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, כֹּרִים עֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וּשְׂעֹרִים, כֹּרִים עֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף; וְיַיִן, בַּתִּים עֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וְשֶׁמֶן, בַּתִּים עֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף.  {ס}	9 And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.' {S}
י  וַיֹּאמֶר חוּרָם מֶלֶךְ-צֹר בִּכְתָב, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה:  בְּאַהֲבַת יְהוָה אֶת-עַמּוֹ, נְתָנְךָ עֲלֵיהֶם מֶלֶךְ.	10 Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon: 'Because the LORD loveth His people, He hath made thee king over them.'
יא  וַיֹּאמֶר, חוּרָם--בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ:  אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לְדָוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ בֵּן חָכָם, יוֹדֵעַ שֵׂכֶל וּבִינָה, אֲשֶׁר יִבְנֶה-בַּיִת לַיהוָה, וּבַיִת לְמַלְכוּתוֹ.	11 Huram said moreover: 'Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued with discretion and understanding, that should build a house for the LORD, and a house for his kingdom.
יב  וְעַתָּה, שָׁלַחְתִּי אִישׁ-חָכָם יוֹדֵעַ בִּינָה--לְחוּרָם אָבִי.	12 And now I have sent a skilful man, endued with understanding, even Huram my master craftsman,
יג  בֶּן-אִשָּׁה מִן-בְּנוֹת דָּן, וְאָבִיו אִישׁ-צֹרִי יוֹדֵעַ לַעֲשׂוֹת בַּזָּהָב-וּבַכֶּסֶף בַּנְּחֹשֶׁת בַּבַּרְזֶל בָּאֲבָנִים וּבָעֵצִים בָּאַרְגָּמָן בַּתְּכֵלֶת וּבַבּוּץ וּבַכַּרְמִיל, וּלְפַתֵּחַ כָּל-פִּתּוּחַ, וְלַחְשֹׁב כָּל-מַחֲשָׁבֶת--אֲשֶׁר יִנָּתֶן-לוֹ, עִם-חֲכָמֶיךָ, וְחַכְמֵי, אֲדֹנִי דָּוִיד אָבִיךָ.	13 the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of graving, and to devise any device; to do whatever may be set before him, with thy skilful men, and with the skilful men of my lord David thy father.
יד  וְעַתָּה הַחִטִּים וְהַשְּׂעֹרִים הַשֶּׁמֶן וְהַיַּיִן, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר אֲדֹנִי--יִשְׁלַח, לַעֲבָדָיו.	14 Now therefore the wheat and the barley, the oil and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants;
טו  וַאֲנַחְנוּ נִכְרֹת עֵצִים מִן-הַלְּבָנוֹן, כְּכָל-צָרְכֶּךָ, וּנְבִיאֵם לְךָ רַפְסֹדוֹת, עַל-יָם יָפוֹ; וְאַתָּה תַּעֲלֶה אֹתָם, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	15 and we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need; and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.' {P}
טז  וַיִּסְפֹּר שְׁלֹמֹה, כָּל-הָאֲנָשִׁים הַגֵּירִים אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַחֲרֵי הַסְּפָר, אֲשֶׁר סְפָרָם דָּוִיד אָבִיו; וַיִּמָּצְאוּ, מֵאָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.	16 And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered them; and they were found a hundred and fifty thousand and three thousand and six hundred.
יז  וַיַּעַשׂ מֵהֶם שִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, סַבָּל, וּשְׁמֹנִים אֶלֶף, חֹצֵב בָּהָר; וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, מְנַצְּחִים לְהַעֲבִיד אֶת-הָעָם.	17 And he set threescore and ten thousand of them to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountains, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people at work.
א  וַיָּחֶל שְׁלֹמֹה, לִבְנוֹת אֶת-בֵּית-יְהוָה בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, בְּהַר הַמּוֹרִיָּה, אֲשֶׁר נִרְאָה לְדָוִיד אָבִיהוּ--אֲשֶׁר הֵכִין בִּמְקוֹם דָּוִיד, בְּגֹרֶן אָרְנָן הַיְבוּסִי.	1 Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where [the LORD] appeared unto David his father; for which provision had been made in the Place of David, in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
ב  וַיָּחֶל לִבְנוֹת בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, בַּשֵּׁנִי, בִּשְׁנַת אַרְבַּע, לְמַלְכוּתוֹ.	2 And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.
ג  וְאֵלֶּה הוּסַד שְׁלֹמֹה, לִבְנוֹת אֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים:  הָאֹרֶךְ אַמּוֹת בַּמִּדָּה הָרִאשׁוֹנָה, אַמּוֹת שִׁשִּׁים, וְרֹחַב, אַמּוֹת עֶשְׂרִים.	3 Now these are the foundations which Solomon laid for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the ancient measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.
ד  וְהָאוּלָם אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֹרֶךְ עַל-פְּנֵי רֹחַב-הַבַּיִת, אַמּוֹת עֶשְׂרִים, וְהַגֹּבַהּ, מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים; וַיְצַפֵּהוּ מִפְּנִימָה, זָהָב טָהוֹר.	4 And the porch that was before [the house], the length of it, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits, and the height a hundred and twenty; and he overlaid it within with pure gold.
ה  וְאֵת הַבַּיִת הַגָּדוֹל, חִפָּה עֵץ בְּרוֹשִׁים, וַיְחַפֵּהוּ, זָהָב טוֹב; וַיַּעַל עָלָיו תִּמֹרִים, וְשַׁרְשְׁרֹת.	5 And the greater house he covered with cypress-wood, which he overlaid with fine gold, and wrought thereon palm-trees and chains.
ו  וַיְצַף אֶת-הַבַּיִת אֶבֶן יְקָרָה, לְתִפְאָרֶת; וְהַזָּהָב, זְהַב פַּרְוָיִם.	6 And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty; and the gold was gold of Parvaim.
ז  וַיְחַף אֶת-הַבַּיִת הַקֹּרוֹת הַסִּפִּים, וְקִירוֹתָיו וְדַלְתוֹתָיו--זָהָב; וּפִתַּח כְּרוּבִים, עַל-הַקִּירוֹת.  {ס}	7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, the thresholds, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubim on the walls. {S}
ח  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-בֵּית-קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים--אָרְכּוֹ עַל-פְּנֵי רֹחַב-הַבַּיִת אַמּוֹת עֶשְׂרִים, וְרָחְבּוֹ אַמּוֹת עֶשְׂרִים; וַיְחַפֵּהוּ זָהָב טוֹב, לְכִכָּרִים שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.	8 And he made the most holy place; the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits; and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.
ט  וּמִשְׁקָל לְמִסְמְרוֹת לִשְׁקָלִים, חֲמִשִּׁים זָהָב; וְהָעֲלִיּוֹת, חִפָּה זָהָב.	9 And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.
י  וַיַּעַשׂ בְּבֵית-קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים, כְּרוּבִים שְׁנַיִם--מַעֲשֵׂה, צַעֲצֻעִים; וַיְצַפּוּ אֹתָם, זָהָב.	10 And in the most holy place he made two cherubim of image work; and they overlaid them with gold.
יא  וְכַנְפֵי, הַכְּרוּבִים--אָרְכָּם, אַמּוֹת עֶשְׂרִים; כְּנַף הָאֶחָד לְאַמּוֹת חָמֵשׁ, מַגַּעַת לְקִיר הַבַּיִת, וְהַכָּנָף הָאַחֶרֶת אַמּוֹת חָמֵשׁ, מַגִּיעַ לִכְנַף הַכְּרוּב הָאַחֵר.	11 And the wings of the cherubim were twenty cubits long: the wing of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house; and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.
יב  וּכְנַף הַכְּרוּב הָאֶחָד אַמּוֹת חָמֵשׁ, מַגִּיעַ לְקִיר הַבָּיִת; וְהַכָּנָף הָאַחֶרֶת, אַמּוֹת חָמֵשׁ--דְּבֵקָה, לִכְנַף הַכְּרוּב הָאַחֵר.	12 And the wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house; and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.
יג  כַּנְפֵי הַכְּרוּבִים הָאֵלֶּה, פֹּרְשִׂים אַמּוֹת עֶשְׂרִים; וְהֵם עֹמְדִים עַל-רַגְלֵיהֶם, וּפְנֵיהֶם לַבָּיִת.  {ס}	13 The wings of these cherubim spread themselves forth twenty cubits; and they stood on their feet, and their faces were inward. {S}
יד  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-הַפָּרֹכֶת, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן, וְכַרְמִיל וּבוּץ; וַיַּעַל עָלָיו, כְּרוּבִים.  {ס}	14 And he made the veil of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubim thereon. {S}
טו  וַיַּעַשׂ לִפְנֵי הַבַּיִת, עַמּוּדִים שְׁנַיִם, אַמּוֹת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וְחָמֵשׁ אֹרֶךְ; וְהַצֶּפֶת אֲשֶׁר-עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, אַמּוֹת חָמֵשׁ.  {ס}	15 Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits high, and the capital that was on the top of each of them was five cubits. {S}
טז  וַיַּעַשׂ שַׁרְשְׁרוֹת בַּדְּבִיר, וַיִּתֵּן עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמֻּדִים; וַיַּעַשׂ רִמּוֹנִים מֵאָה, וַיִּתֵּן בַּשַּׁרְשְׁרוֹת.	16 And he made chains in the Sanctuary, and put them on the tops of the pillars; and he made a hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains.
יז  וַיָּקֶם אֶת-הָעַמּוּדִים עַל-פְּנֵי הַהֵיכָל, אֶחָד מִיָּמִין וְאֶחָד מֵהַשְּׂמֹאול; וַיִּקְרָא שֵׁם-הימיני (הַיְמָנִי) יָכִין, וְשֵׁם הַשְּׂמָאלִי בֹּעַז.  {ס}	17 And he set up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz. {S}
א  וַיַּעַשׂ, מִזְבַּח נְחֹשֶׁת--עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ; וְעֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת, קוֹמָתוֹ.  {ס}	1 Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof. {S}
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַיָּם, מוּצָק:  עֶשֶׂר בָּאַמָּה מִשְּׂפָתוֹ אֶל-שְׂפָתוֹ עָגוֹל סָבִיב, וְחָמֵשׁ בָּאַמָּה קוֹמָתוֹ, וְקָו שְׁלֹשִׁים בָּאַמָּה, יָסֹב אֹתוֹ סָבִיב.	2 Also he made the molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and the height thereof was five cubits; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
ג  וּדְמוּת בְּקָרִים תַּחַת לוֹ סָבִיב סָבִיב, סוֹבְבִים אֹתוֹ, עֶשֶׂר בָּאַמָּה, מַקִּיפִים אֶת-הַיָּם סָבִיב:  שְׁנַיִם טוּרִים הַבָּקָר, יְצוּקִים בְּמֻצַקְתּוֹ.	3 And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round about, for ten cubits, compassing the sea round about. The oxen were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
ד  עוֹמֵד עַל-שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר בָּקָר, שְׁלֹשָׁה פֹנִים צָפוֹנָה וּשְׁלוֹשָׁה פֹנִים יָמָּה וּשְׁלֹשָׁה פֹּנִים נֶגְבָּה וּשְׁלֹשָׁה פֹּנִים מִזְרָחָה, וְהַיָּם עֲלֵיהֶם, מִלְמָעְלָה; וְכָל-אֲחֹרֵיהֶם, בָּיְתָה.	4 It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.
ה  וְעָבְיוֹ טֶפַח--וּשְׂפָתוֹ כְּמַעֲשֵׂה שְׂפַת-כּוֹס, פֶּרַח שׁוֹשַׁנָּה; מַחֲזִיק בַּתִּים, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים יָכִיל.  {ס}	5 And it was a handbreadth thick; and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily: it received and held three thousand baths. {S}
ו  וַיַּעַשׂ כִּיּוֹרִים, עֲשָׂרָה, וַיִּתֵּן חֲמִשָּׁה מִיָּמִין וַחֲמִשָּׁה מִשְּׂמֹאול לְרָחְצָה בָהֶם, אֶת-מַעֲשֵׂה הָעוֹלָה יָדִיחוּ בָם; וְהַיָּם, לְרָחְצָה לַכֹּהֲנִים בּוֹ.  {ס}	6 He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them; such things as belonged to the burnt-offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to wash in. {S}
ז  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-מְנֹרוֹת הַזָּהָב, עֶשֶׂר--כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם; וַיִּתֵּן, בַּהֵיכָל, חָמֵשׁ מִיָּמִין, וְחָמֵשׁ מִשְּׂמֹאול.  {ס}	7 And he made the ten candlesticks of gold according to the ordinance concerning them; and he set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left. {S}
ח  וַיַּעַשׂ שֻׁלְחָנוֹת, עֲשָׂרָה, וַיַּנַּח בַּהֵיכָל, חֲמִשָּׁה מִיָּמִין וַחֲמִשָּׁה מִשְּׂמֹאול; וַיַּעַשׂ מִזְרְקֵי זָהָב, מֵאָה.  {ס}	8 He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made a hundred basins of gold. {S}
ט  וַיַּעַשׂ חֲצַר הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְהָעֲזָרָה הַגְּדוֹלָה; וּדְלָתוֹת לָעֲזָרָה וְדַלְתוֹתֵיהֶם, צִפָּה נְחֹשֶׁת.	9 Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.
י  וְאֶת-הַיָּם, נָתַן מִכֶּתֶף הַיְמָנִית קֵדְמָה--מִמּוּל נֶגְבָּה.	10 And he set the sea on the right side [of the house] eastward, toward the south.
יא  וַיַּעַשׂ חוּרָם--אֶת-הַסִּירוֹת, וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקוֹת; וַיְכַל חירם (חוּרָם), לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-הַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, בְּבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים.	11 And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basins. So Huram made an end of doing the work that he wrought for king Solomon in the house of God:
יב  עַמּוּדִים שְׁנַיִם, וְהַגֻּלּוֹת וְהַכֹּתָרוֹת עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים שְׁתָּיִם; וְהַשְּׂבָכוֹת שְׁתַּיִם--לְכַסּוֹת אֶת-שְׁתֵּי גֻּלּוֹת הַכֹּתָרוֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ הָעַמּוּדִים.	12 the two pillars, and the bowls, and the two capitals which were on the top of the pillars; and the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars;
יג  וְאֶת-הָרִמּוֹנִים אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת, לִשְׁתֵּי הַשְּׂבָכוֹת; שְׁנַיִם טוּרִים רִמּוֹנִים, לַשְּׂבָכָה הָאֶחָת--לְכַסּוֹת אֶת-שְׁתֵּי גֻּלּוֹת הַכֹּתָרוֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָעַמּוּדִים.	13 and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks: two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars.
יד  וְאֶת-הַמְּכֹנוֹת, עָשָׂה; וְאֶת-הַכִּיֹּרוֹת עָשָׂה, עַל-הַמְּכֹנוֹת.	14 He made also the bases, and the lavers made he upon the bases;
טו  אֶת-הַיָּם, אֶחָד; וְאֶת-הַבָּקָר שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר, תַּחְתָּיו.	15 one sea, and the twelve oxen under it.
טז  וְאֶת-הַסִּירוֹת וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמִּזְלָגוֹת, וְאֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵיהֶם, עָשָׂה חוּרָם אָבִיו לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, לְבֵית יְהוָה--נְחֹשֶׁת, מָרוּק.	16 The pots also, and the shovels, and the flesh-hooks, and all the vessels thereof, did Huram his master craftsman make for king Solomon for the house of the LORD of bright brass.
יז  בְּכִכַּר הַיַּרְדֵּן יְצָקָם הַמֶּלֶךְ, בַּעֲבִי הָאֲדָמָה, בֵּין סֻכּוֹת, וּבֵין צְרֵדָתָה.	17 In the plain of the Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah.
יח  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלֹמֹה כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הָאֵלֶּה, לָרֹב מְאֹד:  כִּי לֹא נֶחְקַר, מִשְׁקַל הַנְּחֹשֶׁת.  {ס}	18 Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance; for the weight of the brass could not be found out. {S}
יט  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלֹמֹה--אֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים, אֲשֶׁר בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים; וְאֵת, מִזְבַּח הַזָּהָב, וְאֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָנוֹת, וַעֲלֵיהֶם לֶחֶם הַפָּנִים.	19 And Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon was the showbread;
כ  וְאֶת-הַמְּנֹרוֹת וְנֵרֹתֵיהֶם, לְבַעֲרָם כַּמִּשְׁפָּט לִפְנֵי הַדְּבִיר--זָהָב סָגוּר.	20 and the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn according to the ordinance before the Sanctuary, of pure gold;
כא  וְהַפֶּרַח וְהַנֵּרוֹת וְהַמֶּלְקַחַיִם, זָהָב; הוּא, מִכְלוֹת זָהָב.	21 and the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold, and that perfect gold;
כב  וְהַמְזַמְּרוֹת וְהַמִּזְרָקוֹת וְהַכַּפּוֹת וְהַמַּחְתּוֹת, זָהָב סָגוּר; וּפֶתַח הַבַּיִת דַּלְתוֹתָיו הַפְּנִימִיּוֹת לְקֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים, וְדַלְתֵי הַבַּיִת לַהֵיכָל--זָהָב.	22 and the snuffers, and the basins, and the pans, and the fire-pans, of pure gold. And as for the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house, that is, of the temple, were of gold.
א  וַתִּשְׁלַם, כָּל-הַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה, לְבֵית יְהוָה;  {ס}  וַיָּבֵא שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-קָדְשֵׁי דָּוִיד אָבִיו, וְאֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב וְאֶת-כָּל-הַכֵּלִים--נָתַן, בְּאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.  {פ}	1 Thus all the work that Solomon wrought for the house of the LORD was finished. {S} And Solomon brought in the things that David his father had hallowed; even the silver, and the gold, and all the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house of God. {P}
ב  אָז יַקְהֵיל שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-כָּל-רָאשֵׁי הַמַּטּוֹת נְשִׂיאֵי הָאָבוֹת לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  לְהַעֲלוֹת אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, מֵעִיר דָּוִיד--הִיא צִיּוֹן.	2 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers' houses of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.
ג  וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בֶּחָג:  הוּא, הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִעִי.	3 And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king at the feast, which was in the seventh month.
ד  וַיָּבֹאוּ, כֹּל זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּשְׂאוּ הַלְוִיִּם, אֶת-הָאָרוֹן.	4 And all the elders of Israel came, and the Levites took up the ark.
ה  וַיַּעֲלוּ אֶת-הָאָרוֹן וְאֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר בָּאֹהֶל:  הֶעֱלוּ אֹתָם, הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם.	5 And they brought up the ark, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent; these did the priests and the Levites bring up.
ו  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, וְכָל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל הַנּוֹעָדִים עָלָיו--לִפְנֵי הָאָרוֹן:  מְזַבְּחִים צֹאן וּבָקָר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִסָּפְרוּ וְלֹא יִמָּנוּ מֵרֹב.	6 And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled unto him, were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.
ז  וַיָּבִיאוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה אֶל-מְקוֹמוֹ, אֶל-דְּבִיר הַבַּיִת--אֶל-קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים:  אֶל-תַּחַת, כַּנְפֵי הַכְּרוּבִים.	7 And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD unto its place, into the Sanctuary of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
ח  וַיִּהְיוּ הַכְּרוּבִים פֹּרְשִׂים כְּנָפַיִם, עַל-מְקוֹם הָאָרוֹן; וַיְכַסּוּ הַכְּרוּבִים עַל-הָאָרוֹן וְעַל-בַּדָּיו, מִלְמָעְלָה.	8 For the cherubim spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and the staves thereof above.
ט  וַיַּאֲרִיכוּ, הַבַּדִּים, וַיֵּרָאוּ רָאשֵׁי הַבַּדִּים מִן-הָאָרוֹן עַל-פְּנֵי הַדְּבִיר, וְלֹא יֵרָאוּ הַחוּצָה; וַיְהִי-שָׁם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	9 And the staves were so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the Sanctuary; but they could not be seen without; and there they are unto this day.
י  אֵין, בָּאָרוֹן--רַק שְׁנֵי הַלֻּחוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן מֹשֶׁה בְּחֹרֵב:  אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת יְהוָה עִם-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּצֵאתָם מִמִּצְרָיִם.  {פ}	10 There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put there at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt. {P}
יא  וַיְהִי, בְּצֵאת הַכֹּהֲנִים מִן-הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  כִּי כָּל-הַכֹּהֲנִים הַנִּמְצְאִים, הִתְקַדָּשׁוּ--אֵין, לִשְׁמוֹר לְמַחְלְקוֹת.	11 And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place--for all the priests that were present had sanctified themselves, and did not keep their courses;
יב  וְהַלְוִיִּם הַמְשֹׁרְרִים לְכֻלָּם לְאָסָף לְהֵימָן לִידֻתוּן וְלִבְנֵיהֶם וְלַאֲחֵיהֶם מְלֻבָּשִׁים בּוּץ, בִּמְצִלְתַּיִם וּבִנְבָלִים וְכִנֹּרוֹת, עֹמְדִים, מִזְרָח לַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְעִמָּהֶם כֹּהֲנִים לְמֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים, מחצררים (מַחְצְרִים) בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת.	12 also the Levites who were the singers, all of them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and their brethren, arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets--
יג  וַיְהִי כְאֶחָד למחצצרים (לַמְחַצְּרִים) וְלַמְשֹׁרְרִים לְהַשְׁמִיעַ קוֹל-אֶחָד, לְהַלֵּל וּלְהֹדוֹת לַיהוָה, וּכְהָרִים קוֹל בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת וּבִמְצִלְתַּיִם וּבִכְלֵי הַשִּׁיר וּבְהַלֵּל לַיהוָה כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ; וְהַבַּיִת מָלֵא עָנָן, בֵּית יְהוָה.	13 it came even to pass, when the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised the LORD: 'for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever'; that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the LORD,
יד  וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים לַעֲמוֹד לְשָׁרֵת, מִפְּנֵי הֶעָנָן:  כִּי-מָלֵא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.  {פ}	14 so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled the house of God. {P}
א  אָז, אָמַר שְׁלֹמֹה:  יְהוָה אָמַר, לִשְׁכּוֹן בָּעֲרָפֶל.	1 Then spoke Solomon: The LORD hath said that He would dwell in the thick darkness.
ב  וַאֲנִי בָּנִיתִי בֵית-זְבֻל, לָךְ; וּמָכוֹן לְשִׁבְתְּךָ, עוֹלָמִים.	2 But I have built Thee a house of habitation, and a place for Thee to dwell in for ever.
ג  וַיַּסֵּב הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-פָּנָיו, וַיְבָרֶךְ, אֵת כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכָל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל, עוֹמֵד.	3 And the king turned his face, and blessed all the congregation of Israel; and all the congregation of Israel stood.
ד  וַיֹּאמֶר, בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּפִיו, אֵת דָּוִיד אָבִי; וּבְיָדָיו מִלֵּא, לֵאמֹר.	4 And he said: 'Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke with His mouth unto David my father, and hath with His hands fulfilled it, saying:
ה  מִן-הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִי אֶת-עַמִּי מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לֹא-בָחַרְתִּי בְעִיר מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לִהְיוֹת שְׁמִי שָׁם; וְלֹא-בָחַרְתִּי בְאִישׁ, לִהְיוֹת נָגִיד עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 Since the day that I brought forth My people out of the land of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house in, that My name might be there; neither chose I any man to be prince over My people Israel;
ו  וָאֶבְחַר, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, לִהְיוֹת שְׁמִי, שָׁם; וָאֶבְחַר בְּדָוִיד, לִהְיוֹת עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 but I have chosen Jerusalem, that My name might be there; and have chosen David to be over My people Israel.
ז  וַיְהִי, עִם-לְבַב דָּוִיד אָבִי, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת, לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
ח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-דָּוִיד אָבִי, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר הָיָה עִם-לְבָבְךָ, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לִשְׁמִי--הֱטִיבוֹתָ, כִּי הָיָה עִם-לְבָבֶךָ.	8 But the LORD said unto David my father: Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for My name, thou didst well that it was in thy heart;
ט  רַק אַתָּה, לֹא תִבְנֶה הַבָּיִת:  כִּי בִנְךָ הַיּוֹצֵא מֵחֲלָצֶיךָ, הוּא-יִבְנֶה הַבַּיִת לִשְׁמִי.	9 nevertheless thou shalt not build the house, but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for My name.
י  וַיָּקֶם יְהוָה, אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר; וָאָקוּם תַּחַת דָּוִיד אָבִי וָאֵשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, וָאֶבְנֶה הַבַּיִת, לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	10 And the LORD hath established His word that He spoke; for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
יא  וָאָשִׂים שָׁם אֶת-הָאָרוֹן, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם בְּרִית יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת, עִם-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	11 And there have I set the ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, which He made with the children of Israel.'
יב  וַיַּעֲמֹד, לִפְנֵי מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, נֶגֶד, כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּפְרֹשׂ, כַּפָּיו.	12 And he stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands--
יג  כִּי-עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה כִּיּוֹר נְחֹשֶׁת, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ בְּתוֹךְ הָעֲזָרָה--חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת אָרְכּוֹ וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת רָחְבּוֹ, וְאַמּוֹת שָׁלוֹשׁ קוֹמָתוֹ; וַיַּעֲמֹד עָלָיו, וַיִּבְרַךְ עַל-בִּרְכָּיו נֶגֶד כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּפְרֹשׂ כַּפָּיו, הַשָּׁמָיְמָה.  {פ}	13 for Solomon had made a brazen scaffold, of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court; and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven-- {P}
יד  וַיֹּאמַר,  {פ} 
יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֵין-כָּמוֹךָ אֱלֹהִים--בַּשָּׁמַיִם, וּבָאָרֶץ:  שֹׁמֵר הַבְּרִית, וְהַחֶסֶד, לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, הַהֹלְכִים לְפָנֶיךָ בְּכָל-לִבָּם.	14 and he said: {P}
 
'O LORD, the God of Israel, there is no God like Thee, in the heaven, or in the earth; who keepest covenant and mercy with Thy servants, that walk before Thee with all their heart;
טו  אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַרְתָּ, לְעַבְדְּךָ דָּוִיד אָבִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתָּ, לוֹ; וַתְּדַבֵּר בְּפִיךָ וּבְיָדְךָ מִלֵּאתָ, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	15 who hast kept with Thy servant David my father that which Thou didst promise him; yea, Thou spokest with Thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with Thy hand, as it is this day.
טז  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁמֹר לְעַבְדְּךָ דָוִיד אָבִי אֵת אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ לּוֹ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יִכָּרֵת לְךָ אִישׁ מִלְּפָנַי, יוֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל:  רַק אִם-יִשְׁמְרוּ בָנֶיךָ אֶת-דַּרְכָּם, לָלֶכֶת בְּתוֹרָתִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַכְתָּ, לְפָנָי.	16 Now therefore, O LORD, the God of Israel, keep with Thy servant David my father that which Thou hast promised him, saying: There shall not fail thee a man in My sight to sit on the throne of Israel; if only thy children take heed to their way, to walk in My law as thou hast walked before Me.
יז  וְעַתָּה, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  יֵאָמֵן, דְּבָרְךָ, אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ, לְעַבְדְּךָ לְדָוִיד.	17 Now therefore, O LORD, the God of Israel, let Thy word be verified, which Thou spokest unto Thy servant David.
יח  כִּי, הַאֻמְנָם, יֵשֵׁב אֱלֹהִים אֶת-הָאָדָם, עַל-הָאָרֶץ:  הִנֵּה שָׁמַיִם וּשְׁמֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם, לֹא יְכַלְכְּלוּךָ--אַף, כִּי-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר בָּנִיתִי.	18 But will God in very truth dwell with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee; how much less this house which I have builded!
יט  וּפָנִיתָ אֶל-תְּפִלַּת עַבְדְּךָ, וְאֶל-תְּחִנָּתוֹ--יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי:  לִשְׁמֹעַ אֶל-הָרִנָּה וְאֶל-הַתְּפִלָּה, אֲשֶׁר עַבְדְּךָ מִתְפַּלֵּל לְפָנֶיךָ.	19 Yet have Thou respect unto the prayer of Thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer which Thy servant prayeth before Thee;
כ  לִהְיוֹת עֵינֶיךָ פְתֻחוֹת אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה, יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה--אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתָּ לָשׂוּם שִׁמְךָ שָׁם:  לִשְׁמוֹעַ, אֶל-הַתְּפִלָּה, אֲשֶׁר יִתְפַּלֵּל עַבְדְּךָ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	20 that Thine eyes may be open toward this house day and night, even toward the place whereof Thou hast said that thou wouldest put Thy name there; to hearken unto the prayer which Thy servant shall pray toward this place.
כא  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ אֶל-תַּחֲנוּנֵי עַבְדְּךָ, וְעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יִתְפַּלְלוּ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה; וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע מִמְּקוֹם שִׁבְתְּךָ, מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם--וְשָׁמַעְתָּ, וְסָלָחְתָּ.	21 And hearken Thou to the supplications of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place; yea, hear Thou from Thy dwelling-place, even from heaven; and when Thou hearest, forgive.
כב  אִם-יֶחֱטָא אִישׁ לְרֵעֵהוּ, וְנָשָׁא-בוֹ אָלָה לְהַאֲלֹתוֹ; וּבָא, אָלָה לִפְנֵי מִזְבַּחֲךָ--בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	22 If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be exacted of him to cause him to swear, and he come and swear before Thine altar in this house;
כג  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְעָשִׂיתָ וְשָׁפַטְתָּ אֶת-עֲבָדֶיךָ, לְהָשִׁיב לְרָשָׁע, לָתֵת דַּרְכּוֹ בְּרֹאשׁוֹ; וּלְהַצְדִּיק צַדִּיק, לָתֶת לוֹ כְּצִדְקָתוֹ.  {ס}	23 then hear Thou from heaven, and do, and judge Thy servants, requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness. {S}
כד  וְאִם-יִנָּגֵף עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי אוֹיֵב--כִּי יֶחֶטְאוּ-לָךְ; וְשָׁבוּ וְהוֹדוּ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ, וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ וְהִתְחַנְּנוּ לְפָנֶיךָ בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	24 And if Thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, when they sin against Thee, and shall turn again and confess Thy name, and pray and make supplication before Thee in this house;
כה  וְאַתָּה, תִּשְׁמַע מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְסָלַחְתָּ, לְחַטַּאת עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַהֲשֵׁיבוֹתָם, אֶל-הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּה לָהֶם, וְלַאֲבֹתֵיהֶם.  {פ}	25 then hear Thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy people Israel, and bring them back unto the land which Thou gavest to them and to their fathers. {P}
כו  בְּהֵעָצֵר הַשָּׁמַיִם וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה מָטָר, כִּי יֶחֶטְאוּ-לָךְ; וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וְהוֹדוּ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ--מֵחַטָּאתָם יְשׁוּבוּן, כִּי תַעֲנֵם.	26 When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, when they sin against Thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess Thy name, turning from their sin, when Thou dost afflict them;
כז  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְסָלַחְתָּ לְחַטַּאת עֲבָדֶיךָ וְעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי תוֹרֵם אֶל-הַדֶּרֶךְ הַטּוֹבָה, אֲשֶׁר יֵלְכוּ-בָהּ; וְנָתַתָּה מָטָר עַל-אַרְצְךָ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּה לְעַמְּךָ לְנַחֲלָה.  {ס}	27 then hear Thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of Thy servants, and of Thy people Israel, when Thou dost direct them on the good way wherein they should walk; and send rain upon Thy land, which Thou hast given to Thy people for an inheritance. {S}
כח  רָעָב כִּי-יִהְיֶה בָאָרֶץ, דֶּבֶר כִּי-יִהְיֶה שִׁדָּפוֹן וְיֵרָקוֹן אַרְבֶּה וְחָסִיל כִּי יִהְיֶה, כִּי יָצַר-לוֹ אֹיְבָיו, בְּאֶרֶץ שְׁעָרָיו:  כָּל-נֶגַע, וְכָל-מַחֲלָה.	28 If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their enemies besiege them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague or whatsoever sickness there be;
כט  כָּל-תְּפִלָּה כָל-תְּחִנָּה, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה לְכָל-הָאָדָם, וּלְכֹל, עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֲשֶׁר יֵדְעוּ, אִישׁ נִגְעוֹ וּמַכְאֹבוֹ, וּפָרַשׂ כַּפָּיו, אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	29 what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all Thy people Israel, who shall know every man his own plague and his own pain, and shall spread forth his hands toward this house;
ל  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם מְכוֹן שִׁבְתֶּךָ, וְסָלַחְתָּ, וְנָתַתָּה לָאִישׁ כְּכָל-דְּרָכָיו, אֲשֶׁר תֵּדַע אֶת-לְבָבוֹ:  כִּי אַתָּה לְבַדְּךָ יָדַעְתָּ, אֶת-לְבַב בְּנֵי הָאָדָם.	30 then hear Thou from heaven Thy dwelling-place, and forgive, and render unto every man according to all his ways, whose heart Thou knowest--for Thou, even Thou only, knowest the hearts of the children of men--
לא  לְמַעַן יִירָאוּךָ, לָלֶכֶת בִּדְרָכֶיךָ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר-הֵם חַיִּים עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה--אֲשֶׁר נָתַתָּה, לַאֲבֹתֵינוּ.  {ס}	31 that they may fear Thee, to walk in Thy ways, all the days that they live in the land which Thou gavest unto our fathers. {S}
לב  וְגַם אֶל-הַנָּכְרִי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא מֵעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל הוּא, וּבָא מֵאֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה לְמַעַן שִׁמְךָ הַגָּדוֹל וְיָדְךָ הַחֲזָקָה, וּזְרוֹעֲךָ הַנְּטוּיָה; וּבָאוּ וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ, אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	32 Moreover concerning the stranger, that is not of Thy people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country for Thy great name's sake, and Thy mighty hand, and Thine outstretched arm; when they shall come and pray toward this house;
לג  וְאַתָּה תִּשְׁמַע מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, מִמְּכוֹן שִׁבְתֶּךָ, וְעָשִׂיתָ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרָא אֵלֶיךָ הַנָּכְרִי:  לְמַעַן יֵדְעוּ כָל-עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ, וּלְיִרְאָה אֹתְךָ כְּעַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלָדַעַת, כִּי-שִׁמְךָ נִקְרָא עַל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר בָּנִיתִי.	33 then hear Thou from heaven, even from Thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to Thee for; that all the peoples of the earth may know Thy name, and fear Thee, as doth Thy people Israel, and that they may know that Thy name is called upon this house which I have built.
לד  כִּי-יֵצֵא עַמְּךָ לַמִּלְחָמָה עַל-אֹיְבָיו, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁלָחֵם; וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ אֵלֶיךָ, דֶּרֶךְ הָעִיר הַזֹּאת אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתָּ בָּהּ, וְהַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר-בָּנִיתִי לִשְׁמֶךָ.	34 If Thy people go out to battle against their enemies, by whatsoever way Thou shalt send them, and they pray unto Thee toward this city which Thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for Thy name;
לה  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ, מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, אֶת-תְּפִלָּתָם, וְאֶת-תְּחִנָּתָם; וְעָשִׂיתָ, מִשְׁפָּטָם.	35 then hear Thou from heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.
לו  כִּי יֶחֶטְאוּ-לָךְ, כִּי אֵין אָדָם אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֶחֱטָא, וְאָנַפְתָּ בָם, וּנְתַתָּם לִפְנֵי אוֹיֵב; וְשָׁבוּם שׁוֹבֵיהֶם אֶל-אֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה, אוֹ קְרוֹבָה.	36 If they sin against Thee--for there is no man that sinneth not--and Thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive unto a land far off or near;
לז  וְהֵשִׁיבוּ, אֶל-לְבָבָם, בָּאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבּוּ-שָׁם; וְשָׁבוּ וְהִתְחַנְּנוּ אֵלֶיךָ, בְּאֶרֶץ שִׁבְיָם לֵאמֹר, חָטָאנוּ הֶעֱוִינוּ, וְרָשָׁעְנוּ.	37 yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried captive, and turn, and make supplication unto Thee in the land of their captivity, saying: We have sinned, we have done iniquitously, and have dealt wickedly;
לח  וְשָׁבוּ אֵלֶיךָ, בְּכָל-לִבָּם וּבְכָל-נַפְשָׁם, בְּאֶרֶץ שִׁבְיָם, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁבוּ אֹתָם; וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ, דֶּרֶךְ אַרְצָם אֲשֶׁר נָתַתָּה לַאֲבוֹתָם, וְהָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתָּ, וְלַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-בָּנִיתִי לִשְׁמֶךָ.	38 if they return unto Thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captive, and pray toward their land, which Thou gavest unto their fathers, and the city which Thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for Thy name;
לט  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם מִמְּכוֹן שִׁבְתְּךָ, אֶת-תְּפִלָּתָם וְאֶת-תְּחִנֹּתֵיהֶם, וְעָשִׂיתָ, מִשְׁפָּטָם; וְסָלַחְתָּ לְעַמְּךָ, אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ-לָךְ.	39 then hear Thou from heaven, even from Thy dwelling-place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause; and forgive Thy people who have sinned against Thee.
מ  עַתָּה אֱלֹהַי, יִהְיוּ-נָא עֵינֶיךָ פְּתֻחוֹת, וְאָזְנֶיךָ, קַשֻּׁבוֹת--לִתְפִלַּת, הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	40 Now, O my God, let, I beseech Thee, Thine eyes be open, and let Thine ears be attent, unto the prayer that is made in this place. {S}
מא  וְעַתָּה, קוּמָה יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים לְנוּחֶךָ--אַתָּה, וַאֲרוֹן עֻזֶּךָ; כֹּהֲנֶיךָ יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים, יִלְבְּשׁוּ תְשׁוּעָה, וַחֲסִידֶיךָ, יִשְׂמְחוּ בַטּוֹב.	41 Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into Thy resting-place, Thou, and the ark of Thy strength; let Thy priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation, and let Thy saints rejoice in good.
מב  יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים, אַל-תָּשֵׁב פְּנֵי מְשִׁיחֶךָ:  זָכְרָה, לְחַסְדֵי דָּוִיד עַבְדֶּךָ.  {פ}	42 O LORD God, turn not away the face of Thine anointed; remember the good deeds of David Thy servant.' {P}
א  וּכְכַלּוֹת שְׁלֹמֹה, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל, וְהָאֵשׁ יָרְדָה מֵהַשָּׁמַיִם, וַתֹּאכַל הָעֹלָה וְהַזְּבָחִים; וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, מָלֵא אֶת-הַבָּיִת.	1 Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt-offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the LORD filled the house.
ב  וְלֹא יָכְלוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, לָבוֹא אֶל-בֵּית יְהוָה:  כִּי-מָלֵא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה.	2 And the priests could not enter into the house of the LORD, because the glory of the LORD filled the LORD'S house.
ג  וְכֹל בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, רֹאִים בְּרֶדֶת הָאֵשׁ, וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, עַל-הַבָּיִת; וַיִּכְרְעוּ אַפַּיִם אַרְצָה עַל-הָרִצְפָה, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ, וְהֹדוֹת לַיהוָה כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ.	3 And all the children of Israel looked on, when the fire came down, and the glory of the LORD was upon the house; and they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and prostrated themselves, and gave thanks unto the LORD; 'for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever.'
ד  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-הָעָם, זֹבְחִים זֶבַח, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}	4 And the king and all the people offered sacrifice before the LORD. {S}
ה  וַיִּזְבַּח הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-זֶבַח הַבָּקָר, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף, וְצֹאן מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף; וַיַּחְנְכוּ אֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, הַמֶּלֶךְ וְכָל-הָעָם.	5 And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.
ו  וְהַכֹּהֲנִים עַל-מִשְׁמְרוֹתָם עֹמְדִים, וְהַלְוִיִּם בִּכְלֵי-שִׁיר יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה דָּוִיד הַמֶּלֶךְ לְהֹדוֹת לַיהוָה כִּי-לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ, בְּהַלֵּל דָּוִיד, בְּיָדָם; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים מחצצרים (מַחְצְרִים) נֶגְדָּם, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עֹמְדִים.  {ס}	6 And the priests stood, according to their offices; the Levites also with instruments of music of the LORD, which David the king had made, to give thanks unto the LORD, for His mercy endureth for ever, with the praises of David by their hand; and the priests sounded trumpets over against them; and all Israel stood. {S}
ז  וַיְקַדֵּשׁ שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-תּוֹךְ הֶחָצֵר אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי בֵית-יְהוָה, כִּי-עָשָׂה שָׁם הָעֹלוֹת, וְאֵת חֶלְבֵי הַשְּׁלָמִים:  כִּי-מִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה, לֹא יָכוֹל לְהָכִיל אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וְאֶת-הַחֲלָבִים.	7 Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of the LORD; for there he offered the burnt-offerings, and the fat of the peace-offerings; because the brazen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering, and the fat.
ח  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-הֶחָג בָּעֵת הַהִיא שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ--קָהָל, גָּדוֹל מְאֹד:  מִלְּבוֹא חֲמָת, עַד-נַחַל מִצְרָיִם.	8 So Solomon held the feast at that time seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entrance of Hamath unto the Brook of Egypt.
ט  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, עֲצָרֶת:  כִּי חֲנֻכַּת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, עָשׂוּ שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וְהֶחָג, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.	9 And on the eighth day they held a solemn assembly; for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.
י  וּבְיוֹם עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, שִׁלַּח אֶת-הָעָם לְאָהֳלֵיהֶם--שְׂמֵחִים, וְטוֹבֵי לֵב, עַל-הַטּוֹבָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוָה לְדָוִיד וְלִשְׁלֹמֹה, וּלְיִשְׂרָאֵל עַמּוֹ.	10 And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the people away unto their tents, joyful and glad of heart for the goodness that the LORD had shown unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel His people.
יא  וַיְכַל שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְאֵת כָּל-הַבָּא עַל-לֵב שְׁלֹמֹה, לַעֲשׂוֹת בְּבֵית-יְהוָה וּבְבֵיתוֹ--הִצְלִיחַ.  {פ}	11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD, and the king's house; and all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously effected. {P}
יב  וַיֵּרָא יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה, בַּלָּיְלָה; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, שָׁמַעְתִּי אֶת-תְּפִלָּתֶךָ, וּבָחַרְתִּי בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה לִי, לְבֵית זָבַח.	12 And the LORD appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him: 'I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to Myself for a house of sacrifice.
יג  הֵן אֶעֱצֹר הַשָּׁמַיִם וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה מָטָר, וְהֵן-אֲצַוֶּה עַל-חָגָב לֶאֱכוֹל הָאָרֶץ; וְאִם-אֲשַׁלַּח דֶּבֶר, בְּעַמִּי.	13 If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locust to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among My people;
יד  וְיִכָּנְעוּ עַמִּי אֲשֶׁר נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עֲלֵיהֶם, וְיִתְפַּלְלוּ וִיבַקְשׁוּ פָנַי, וְיָשֻׁבוּ, מִדַּרְכֵיהֶם הָרָעִים--וַאֲנִי, אֶשְׁמַע מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְאֶסְלַח לְחַטָּאתָם, וְאֶרְפָּא אֶת-אַרְצָם.	14 if My people, upon whom My name is called, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek My face, and turn from their evil ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
טו  עַתָּה, עֵינַי יִהְיוּ פְתֻחוֹת, וְאָזְנַי, קַשֻּׁבוֹת--לִתְפִלַּת, הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	15 Now Mine eyes shall be open, and Mine ears attent, unto the prayer that is made in this place.
טז  וְעַתָּה, בָּחַרְתִּי וְהִקְדַּשְׁתִּי אֶת-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה, לִהְיוֹת-שְׁמִי שָׁם, עַד-עוֹלָם; וְהָיוּ עֵינַי וְלִבִּי שָׁם, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	16 For now have I chosen and hallowed this house, that My name may be there for ever; and Mine eyes and My heart shall be there perpetually.
יז  וְאַתָּה אִם-תֵּלֵךְ לְפָנַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ דָּוִיד אָבִיךָ, וְלַעֲשׂוֹת, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִיךָ; וְחֻקַּי וּמִשְׁפָּטַי, תִּשְׁמוֹר.	17 And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before Me as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep My statutes and Mine ordinances;
יח  וַהֲקִימוֹתִי, אֵת כִּסֵּא מַלְכוּתֶךָ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר כָּרַתִּי, לְדָוִיד אָבִיךָ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יִכָּרֵת לְךָ אִישׁ, מוֹשֵׁל בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	18 then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I covenanted with David thy father, saying: There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.
יט  וְאִם-תְּשׁוּבוּן אַתֶּם--וַעֲזַבְתֶּם חֻקּוֹתַי וּמִצְוֺתַי, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לִפְנֵיכֶם; וַהֲלַכְתֶּם, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוִיתֶם, לָהֶם.	19 But if ye turn away, and forsake My statutes and My commandments which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them;
כ  וּנְתַשְׁתִּים, מֵעַל אַדְמָתִי אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָהֶם, וְאֶת-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר הִקְדַּשְׁתִּי לִשְׁמִי, אַשְׁלִיךְ מֵעַל פָּנָי; וְאֶתְּנֶנּוּ לְמָשָׁל וְלִשְׁנִינָה, בְּכָל-הָעַמִּים.	20 then will I pluck them up by the roots out of My land which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed for My name, will I cast out of My sight, and I will make it a proverb and a byword among all peoples.
כא  וְהַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר הָיָה עֶלְיוֹן, לְכָל-עֹבֵר עָלָיו יִשֹּׁם; וְאָמַר, בַּמֶּה עָשָׂה יְהוָה כָּכָה, לָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, וְלַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.	21 And this house, which is so high, every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall say: Why hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and to this house?
כב  וְאָמְרוּ, עַל אֲשֶׁר עָזְבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר הוֹצִיאָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וַיַּחֲזִיקוּ בֵּאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם וַיַּעַבְדוּם; עַל-כֵּן הֵבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת.  {פ}	22 And they shall answer: Because they forsook the LORD, the God of their fathers, who brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them; therefore hath He brought all this evil upon them.' {P}
א  וַיְהִי מִקֵּץ עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה--וְאֶת-בֵּיתוֹ.	1 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the LORD, and his own house,
ב  וְהֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן חוּרָם לִשְׁלֹמֹה--בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה, אֹתָם; וַיּוֹשֶׁב שָׁם, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 that the cities which Huram had given to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there.
ג  וַיֵּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה חֲמָת צוֹבָה, וַיֶּחֱזַק עָלֶיהָ.	3 And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and prevailed against it.
ד  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-תַּדְמֹר, בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְאֵת כָּל-עָרֵי הַמִּסְכְּנוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה בַּחֲמָת.	4 And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store-cities, which he built in Hamath.
ה  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-בֵּית חוֹרוֹן, הָעֶלְיוֹן, וְאֶת-בֵּית חוֹרוֹן, הַתַּחְתּוֹן--עָרֵי מָצוֹר, חוֹמוֹת דְּלָתַיִם וּבְרִיחַ.	5 Also he built Beth-horon the upper, and Beth-horon the nether, fortified cities, with walls, gates, and bars;
ו  וְאֶת-בַּעֲלָת, וְאֵת כָּל-עָרֵי הַמִּסְכְּנוֹת אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ לִשְׁלֹמֹה, וְאֵת כָּל-עָרֵי הָרֶכֶב, וְאֵת עָרֵי הַפָּרָשִׁים; וְאֵת כָּל-חֵשֶׁק שְׁלֹמֹה, אֲשֶׁר חָשַׁק לִבְנוֹת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם וּבַלְּבָנוֹן, וּבְכֹל, אֶרֶץ מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ.	6 and Baalath, and all the store-cities that Solomon had, and all the cities for his chariots, and the cities for his horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
ז  כָּל-הָעָם הַנּוֹתָר מִן-הַחִתִּי וְהָאֱמֹרִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי, וְהַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, הֵמָּה.	7 As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of Israel;
ח  מִן-בְּנֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר נוֹתְרוּ אַחֲרֵיהֶם בָּאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-כִלּוּם, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּעֲלֵם שְׁלֹמֹה לְמַס, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	8 of their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, of them did Solomon raise a levy of bondservants, unto this day.
ט  וּמִן-בְּנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נָתַן שְׁלֹמֹה לַעֲבָדִים, לִמְלַאכְתּוֹ:  כִּי-הֵמָּה אַנְשֵׁי מִלְחָמָה, וְשָׂרֵי שָׁלִישָׁיו, וְשָׂרֵי רִכְבּוֹ, וּפָרָשָׁיו.  {פ}	9 But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen. {P}
י  וְאֵלֶּה שָׂרֵי הנציבים (הַנִּצָּבִים) אֲשֶׁר-לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתָיִם, הָרֹדִים, בָּעָם.	10 And these were the chief officers of king Solomon, even two hundred and fifty, that bore rule over the people.
יא  וְאֶת-בַּת-פַּרְעֹה, הֶעֱלָה שְׁלֹמֹה מֵעִיר דָּוִיד, לַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה-לָהּ:  כִּי אָמַר, לֹא-תֵשֵׁב אִשָּׁה לִי בְּבֵית דָּוִיד מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי-קֹדֶשׁ הֵמָּה, אֲשֶׁר-בָּאָה אֲלֵיהֶם אֲרוֹן יְהוָה.  {פ}	11 And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her; for he said: 'No wife of mine shall dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are holy, whereunto the ark of the LORD hath come.' {P}
יב  אָז הֶעֱלָה שְׁלֹמֹה עֹלוֹת, לַיהוָה, עַל מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה לִפְנֵי הָאוּלָם.	12 Then Solomon offered burnt-offerings unto the LORD on the altar of the LORD, which he had built before the porch,
יג  וּבִדְבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹם, לְהַעֲלוֹת כְּמִצְוַת מֹשֶׁה, לַשַּׁבָּתוֹת וְלֶחֳדָשִׁים, וְלַמּוֹעֲדוֹת שָׁלוֹשׁ פְּעָמִים בַּשָּׁנָה--בְּחַג הַמַּצּוֹת וּבְחַג הַשָּׁבֻעוֹת, וּבְחַג הַסֻּכּוֹת.	13 even as the duty of every day required, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the appointed seasons, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.
יד  וַיַּעֲמֵד כְּמִשְׁפַּט דָּוִיד-אָבִיו אֶת-מַחְלְקוֹת הַכֹּהֲנִים עַל-עֲבֹדָתָם, וְהַלְוִיִּם עַל-מִשְׁמְרוֹתָם לְהַלֵּל וּלְשָׁרֵת נֶגֶד הַכֹּהֲנִים לִדְבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ, וְהַשֹּׁעֲרִים בְּמַחְלְקוֹתָם, לְשַׁעַר וָשָׁעַר:  כִּי כֵן, מִצְוַת דָּוִיד אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים.	14 And he appointed, according to the ordinance of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise, and to minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required; the doorkeepers also by their courses at every gate; for so had David the man of God commanded.
טו  וְלֹא סָרוּ מִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, לְכָל-דָּבָר--וְלָאֹצָרוֹת.	15 And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.
טז  וַתִּכֹּן כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת שְׁלֹמֹה, עַד-הַיּוֹם מוּסַד בֵּית-יְהוָה וְעַד-כְּלֹתוֹ:  שָׁלֵם, בֵּית יְהוָה.  {ס}	16 So all the work of Solomon was set in order from the day of the foundation of the house of the LORD, and until it was finished. So the house of the LORD was perfected. {S}
יז  אָז הָלַךְ שְׁלֹמֹה לְעֶצְיוֹן-גֶּבֶר וְאֶל-אֵילוֹת, עַל-שְׂפַת הַיָּם--בְּאֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם.	17 Then went Solomon to Ezion-geber, and to Eloth, on the sea-shore in the land of Edom.
יח  וַיִּשְׁלַח-לוֹ חוּרָם בְּיַד-עֲבָדָיו אוניות (אֳנִיּוֹת), וַעֲבָדִים יוֹדְעֵי יָם, וַיָּבֹאוּ עִם-עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה אוֹפִירָה, וַיִּקְחוּ מִשָּׁם אַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים כִּכַּר זָהָב; וַיָּבִיאוּ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה.  {פ}	18 And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they came with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and fetched from thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon. {P}
א  וּמַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא, שָׁמְעָה אֶת-שֵׁמַע שְׁלֹמֹה, וַתָּבוֹא לְנַסּוֹת אֶת-שְׁלֹמֹה בְחִידוֹת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם בְּחַיִל כָּבֵד מְאֹד וּגְמַלִּים נֹשְׂאִים בְּשָׂמִים וְזָהָב לָרֹב, וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה; וַתָּבוֹא, אֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה, וַתְּדַבֵּר עִמּוֹ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר הָיָה עִם-לְבָבָהּ.	1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great train, and camels that bore spices and gold in abundance, and precious stones; and when she was come to Solomon, she spoke with him of all that was in her heart.
ב  וַיַּגֶּד-לָהּ שְׁלֹמֹה, אֶת-כָּל-דְּבָרֶיהָ; וְלֹא-נֶעְלַם דָּבָר מִשְּׁלֹמֹה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא הִגִּיד לָהּ.	2 And Solomon told her all her questions; and there was not any thing hid from Solomon which he told her not.
ג  וַתֵּרֶא, מַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא, אֵת, חָכְמַת שְׁלֹמֹה--וְהַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה.	3 And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,
ד  וּמַאֲכַל שֻׁלְחָנוֹ וּמוֹשַׁב עֲבָדָיו וּמַעֲמַד מְשָׁרְתָיו וּמַלְבּוּשֵׁיהֶם, וּמַשְׁקָיו וּמַלְבּוּשֵׁיהֶם, וַעֲלִיָּתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲלֶה בֵּית יְהוָה; וְלֹא-הָיָה עוֹד בָּהּ, רוּחַ.	4 and the food of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her.
ה  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֱמֶת הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתִּי בְּאַרְצִי--עַל-דְּבָרֶיךָ, וְעַל-חָכְמָתֶךָ.	5 And she said to the king: 'It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom.
ו  וְלֹא-הֶאֱמַנְתִּי לְדִבְרֵיהֶם, עַד אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתִי וַתִּרְאֶינָה עֵינַי, וְהִנֵּה לֹא הֻגַּד-לִי, חֲצִי מַרְבִּית חָכְמָתֶךָ:  יָסַפְתָּ, עַל-הַשְּׁמוּעָה אֲשֶׁר שָׁמָעְתִּי.	6 Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and, behold, the half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me; thou exceedest the fame that I heard.
ז  אַשְׁרֵי אֲנָשֶׁיךָ, וְאַשְׁרֵי עֲבָדֶיךָ אֵלֶּה--הָעֹמְדִים לְפָנֶיךָ תָּמִיד, וְשֹׁמְעִים אֶת-חָכְמָתֶךָ.	7 Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, that stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.
ח  יְהִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, בָּרוּךְ, אֲשֶׁר חָפֵץ בְּךָ לְתִתְּךָ עַל-כִּסְאוֹ לְמֶלֶךְ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ:  בְּאַהֲבַת אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַעֲמִידוֹ לְעוֹלָם, וַיִּתֶּנְךָ עֲלֵיהֶם לְמֶלֶךְ, לַעֲשׂוֹת מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה.	8 Blessed be the LORD thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee on His throne, to be king for the LORD thy God; because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made He thee king over them, to do justice and righteousness.'
ט  וַתִּתֵּן לַמֶּלֶךְ מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים כִּכַּר זָהָב, וּבְשָׂמִים לָרֹב מְאֹד--וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה; וְלֹא הָיָה כַּבֹּשֶׂם הַהוּא, אֲשֶׁר-נָתְנָה מַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא לַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה.	9 And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in great abundance, and precious stones; neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
י  וְגַם-עַבְדֵי חירם (חוּרָם) וְעַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה, אֲשֶׁר-הֵבִיאוּ זָהָב מֵאוֹפִיר--הֵבִיאוּ עֲצֵי אַלְגּוּמִּים, וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה.	10 And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon that brought gold from Ophir, brought sandal-wood and precious stones.
יא  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-עֲצֵי הָאַלְגּוּמִּים מְסִלּוֹת לְבֵית-יְהוָה, וּלְבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכִנֹּרוֹת וּנְבָלִים, לַשָּׁרִים; וְלֹא-נִרְאוּ כָהֵם לְפָנִים, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה.	11 And the king made of the sandal-wood paths for the house of the LORD, and for the king's house, and harps and psalteries for the singers; and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.
יב  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה נָתַן לְמַלְכַּת-שְׁבָא, אֶת-כָּל-חֶפְצָהּ אֲשֶׁר שָׁאָלָה, מִלְּבַד, אֲשֶׁר-הֵבִיאָה אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַתַּהֲפֹךְ וַתֵּלֶךְ לְאַרְצָהּ, הִיא וַעֲבָדֶיהָ.  {פ}	12 And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and her servants. {P}
יג  וַיְהִי מִשְׁקַל הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא לִשְׁלֹמֹה בְּשָׁנָה אֶחָת--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים וָשֵׁשׁ, כִּכְּרֵי זָהָב.	13 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold;
יד  לְבַד מֵאַנְשֵׁי הַתָּרִים וְהַסֹּחֲרִים, מְבִיאִים; וְכָל-מַלְכֵי עֲרַב וּפַחוֹת הָאָרֶץ, מְבִיאִים זָהָב וָכֶסֶף לִשְׁלֹמֹה.	14 beside that which the traffickers and merchants brought; and all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.
טו  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה מָאתַיִם צִנָּה, זָהָב שָׁחוּט:  שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת זָהָב שָׁחוּט, יַעֲלֶה עַל-הַצִּנָּה הָאֶחָת.	15 And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target;
טז  וּשְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת מָגִנִּים, זָהָב שָׁחוּט--שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת זָהָב, יַעֲלֶה עַל-הַמָּגֵן הָאֶחָת; וַיִּתְּנֵם הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּבֵית יַעַר הַלְּבָנוֹן.	16 three hundred shields of beaten gold also: three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield; and the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
יז  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ כִּסֵּא-שֵׁן, גָּדוֹל; וַיְצַפֵּהוּ, זָהָב טָהוֹר.	17 Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.
יח  וְשֵׁשׁ מַעֲלוֹת לַכִּסֵּא וְכֶבֶשׁ בַּזָּהָב לַכִּסֵּא, מָאֳחָזִים, וְיָדוֹת מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה, עַל-מְקוֹם הַשָּׁבֶת; וּשְׁנַיִם אֲרָיוֹת, עֹמְדִים אֵצֶל הַיָּדוֹת.	18 And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and arms on either side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the arms.
יט  וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר אֲרָיוֹת, עֹמְדִים שָׁם עַל-שֵׁשׁ הַמַּעֲלוֹת--מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה; לֹא-נַעֲשָׂה כֵן, לְכָל-מַמְלָכָה.	19 And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps; there was not the like made in any kingdom.
כ  וְכֹל כְּלֵי מַשְׁקֵה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, זָהָב, וְכֹל כְּלֵי בֵּית-יַעַר הַלְּבָנוֹן, זָהָב סָגוּר:  אֵין כֶּסֶף, נֶחְשָׁב בִּימֵי שְׁלֹמֹה--לִמְאוּמָה.	20 And all king Solomon's drinking-vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; silver was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.
כא  כִּי-אֳנִיּוֹת לַמֶּלֶךְ הֹלְכוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ, עִם עַבְדֵי חוּרָם:  אַחַת לְשָׁלוֹשׁ שָׁנִים תָּבוֹאנָה אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ, נֹשְׂאוֹת זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, שֶׁנְהַבִּים וְקוֹפִים, וְתוּכִּיִּים.  {פ}	21 For the king had ships that went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram; once every three years came the ships of Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks. {P}
כב  וַיִּגְדַּל הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, מִכֹּל מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ--לְעֹשֶׁר, וְחָכְמָה.	22 So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
כג  וְכֹל מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ, מְבַקְשִׁים אֶת-פְּנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה--לִשְׁמֹעַ, אֶת-חָכְמָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן הָאֱלֹהִים, בְּלִבּוֹ.	23 And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
כד  וְהֵם מְבִיאִים אִישׁ מִנְחָתוֹ כְּלֵי כֶסֶף וּכְלֵי זָהָב וּשְׂלָמוֹת, נֵשֶׁק וּבְשָׂמִים, סוּסִים, וּפְרָדִים--דְּבַר-שָׁנָה, בְּשָׁנָה.  {ס}	24 And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year. {S}
כה  וַיְהִי לִשְׁלֹמֹה אַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים אֻרְיוֹת סוּסִים, וּמַרְכָּבוֹת, וּשְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף, פָּרָשִׁים; וַיַּנִּיחֵם בְּעָרֵי הָרֶכֶב, וְעִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	25 And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.
כו  וַיְהִי מוֹשֵׁל, בְּכָל-הַמְּלָכִים--מִן-הַנָּהָר וְעַד-אֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְעַד גְּבוּל מִצְרָיִם.	26 And he ruled over all the kings from the River even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.
כז  וַיִּתֵּן הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, כָּאֲבָנִים; וְאֵת הָאֲרָזִים, נָתַן כַּשִּׁקְמִים אֲשֶׁר-בַּשְּׁפֵלָה--לָרֹב.	27 And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycamore-trees that are in the Lowland, for abundance.
כח  וּמוֹצִיאִים סוּסִים מִמִּצְרַיִם לִשְׁלֹמֹה, וּמִכָּל-הָאֲרָצוֹת.	28 And they brought horses for Solomon out of Egypt, and out of all lands.
כט  וּשְׁאָר דִּבְרֵי שְׁלֹמֹה, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרוֹנִים--הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-דִּבְרֵי נָתָן הַנָּבִיא, וְעַל-נְבוּאַת אֲחִיָּה הַשִּׁילוֹנִי וּבַחֲזוֹת יעדי (יֶעְדּוֹ) הַחֹזֶה, עַל-יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט.	29 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written in the words of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Jedo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat?
ל  וַיִּמְלֹךְ שְׁלֹמֹה בִירוּשָׁלִַם עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה.	30 And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
לא  וַיִּשְׁכַּב שְׁלֹמֹה, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ, בְּעִיר דָּוִיד אָבִיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ רְחַבְעָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	31 And Solomon slept with his fathers; they buried him in the city of David his father; and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  וַיֵּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, שְׁכֶמָה:  כִּי שְׁכֶם בָּאוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַמְלִיךְ אֹתוֹ.	1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem; for all Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.
ב  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, וְהוּא בְמִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר בָּרַח, מִפְּנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה הַמֶּלֶךְ--וַיָּשָׁב יָרָבְעָם, מִמִּצְרָיִם.	2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it--for he was in Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of king Solomon--that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.
ג  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ, וַיִּקְרְאוּ-לוֹ, וַיָּבֹא יָרָבְעָם, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְדַבְּרוּ, אֶל-רְחַבְעָם לֵאמֹר.	3 And they sent and called him; and Jeroboam and all Israel came, and they spoke to Rehoboam, saying:
ד  אָבִיךָ, הִקְשָׁה אֶת-עֻלֵּנוּ; וְעַתָּה הָקֵל מֵעֲבוֹדַת אָבִיךָ הַקָּשָׁה, וּמֵעֻלּוֹ הַכָּבֵד אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן עָלֵינוּ--וְנַעַבְדֶךָּ.	4 'Thy father made our yoke grievous; now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.'
ה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, עוֹד שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים--וְשׁוּבוּ אֵלָי; וַיֵּלֶךְ, הָעָם.  {ס}	5 And he said unto them: 'Come again unto me after three days.' And the people departed. {S}
ו  וַיִּוָּעַץ הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, אֶת-הַזְּקֵנִים אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ עֹמְדִים לִפְנֵי שְׁלֹמֹה אָבִיו, בִּהְיֹתוֹ חַי, לֵאמֹר:  אֵיךְ אַתֶּם נוֹעָצִים, לְהָשִׁיב לָעָם-הַזֶּה דָּבָר.	6 And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men, that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying: 'What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?'
ז  וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, אִם-תִּהְיֶה לְטוֹב לְהָעָם הַזֶּה וּרְצִיתָם, וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, דְּבָרִים טוֹבִים--וְהָיוּ לְךָ עֲבָדִים, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	7 And they spoke unto him, saying: 'If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.'
ח  וַיַּעֲזֹב אֶת-עֲצַת הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר יְעָצֻהוּ; וַיִּוָּעַץ, אֶת-הַיְלָדִים אֲשֶׁר גָּדְלוּ אִתּוֹ, הָעֹמְדִים, לְפָנָיו.	8 But he forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men that were grown up with him, that stood before him.
ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, מָה אַתֶּם נוֹעָצִים, וְנָשִׁיב דָּבָר, אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה:  אֲשֶׁר דִּבְּרוּ אֵלַי, לֵאמֹר, הָקֵל מִן-הָעֹל, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן אָבִיךָ עָלֵינוּ.	9 And he said unto them: 'What counsel give ye, that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me, saying: Make the yoke that thy father did put upon us lighter?'
י  וַיְדַבְּרוּ אִתּוֹ, הַיְלָדִים אֲשֶׁר גָּדְלוּ אִתּוֹ לֵאמֹר, כֹּה-תֹאמַר לָעָם אֲשֶׁר-דִּבְּרוּ אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר אָבִיךָ הִכְבִּיד אֶת-עֻלֵּנוּ, וְאַתָּה הָקֵל מֵעָלֵינוּ:  כֹּה תֹּאמַר אֲלֵהֶם, קָטָנִּי עָבָה מִמָּתְנֵי אָבִי.	10 And the young men that were grown up with him spoke unto him, saying: 'Thus shalt thou say unto the people that spoke unto thee, saying: Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou say unto them: My little finger is thicker than my father's loins.
יא  וְעַתָּה, אָבִי הֶעְמִיס עֲלֵיכֶם עֹל כָּבֵד, וַאֲנִי, אֹסִיף עַל-עֻלְּכֶם:  אָבִי, יִסַּר אֶתְכֶם בַּשּׁוֹטִים, וַאֲנִי, בָּעַקְרַבִּים.  {פ}	11 And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.' {P}
יב  וַיָּבֹא יָרָבְעָם וְכָל-הָעָם אֶל-רְחַבְעָם, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִשִׁי, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר הַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, שׁוּבוּ אֵלַי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִשִׁי.	12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying: 'Come to me again the third day.'
יג  וַיַּעֲנֵם הַמֶּלֶךְ, קָשָׁה; וַיַּעֲזֹב הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, אֵת עֲצַת הַזְּקֵנִים.	13 And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,
יד  וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם, כַּעֲצַת הַיְלָדִים לֵאמֹר, אַכְבִּיד אֶת-עֻלְּכֶם, וַאֲנִי אֹסִיף עָלָיו:  אָבִי, יִסַּר אֶתְכֶם בַּשּׁוֹטִים, וַאֲנִי, בָּעַקְרַבִּים.	14 and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying: '[My father] made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.'
טו  וְלֹא-שָׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-הָעָם:  כִּי-הָיְתָה נְסִבָּה, מֵעִם הָאֱלֹהִים--לְמַעַן הָקִים יְהוָה אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּיַד אֲחִיָּהוּ הַשִּׁלוֹנִי, אֶל-יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט.	15 So the king hearkened not unto the people; for it was brought about of God, that the LORD might establish His word, which He spoke by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
טז  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי לֹא-שָׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ לָהֶם, וַיָּשִׁיבוּ הָעָם אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר מַה-לָּנוּ חֵלֶק בְּדָוִיד וְלֹא-נַחֲלָה בְּבֶן-יִשַׁי אִישׁ לְאֹהָלֶיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַתָּה רְאֵה בֵיתְךָ דָּוִיד; וַיֵּלֶךְ כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְאֹהָלָיו.  {ס}	16 And when all Israel [saw] that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying: 'What portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse; every man to your tents, O Israel; now see to thine own house, David.' So all Israel departed unto their tents. {S}
יז  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה--וַיִּמְלֹךְ עֲלֵיהֶם, רְחַבְעָם.	17 But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
יח  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, אֶת-הֲדֹרָם אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמַּס, וַיִּרְגְּמוּ-בוֹ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶבֶן, וַיָּמֹת;  {ס}  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, הִתְאַמֵּץ לַעֲלוֹת בַּמֶּרְכָּבָה, לָנוּס, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	18 Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was over the levy; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones, so that he died. {S} And king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem. {S}
יט  וַיִּפְשְׁעוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּבֵית דָּוִיד, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	19 So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.
א  וַיָּבֹא רְחַבְעָם, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּקְהֵל אֶת-בֵּית יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן מֵאָה וּשְׁמוֹנִים אֶלֶף בָּחוּר, עֹשֵׂה מִלְחָמָה--לְהִלָּחֵם, עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה, לִרְחַבְעָם.  {פ}	1 And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, that were warriors, to fight against Israel, to bring the kingdom back to Rehoboam. {P}
ב  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-שְׁמַעְיָהוּ אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, לֵאמֹר.	2 But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying:
ג  אֱמֹר, אֶל-רְחַבְעָם בֶּן-שְׁלֹמֹה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--וְאֶל, כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּיהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן, לֵאמֹר.	3 'Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying:
ד  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה לֹא-תַעֲלוּ וְלֹא-תִלָּחֲמוּ עִם-אֲחֵיכֶם, שׁוּבוּ אִישׁ לְבֵיתוֹ--כִּי מֵאִתִּי נִהְיָה, הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶת-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ מִלֶּכֶת אֶל-יָרָבְעָם.  {פ}	4 Thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren; return every man to his house, for this thing is of Me.' So they hearkened unto the words of the LORD, and returned from going against Jeroboam. {P}
ה  וַיֵּשֶׁב רְחַבְעָם, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיִּבֶן עָרִים לְמָצוֹר, בִּיהוּדָה.	5 And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah.
ו  וַיִּבֶן אֶת-בֵּית-לֶחֶם וְאֶת-עֵיטָם, וְאֶת-תְּקוֹעַ.	6 He built even Beth-lehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,
ז  וְאֶת-בֵּית-צוּר וְאֶת-שׂוֹכוֹ, וְאֶת-עֲדֻלָּם.	7 and Beth-zur, and Soco, and Adullam,
ח  וְאֶת-גַּת וְאֶת-מָרֵשָׁה, וְאֶת-זִיף.	8 and Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,
ט  וְאֶת-אֲדוֹרַיִם וְאֶת-לָכִישׁ, וְאֶת-עֲזֵקָה.	9 and Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,
י  וְאֶת-צָרְעָה, וְאֶת-אַיָּלוֹן, וְאֶת-חֶבְרוֹן, אֲשֶׁר בִּיהוּדָה וּבְבִנְיָמִן:  עָרֵי, מְצֻרוֹת.	10 and Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities.
יא  וַיְחַזֵּק, אֶת-הַמְּצוּרוֹת; וַיִּתֵּן בָּהֶם נְגִידִים, וְאֹצְרוֹת מַאֲכָל וְשֶׁמֶן וָיָיִן.	11 And he fortified the strongholds, and put captains in them, and store of victual, and oil and wine.
יב  וּבְכָל-עִיר וָעִיר צִנּוֹת וּרְמָחִים, וַיְחַזְּקֵם לְהַרְבֵּה מְאֹד; וַיְהִי-לוֹ, יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן.  {ס}	12 And in every city he put shields and spears, and made them exceeding strong. And Judah and Benjamin adhered to him. {S}
יג  וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, וְהַלְוִיִּם, אֲשֶׁר, בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--הִתְיַצְּבוּ עָלָיו, מִכָּל-גְּבוּלָם.	13 And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel presented themselves to him out of all their border.
יד  כִּי-עָזְבוּ הַלְוִיִּם, אֶת-מִגְרְשֵׁיהֶם וַאֲחֻזָּתָם, וַיֵּלְכוּ לִיהוּדָה, וְלִירוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי-הִזְנִיחָם יָרָבְעָם וּבָנָיו, מִכַּהֵן לַיהוָה.	14 For the Levites left their open land and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons cast them off, that they should not execute the priest's office unto the LORD;
טו  וַיַּעֲמֶד-לוֹ כֹּהֲנִים, לַבָּמוֹת וְלַשְּׂעִירִים, וְלָעֲגָלִים, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה.	15 and he appointed him priests for the high places, and for the satyrs, and for the calves which he had made.
טז  וְאַחֲרֵיהֶם, מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַנֹּתְנִים אֶת-לְבָבָם, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--בָּאוּ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לִזְבּוֹחַ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.	16 And after them, out of all the tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the LORD, the God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the LORD, the God of their fathers.
יז  וַיְחַזְּקוּ אֶת-מַלְכוּת יְהוּדָה, וַיְאַמְּצוּ אֶת-רְחַבְעָם בֶּן-שְׁלֹמֹה לְשָׁנִים שָׁלוֹשׁ:  כִּי הָלְכוּ, בְּדֶרֶךְ דָּוִיד וּשְׁלֹמֹה--לְשָׁנִים שָׁלוֹשׁ.	17 So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years; for they walked three years in the way of David and Solomon.
יח  וַיִּקַּח-לוֹ רְחַבְעָם, אִשָּׁה--אֶת-מָחֲלַת, בן- (בַּת-) יְרִימוֹת בֶּן-דָּוִיד:  אֲבִיהַיִל, בַּת-אֱלִיאָב בֶּן-יִשָׁי.	18 And Rehoboam took him a wife, Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David, and of Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;
יט  וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, בָּנִים--אֶת-יְעוּשׁ וְאֶת-שְׁמַרְיָה, וְאֶת-זָהַם.	19 and she bore him sons: Jeush, and Shemariah, and Zaham.
כ  וְאַחֲרֶיהָ לָקַח, אֶת-מַעֲכָה בַּת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-אֲבִיָּה וְאֶת-עַתַּי, וְאֶת-זִיזָא, וְאֶת-שְׁלֹמִית.	20 And after her he took Maacah the daughter of Absalom; and she bore him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.
כא  וַיֶּאֱהַב רְחַבְעָם אֶת-מַעֲכָה בַת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, מִכָּל-נָשָׁיו וּפִילַגְשָׁיו--כִּי נָשִׁים שְׁמוֹנֶה-עֶשְׂרֵה נָשָׂא, וּפִילַגְשִׁים שִׁשִּׁים; וַיּוֹלֶד, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמוֹנָה בָּנִים--וְשִׁשִּׁים בָּנוֹת.	21 And Rehoboam loved Maacah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines--for he took eighteen wives, and threescore concubines, and begot twenty and eight sons and threescore daughters.
כב  וַיַּעֲמֵד לָרֹאשׁ רְחַבְעָם אֶת-אֲבִיָּה בֶן-מַעֲכָה, לְנָגִיד בְּאֶחָיו--כִּי, לְהַמְלִיכוֹ.	22 And Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of Maacah to be chief, even the prince among his brethren; for he was minded to make him king.
כג  וַיָּבֶן וַיִּפְרֹץ מִכָּל-בָּנָיו לְכָל-אַרְצוֹת יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן, לְכֹל עָרֵי הַמְּצֻרוֹת, וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם הַמָּזוֹן, לָרֹב; וַיִּשְׁאַל, הֲמוֹן נָשִׁים.	23 And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his sons throughout all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fortified city; and he gave them victual in abundance. And he sought for them many wives.
א  וַיְהִי, כְּהָכִין מַלְכוּת רְחַבְעָם וּכְחֶזְקָתוֹ, עָזַב, אֶת-תּוֹרַת יְהוָה; וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עִמּוֹ.  {פ}	1 And it came to pass, when the kingdom of Rehoboam was established, and he was strong, that he forsook the law of the LORD, and all Israel with him. {P}
ב  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַחֲמִישִׁית, לַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, עָלָה שִׁישַׁק מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי מָעֲלוּ, בַּיהוָה.	2 And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had dealt treacherously with the LORD,
ג  בְּאֶלֶף וּמָאתַיִם רֶכֶב, וּבְשִׁשִּׁים אֶלֶף פָּרָשִׁים; וְאֵין מִסְפָּר, לָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ עִמּוֹ מִמִּצְרַיִם--לוּבִים סֻכִּיִּים, וְכוּשִׁים.	3 with twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen; and the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubim, the Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians.
ד  וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-עָרֵי הַמְּצֻרוֹת, אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה; וַיָּבֹא, עַד-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	4 And he took the fortified cities which pertained to Judah, and came unto Jerusalem. {S}
ה  וּשְׁמַעְיָה הַנָּבִיא, בָּא אֶל-רְחַבְעָם, וְשָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר-נֶאֶסְפוּ אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם מִפְּנֵי שִׁישָׁק; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אַתֶּם עֲזַבְתֶּם אֹתִי, וְאַף-אֲנִי עָזַבְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, בְּיַד-שִׁישָׁק.	5 Now Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said unto them: 'Thus saith the LORD: Ye have forsaken Me, therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.'
ו  וַיִּכָּנְעוּ שָׂרֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, צַדִּיק יְהוָה.	6 Then the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said: 'The LORD is righteous.'
ז  וּבִרְאוֹת יְהוָה כִּי נִכְנָעוּ, הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-שְׁמַעְיָה לֵאמֹר נִכְנְעוּ לֹא אַשְׁחִיתֵם; וְנָתַתִּי לָהֶם כִּמְעַט לִפְלֵיטָה, וְלֹא-תִתַּךְ חֲמָתִי בִּירוּשָׁלִַם בְּיַד-שִׁישָׁק.	7 And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying: 'They have humbled themselves; I will not destroy them; but I will grant them some deliverance, and My wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
ח  כִּי יִהְיוּ-לוֹ, לַעֲבָדִים; וְיֵדְעוּ, עֲבוֹדָתִי, וַעֲבוֹדַת, מַמְלְכוֹת הָאֲרָצוֹת.  {ס}	8 Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know My service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.' {S}
ט  וַיַּעַל שִׁישַׁק מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-אֹצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה וְאֶת-אֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-הַכֹּל לָקָח; וַיִּקַּח אֶת-מָגִנֵּי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה.	9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he took all away; he took away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
י  וַיַּעַשׂ הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם תַּחְתֵּיהֶם, מָגִנֵּי נְחֹשֶׁת; וְהִפְקִיד, עַל-יַד שָׂרֵי הָרָצִים, הַשֹּׁמְרִים, פֶּתַח בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ.	10 And king Rehoboam made in their stead shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard, that kept the door of the king's house.
יא  וַיְהִי מִדֵּי-בוֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ, בֵּית יְהוָה, בָּאוּ הָרָצִים וּנְשָׂאוּם, וֶהֱשִׁבוּם אֶל-תָּא הָרָצִים.	11 And it was so, that as oft as the king entered into the house of the LORD, the guard came and bore them, and brought them back into the guard-chamber.
יב  וּבְהִכָּנְעוֹ, שָׁב מִמֶּנּוּ אַף-יְהוָה, וְלֹא לְהַשְׁחִית, לְכָלָה; וְגַם, בִּיהוּדָה, הָיָה, דְּבָרִים טוֹבִים.  {ס}	12 And when he humbled himself, the anger of the LORD turned from him, that He would not destroy him altogether; and moreover in Judah there were good things found. {S}
יג  וַיִּתְחַזֵּק הַמֶּלֶךְ רְחַבְעָם, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם--וַיִּמְלֹךְ:  כִּי בֶן-אַרְבָּעִים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה רְחַבְעָם בְּמָלְכוֹ וּשְׁבַע עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר-בָּחַר יְהוָה לָשׂוּם אֶת-שְׁמוֹ שָׁם מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, נַעֲמָה הָעַמֹּנִית.	13 So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned; for Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put His name there; and his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.
יד  וַיַּעַשׂ, הָרָע:  כִּי לֹא הֵכִין לִבּוֹ, לִדְרוֹשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה.  {ס}	14 And he did that which was evil, because he set not his heart to seek the LORD. {S}
טו  וְדִבְרֵי רְחַבְעָם, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרוֹנִים--הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים בְּדִבְרֵי שְׁמַעְיָה הַנָּבִיא וְעִדּוֹ הַחֹזֶה, לְהִתְיַחֵשׂ; וּמִלְחֲמוֹת רְחַבְעָם וְיָרָבְעָם, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the histories of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer, after the manner of genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
טז  וַיִּשְׁכַּב רְחַבְעָם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּעִיר דָּוִיד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲבִיָּה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	16 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David; and Abijah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁמוֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה, לַמֶּלֶךְ יָרָבְעָם; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲבִיָּה, עַל-יְהוּדָה.	1 In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah.
ב  שָׁלוֹשׁ שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, מִיכָיָהוּ בַת-אוּרִיאֵל מִן-גִּבְעָה; וּמִלְחָמָה הָיְתָה בֵּין אֲבִיָּה, וּבֵין יָרָבְעָם.	2 Three years reigned he in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
ג  וַיֶּאְסֹר אֲבִיָּה אֶת-הַמִּלְחָמָה, בְּחַיִל גִּבּוֹרֵי מִלְחָמָה, אַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף, אִישׁ בָּחוּר;  {ס}  וְיָרָבְעָם, עָרַךְ עִמּוֹ מִלְחָמָה, בִּשְׁמוֹנֶה מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף אִישׁ בָּחוּר, גִּבּוֹר חָיִל.  {ס}	3 And Abijah joined battle with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men; {S} and Jeroboam set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, who were mighty men of valour. {S}
ד  וַיָּקָם אֲבִיָּה, מֵעַל לְהַר צְמָרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר, בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וַיֹּאמֶר, שְׁמָעוּנִי יָרָבְעָם וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in the hill-country of Ephraim, and said: 'Hear me, O Jeroboam and all Israel;
ה  הֲלֹא לָכֶם, לָדַעַת, כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל נָתַן מַמְלָכָה לְדָוִיד עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְעוֹלָם:  לוֹ וּלְבָנָיו, בְּרִית מֶלַח.  {פ}	5 ought ye not to know that the LORD, the God of Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt? {P}
ו  וַיָּקָם יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, עֶבֶד שְׁלֹמֹה בֶן-דָּוִיד; וַיִּמְרֹד, עַל-אֲדֹנָיו.	6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up, and rebelled against his lord.
ז  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ עָלָיו, אֲנָשִׁים רֵקִים בְּנֵי בְלִיַּעַל, וַיִּתְאַמְּצוּ, עַל-רְחַבְעָם בֶּן-שְׁלֹמֹה; וּרְחַבְעָם, הָיָה נַעַר וְרַךְ-לֵבָב, וְלֹא הִתְחַזַּק, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	7 And there were gathered unto him vain men, base fellows that strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and faint-hearted, and could not withstand them.
ח  וְעַתָּה אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, לְהִתְחַזֵּק לִפְנֵי מַמְלֶכֶת יְהוָה, בְּיַד, בְּנֵי דָוִיד; וְאַתֶּם, הָמוֹן רָב, וְעִמָּכֶם עֶגְלֵי זָהָב, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לָכֶם יָרָבְעָם לֵאלֹהִים.	8 And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand of the sons of David; and ye are a great multitude, and there are with you the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods.
ט  הֲלֹא הִדַּחְתֶּם אֶת-כֹּהֲנֵי יְהוָה, אֶת-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן וְהַלְוִיִּם; וַתַּעֲשׂוּ לָכֶם כֹּהֲנִים, כְּעַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת--כָּל-הַבָּא לְמַלֵּא יָדוֹ בְּפַר בֶּן-בָּקָר וְאֵילִם שִׁבְעָה, וְהָיָה כֹהֵן לְלֹא אֱלֹהִים.  {ס}	9 Have ye not driven out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the peoples of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same becometh a priest of them that are no gods. {S}
י  וַאֲנַחְנוּ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וְלֹא עֲזַבְנֻהוּ; וְכֹהֲנִים מְשָׁרְתִים לַיהוָה, בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, וְהַלְוִיִּם, בַּמְלָאכֶת.	10 But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken Him; and we have priests ministering unto the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites in their work;
יא  וּמַקְטִרִים לַיהוָה עֹלוֹת בַּבֹּקֶר-בַּבֹּקֶר וּבָעֶרֶב-בָּעֶרֶב וּקְטֹרֶת-סַמִּים וּמַעֲרֶכֶת לֶחֶם עַל-הַשֻּׁלְחָן הַטָּהוֹר, וּמְנוֹרַת הַזָּהָב וְנֵרֹתֶיהָ לְבָעֵר בָּעֶרֶב בָּעֶרֶב--כִּי-שֹׁמְרִים אֲנַחְנוּ, אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וְאַתֶּם, עֲזַבְתֶּם אֹתוֹ.	11 and they burn unto the LORD every morning and every evening burnt-offerings and sweet incense; the showbread also set they in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening; for we keep the charge of the LORD our God; but ye have forsaken Him.
יב  וְהִנֵּה עִמָּנוּ בָרֹאשׁ הָאֱלֹהִים וְכֹהֲנָיו, וַחֲצֹצְרוֹת הַתְּרוּעָה--לְהָרִיעַ עֲלֵיכֶם; בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַל-תִּלָּחֲמוּ עִם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-אֲבֹתֵיכֶם--כִּי-לֹא תַצְלִיחוּ.	12 And, behold, God is with us at our head, and His priests with the trumpets of alarm to sound an alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the LORD, the God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.'
יג  וְיָרָבְעָם, הֵסֵב אֶת-הַמַּאְרָב, לָבוֹא, מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם; וַיִּהְיוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוּדָה, וְהַמַּאְרָב מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם.	13 But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them; so they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.
יד  וַיִּפְנוּ יְהוּדָה, וְהִנֵּה לָהֶם הַמִּלְחָמָה פָּנִים וְאָחוֹר, וַיִּצְעֲקוּ, לַיהוָה; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, מחצצרים (מַחְצְרִים) בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת.	14 And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind them; and they cried unto the LORD, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.
טו  וַיָּרִיעוּ, אִישׁ יְהוּדָה; וַיְהִי, בְּהָרִיעַ אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וְהָאֱלֹהִים נָגַף אֶת-יָרָבְעָם וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי אֲבִיָּה וִיהוּדָה.	15 Then the men of Judah gave a shout; and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.
טז  וַיָּנוּסוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִפְּנֵי יְהוּדָה; וַיִּתְּנֵם אֱלֹהִים, בְּיָדָם.	16 And the children of Israel fled before Judah; and God delivered them into their hand.
יז  וַיַּכּוּ בָהֶם אֲבִיָּה וְעַמּוֹ, מַכָּה רַבָּה; וַיִּפְּלוּ חֲלָלִים מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, חֲמֵשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף אִישׁ בָּחוּר.	17 And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter; so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.
יח  וַיִּכָּנְעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּעֵת הַהִיא; וַיֶּאֶמְצוּ, בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, כִּי נִשְׁעֲנוּ, עַל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.	18 Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD, the God of their fathers.
יט  וַיִּרְדֹּף אֲבִיָּה, אַחֲרֵי יָרָבְעָם, וַיִּלְכֹּד מִמֶּנּוּ עָרִים, אֶת-בֵּית-אֵל וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֶיהָ וְאֶת-יְשָׁנָה וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֶיהָ; וְאֶת-עפרון (עֶפְרַיִן), וּבְנֹתֶיהָ.	19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephrain with the towns thereof.
כ  וְלֹא-עָצַר כֹּחַ-יָרָבְעָם עוֹד, בִּימֵי אֲבִיָּהוּ; וַיִּגְּפֵהוּ יְהוָה, וַיָּמֹת.  {פ}	20 Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah; and the LORD smote him, and he died. {P}
כא  וַיִּתְחַזֵּק אֲבִיָּהוּ--וַיִּשָּׂא-לוֹ, נָשִׁים אַרְבַּע עֶשְׂרֵה; וַיּוֹלֶד, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנַיִם בָּנִים, וְשֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה, בָּנוֹת.	21 But Abijah waxed mighty, and took unto himself fourteen wives, and begot twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.
כב  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אֲבִיָּה, וּדְרָכָיו וּדְבָרָיו--כְּתוּבִים, בְּמִדְרַשׁ הַנָּבִיא עִדּוֹ.	22 And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are written in the commentary of the prophet Iddo.
כג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אֲבִיָּה עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ בְּעִיר דָּוִיד, וַיִּמְלֹךְ אָסָא בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו; בְּיָמָיו שָׁקְטָה הָאָרֶץ, עֶשֶׂר שָׁנִים.  {פ}	23 So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David, and Asa his son reigned in his stead; in his days the land was quiet ten years. {P}
א  וַיַּעַשׂ אָסָא הַטּוֹב וְהַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו.	1 And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God;
ב  וַיָּסַר אֶת-מִזְבְּחוֹת הַנֵּכָר, וְהַבָּמוֹת; וַיְשַׁבֵּר, אֶת-הַמַּצֵּבוֹת, וַיְגַדַּע, אֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרִים.	2 for he took away the strange altars, and the high places, and broke down the pillars, and hewed down the Asherim;
ג  וַיֹּאמֶר, לִיהוּדָה, לִדְרוֹשׁ, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם--וְלַעֲשׂוֹת, הַתּוֹרָה וְהַמִּצְוָה.	3 and commanded Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.
ד  וַיָּסַר מִכָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת וְאֶת-הַחַמָּנִים; וַתִּשְׁקֹט הַמַּמְלָכָה, לְפָנָיו.	4 Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the sun-images; and the kingdom was quiet before him.
ה  וַיִּבֶן עָרֵי מְצוּרָה, בִּיהוּדָה:  כִּי-שָׁקְטָה הָאָרֶץ, וְאֵין-עִמּוֹ מִלְחָמָה בַּשָּׁנִים הָאֵלֶּה--כִּי-הֵנִיחַ יְהוָה, לוֹ.	5 And he built fortified cities in Judah; for the land was quiet, and he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest.
ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לִיהוּדָה נִבְנֶה אֶת-הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְנָסֵב חוֹמָה וּמִגְדָּלִים דְּלָתַיִם וּבְרִיחִים, עוֹדֶנּוּ הָאָרֶץ לְפָנֵינוּ כִּי דָרַשְׁנוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, דָּרַשְׁנוּ וַיָּנַח לָנוּ מִסָּבִיב; וַיִּבְנוּ, וַיַּצְלִיחוּ.  {פ}	6 For he said unto Judah: 'Let us build these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars; the land is yet before us, because we have sought the LORD our God; we have sought Him, and He hath given us rest on every side.' So they built and prospered. {P}
ז  וַיְהִי לְאָסָא, חַיִל נֹשֵׂא צִנָּה וָרֹמַח, מִיהוּדָה שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף,  {ס}  וּמִבִּנְיָמִן נֹשְׂאֵי מָגֵן וְדֹרְכֵי קֶשֶׁת מָאתַיִם וּשְׁמוֹנִים אָלֶף:  כָּל-אֵלֶּה, גִּבּוֹרֵי חָיִל.	7 And Asa had an army that bore bucklers and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; {S} and out of Benjamin, that bore shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand; all these were mighty men of valour.
ח  וַיֵּצֵא אֲלֵיהֶם זֶרַח הַכּוּשִׁי, בְּחַיִל אֶלֶף אֲלָפִים, וּמַרְכָּבוֹת, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת; וַיָּבֹא, עַד-מָרֵשָׁה.	8 And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an army of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and he came unto Mareshah.
ט  וַיֵּצֵא אָסָא, לְפָנָיו; וַיַּעַרְכוּ, מִלְחָמָה, בְּגֵיא צְפַתָה, לְמָרֵשָׁה.	9 Then Asa went out to meet him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephath at Mareshah.
י  וַיִּקְרָא אָסָא אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, וַיֹּאמַר, יְהוָה אֵין-עִמְּךָ לַעְזֹר בֵּין רַב לְאֵין כֹּחַ, עָזְרֵנוּ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ כִּי-עָלֶיךָ נִשְׁעַנּוּ וּבְשִׁמְךָ בָאנוּ עַל-הֶהָמוֹן הַזֶּה:  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ אַתָּה, אַל-יַעְצֹר עִמְּךָ אֱנוֹשׁ.  {ס}	10 And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said: 'LORD, there is none beside Thee to help, between the mighty and him that hath no strength; help us, O LORD our God; for we rely on Thee, and in Thy name are we come against this multitude. Thou art the LORD our God; let not man prevail against Thee.' {S}
יא  וַיִּגֹּף יְהוָה אֶת-הַכּוּשִׁים, לִפְנֵי אָסָא וְלִפְנֵי יְהוּדָה; וַיָּנֻסוּ, הַכּוּשִׁים.	11 So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.
יב  וַיִּרְדְּפֵם אָסָא וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ, עַד-לִגְרָר, וַיִּפֹּל מִכּוּשִׁים לְאֵין לָהֶם מִחְיָה, כִּי-נִשְׁבְּרוּ לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה וְלִפְנֵי מַחֲנֵהוּ; וַיִּשְׂאוּ שָׁלָל, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.	12 And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar; and there fell of the Ethiopians so that none remained alive; for they were shattered before the LORD, and before His host; and they carried away very much booty.
יג  וַיַּכּוּ, אֵת כָּל-הֶעָרִים סְבִיבוֹת גְּרָר--כִּי-הָיָה פַחַד-יְהוָה, עֲלֵיהֶם; וַיָּבֹזּוּ, אֶת-כָּל-הֶעָרִים, כִּי-בִזָּה רַבָּה, הָיְתָה בָהֶם.	13 And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for a terror from the LORD came upon them; and they spoiled all the cities; for there was much spoil in them.
יד  וְגַם-אָהֳלֵי מִקְנֶה, הִכּוּ; וַיִּשְׁבּוּ צֹאן לָרֹב וּגְמַלִּים, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	14 They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep in abundance and camels, and returned to Jerusalem. {S}
א  וַעֲזַרְיָהוּ, בֶּן-עוֹדֵד, הָיְתָה עָלָיו, רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים.	1 And the spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded;
ב  וַיֵּצֵא, לִפְנֵי אָסָא, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, שְׁמָעוּנִי אָסָא וְכָל-יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן:  יְהוָה עִמָּכֶם, בִּהְיוֹתְכֶם עִמּוֹ, וְאִם-תִּדְרְשֻׁהוּ יִמָּצֵא לָכֶם, וְאִם-תַּעַזְבֻהוּ יַעֲזֹב אֶתְכֶם.  {ס}	2 and he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him: 'Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin: the LORD is with you, while ye are with Him; and if ye seek Him, He will be found of you; but if ye forsake Him, He will forsake you. {S}
ג  וְיָמִים רַבִּים, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל:  לְלֹא אֱלֹהֵי אֱמֶת, וּלְלֹא כֹּהֵן מוֹרֶה--וּלְלֹא תוֹרָה.	3 Now for long seasons Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law;
ד  וַיָּשָׁב, בַּצַּר-לוֹ, עַל-יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְבַקְשֻׁהוּ, וַיִּמָּצֵא לָהֶם.	4 but when in their distress they turned unto the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought Him, He was found of them.
ה  וּבָעִתִּים הָהֵם, אֵין שָׁלוֹם לַיּוֹצֵא וְלַבָּא:  כִּי מְהוּמֹת רַבּוֹת, עַל כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאֲרָצוֹת.	5 And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great discomfitures were upon all the inhabitants of the lands.
ו  וְכֻתְּתוּ גוֹי-בְּגוֹי, וְעִיר בְּעִיר:  כִּי-אֱלֹהִים הֲמָמָם, בְּכָל-צָרָה.	6 And they were broken in pieces, nation against nation, and city against city; for God did discomfit them with all manner of adversity.
ז  וְאַתֶּם חִזְקוּ, וְאַל-יִרְפּוּ יְדֵיכֶם:  כִּי יֵשׁ שָׂכָר, לִפְעֻלַּתְכֶם.  {ס}	7 But be ye strong, and let not your hands be slack; for your work shall be rewarded.' {S}
ח  וְכִשְׁמֹעַ אָסָא הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְהַנְּבוּאָה עֹדֵד הַנָּבִיא, הִתְחַזַּק וַיַּעֲבֵר הַשִּׁקּוּצִים מִכָּל-אֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן, וּמִן-הֶעָרִים אֲשֶׁר לָכַד מֵהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וַיְחַדֵּשׁ, אֶת-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר, לִפְנֵי אוּלָם יְהוָה.	8 And when Asa heard these words, even the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the detestable things out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from the hill-country of Ephraim; and he renewed the altar of the LORD, that was before the porch of the LORD.
ט  וַיִּקְבֹּץ, אֶת-כָּל-יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן, וְהַגָּרִים עִמָּהֶם, מֵאֶפְרַיִם וּמְנַשֶּׁה וּמִשִּׁמְעוֹן:  כִּי-נָפְלוּ עָלָיו מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, לָרֹב, בִּרְאֹתָם, כִּי-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו עִמּוֹ.  {פ}	9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and them that sojourned with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon; for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God was with him. {P}
י  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁלִשִׁי, לִשְׁנַת חֲמֵשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה, לְמַלְכוּת אָסָא.	10 So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.
יא  וַיִּזְבְּחוּ לַיהוָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, מִן-הַשָּׁלָל הֵבִיאוּ:  בָּקָר שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת, וְצֹאן שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים.	11 And they sacrificed unto the LORD in that day, of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.
יב  וַיָּבֹאוּ בַבְּרִית--לִדְרוֹשׁ, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם:  בְּכָל-לְבָבָם, וּבְכָל-נַפְשָׁם.	12 And they entered into the covenant to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul;
יג  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִדְרֹשׁ לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, יוּמָת--לְמִן-קָטֹן, וְעַד-גָּדוֹל, לְמֵאִישׁ, וְעַד-אִשָּׁה.	13 and that whosoever would not seek the LORD, the God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.
יד  וַיִּשָּׁבְעוּ, לַיהוָה, בְּקוֹל גָּדוֹל, וּבִתְרוּעָה--וּבַחֲצֹצְרוֹת, וּבְשׁוֹפָרוֹת.	14 And they swore unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with horns.
טו  וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ כָל-יְהוּדָה עַל-הַשְּׁבוּעָה, כִּי בְכָל-לְבָבָם נִשְׁבָּעוּ, וּבְכָל-רְצוֹנָם בִּקְשֻׁהוּ, וַיִּמָּצֵא לָהֶם; וַיָּנַח יְהוָה לָהֶם, מִסָּבִיב.	15 And all Judah rejoiced at the oath; for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought Him with their whole desire; and He was found of them; and the LORD gave them rest round about.
טז  וְגַם-מַעֲכָה אֵם אָסָא הַמֶּלֶךְ, הֱסִירָהּ מִגְּבִירָה, אֲשֶׁר-עָשְׂתָה לַאֲשֵׁרָה, מִפְלָצֶת; וַיִּכְרֹת אָסָא, אֶת-מִפְלַצְתָּהּ, וַיָּדֶק, וַיִּשְׂרֹף בְּנַחַל קִדְרוֹן.	16 And also Maacah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from being queen, because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah; and Asa cut down her image, and made dust of it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.
יז  וְהַבָּמוֹת--לֹא-סָרוּ, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל:  רַק לְבַב-אָסָא הָיָה שָׁלֵם, כָּל-יָמָיו.	17 But the high places were not taken away out of Israel; nevertheless the heart of Asa was whole all his days.
יח  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-קָדְשֵׁי אָבִיו, וְקָדָשָׁיו--בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים:  כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, וְכֵלִים.	18 And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had hallowed, and that he himself had hallowed, silver, and gold, and vessels.
יט  וּמִלְחָמָה, לֹא הָיָתָה, עַד שְׁנַת-שְׁלֹשִׁים וְחָמֵשׁ, לְמַלְכוּת אָסָא.  {פ}	19 And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa. {P}
א  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וָשֵׁשׁ, לְמַלְכוּת אָסָא, עָלָה בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל עַל-יְהוּדָה, וַיִּבֶן אֶת-הָרָמָה--לְבִלְתִּי, תֵּת יוֹצֵא וָבָא, לְאָסָא, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	1 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa, Baasa king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
ב  וַיֹּצֵא אָסָא כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, מֵאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה--וּבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּשְׁלַח, אֶל-בֶּן-הֲדַד מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּדַרְמֶשֶׂק, לֵאמֹר.	2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent to Ben-hadad king of Aram, that dwelt at Damascus, saying:
ג  בְּרִית בֵּינִי וּבֵינֶךָ, וּבֵין אָבִי וּבֵין אָבִיךָ:  הִנֵּה שָׁלַחְתִּי לְךָ, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב--לֵךְ הָפֵר בְּרִיתְךָ אֶת-בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיַעֲלֶה מֵעָלָי.	3 'There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father; behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasa king of Israel, that he may depart from me.'
ד  וַיִּשְׁמַע בֶּן-הֲדַד אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אָסָא, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ אֶל-עָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-עִיּוֹן וְאֶת-דָּן, וְאֵת אָבֵל מָיִם; וְאֵת כָּל-מִסְכְּנוֹת, עָרֵי נַפְתָּלִי.	4 And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and all the store-cities of Naphtali.
ה  וַיְהִי, כִּשְׁמֹעַ בַּעְשָׁא, וַיֶּחְדַּל, מִבְּנוֹת אֶת-הָרָמָה; וַיַּשְׁבֵּת, אֶת-מְלַאכְתּוֹ.  {ס}	5 And it came to pass, when Baasa heard thereof, that he left off building Ramah, and let his work cease. {S}
ו  וְאָסָא הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָקַח אֶת-כָּל-יְהוּדָה, וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-אַבְנֵי הָרָמָה וְאֶת-עֵצֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה בַּעְשָׁא; וַיִּבֶן בָּהֶם, אֶת-גֶּבַע וְאֶת-הַמִּצְפָּה.  {ס}	6 Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasa had builded; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah. {S}
ז  וּבָעֵת הַהִיא, בָּא חֲנָנִי הָרֹאֶה, אֶל-אָסָא, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, בְּהִשָּׁעֶנְךָ עַל-מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם וְלֹא נִשְׁעַנְתָּ עַל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, עַל-כֵּן נִמְלַט חֵיל מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, מִיָּדֶךָ.	7 And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him: 'Because thou hast relied on the king of Aram, and hast not relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Aram escaped out of thy hand.
ח  הֲלֹא הַכּוּשִׁים וְהַלּוּבִים, הָיוּ לְחַיִל לָרֹב לְרֶכֶב וּלְפָרָשִׁים--לְהַרְבֵּה מְאֹד; וּבְהִשָּׁעֶנְךָ עַל-יְהוָה, נְתָנָם בְּיָדֶךָ.	8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubim a huge host, with chariots and horsemen exceeding many? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, He delivered them into thy hand.
ט  כִּי יְהוָה, עֵינָיו מְשֹׁטְטוֹת בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ לְהִתְחַזֵּק עִם-לְבָבָם שָׁלֵם אֵלָיו--נִסְכַּלְתָּ עַל-זֹאת:  כִּי מֵעַתָּה, יֵשׁ עִמְּךָ מִלְחָמוֹת.	9 For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show Himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is whole toward Him. Herein thou hast done foolishly; for from henceforth thou shalt have wars.'
י  וַיִּכְעַס אָסָא אֶל-הָרֹאֶה, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ בֵּית הַמַּהְפֶּכֶת--כִּי-בְזַעַף עִמּוֹ, עַל-זֹאת; וַיְרַצֵּץ אָסָא מִן-הָעָם, בָּעֵת הַהִיא.	10 Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in the prison-house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.
יא  וְהִנֵּה דִּבְרֵי אָסָא, הָרִאשׁוֹנִים וְהָאַחֲרוֹנִים--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים עַל-סֵפֶר הַמְּלָכִים, לִיהוּדָה וְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	11 And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
יב  וַיֶּחֱלֶא אָסָא בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלוֹשִׁים וָתֵשַׁע לְמַלְכוּתוֹ בְּרַגְלָיו, עַד-לְמַעְלָה חָלְיוֹ; וְגַם-בְּחָלְיוֹ לֹא-דָרַשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה, כִּי בָּרֹפְאִים.	12 And in the thirty and ninth year of his reign Asa was diseased in his feet; his disease was exceeding great; yet in his disease he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians.
יג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אָסָא, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וַיָּמָת, בִּשְׁנַת אַרְבָּעִים וְאַחַת לְמָלְכוֹ.	13 And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign.
יד  וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְקִבְרֹתָיו, אֲשֶׁר כָּרָה-לוֹ בְּעִיר דָּוִיד, וַיַּשְׁכִּיבֻהוּ בַּמִּשְׁכָּב אֲשֶׁר מִלֵּא בְּשָׂמִים וּזְנִים, מְרֻקָּחִים בְּמִרְקַחַת מַעֲשֶׂה; וַיִּשְׂרְפוּ-לוֹ שְׂרֵפָה, גְּדוֹלָה עַד-לִמְאֹד.  {פ}	14 And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had hewn out for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds [of spices] prepared by the perfumers' art; and they made a very great burning for him. {P}
א  וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹשָׁפָט בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו; וַיִּתְחַזֵּק, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	1 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.
ב  וַיִּתֶּן-חַיִל--בְּכָל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, הַבְּצֻרוֹת; וַיִּתֵּן נְצִיבִים, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה, וּבְעָרֵי אֶפְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר לָכַד אָסָא אָבִיו.	2 And he placed forces in all the fortified cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.
ג  וַיְהִי יְהוָה, עִם-יְהוֹשָׁפָט:  כִּי הָלַךְ, בְּדַרְכֵי דָּוִיד אָבִיו הָרִאשֹׁנִים, וְלֹא דָרַשׁ, לַבְּעָלִים.	3 And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto the Baalim;
ד  כִּי לֵאלֹהֵי אָבִיו, דָּרָשׁ, וּבְמִצְוֺתָיו, הָלָךְ; וְלֹא, כְּמַעֲשֵׂה יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 but sought to the God of his father, and walked in His commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.
ה  וַיָּכֶן יְהוָה אֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה בְּיָדוֹ, וַיִּתְּנוּ כָל-יְהוּדָה מִנְחָה לִיהוֹשָׁפָט; וַיְהִי-לוֹ עֹשֶׁר-וְכָבוֹד, לָרֹב.	5 Therefore the LORD established the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance.
ו  וַיִּגְבַּהּ לִבּוֹ, בְּדַרְכֵי יְהוָה; וְעוֹד, הֵסִיר אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת וְאֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרִים--מִיהוּדָה.  {פ}	6 And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD; and furthermore he took away the high places and the Asherim out of Judah. {P}
ז  וּבִשְׁנַת שָׁלוֹשׁ לְמָלְכוֹ, שָׁלַח לְשָׂרָיו לְבֶן-חַיִל וּלְעֹבַדְיָה וְלִזְכַרְיָה, וְלִנְתַנְאֵל, וּלְמִיכָיָהוּ--לְלַמֵּד, בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה.	7 Also in the third year of his reign he sent his princes, even Ben-hail, and Obadiah, and Zechariah, and Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah;
ח  וְעִמָּהֶם הַלְוִיִּם, שְׁמַעְיָהוּ וּנְתַנְיָהוּ וּזְבַדְיָהוּ וַעֲשָׂהאֵל ושמרימות (וּשְׁמִירָמוֹת) וִיהוֹנָתָן וַאֲדֹנִיָּהוּ וְטוֹבִיָּהוּ וְטוֹב אֲדוֹנִיָּה--הַלְוִיִּם; וְעִמָּהֶם אֱלִישָׁמָע וִיהוֹרָם, הַכֹּהֲנִים.	8 and with them the Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah, the Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, the priests.
ט  וַיְלַמְּדוּ, בִּיהוּדָה, וְעִמָּהֶם, סֵפֶר תּוֹרַת יְהוָה; וַיָּסֹבּוּ בְּכָל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיְלַמְּדוּ בָּעָם.	9 And they taught in Judah, having the book of the Law of the LORD with them; and they went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught among the people.
י  וַיְהִי פַּחַד יְהוָה, עַל כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאֲרָצוֹת, אֲשֶׁר, סְבִיבוֹת יְהוּדָה; וְלֹא נִלְחֲמוּ, עִם-יְהוֹשָׁפָט.	10 And a terror from the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.
יא  וּמִן-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, מְבִיאִים לִיהוֹשָׁפָט מִנְחָה--וְכֶסֶף מַשָּׂא; גַּם הָעַרְבִיאִים, מְבִיאִים לוֹ צֹאן, אֵילִים שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת, וּתְיָשִׁים שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	11 And some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and silver for tribute; the Arabians also brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he-goats. {P}
יב  וַיְהִי יְהוֹשָׁפָט הֹלֵךְ וְגָדֵל, עַד-לְמָעְלָה; וַיִּבֶן בִּיהוּדָה בִּירָנִיּוֹת, וְעָרֵי מִסְכְּנוֹת.	12 And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles and cities of store.
יג  וּמְלָאכָה רַבָּה הָיָה לוֹ, בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה; וְאַנְשֵׁי מִלְחָמָה גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	13 And he had many works in the cities of Judah; and men of war, mighty men of valour, in Jerusalem.
יד  וְאֵלֶּה פְקֻדָּתָם, לְבֵית אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם:  לִיהוּדָה, שָׂרֵי אֲלָפִים--  {ס}  עַדְנָה הַשָּׂר, וְעִמּוֹ גִּבּוֹרֵי חַיִל שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת אָלֶף.  {ס}	14 And this was the numbering of them according to their fathers' houses: of Judah, the captains of thousands: {S} Adnah the captain, and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand; {S}
טו  וְעַל-יָדוֹ, יְהוֹחָנָן הַשָּׂר; וְעִמּוֹ, מָאתַיִם וּשְׁמוֹנִים אָלֶף.  {ס}	15 and next to him Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand; {S}
טז  וְעַל-יָדוֹ עֲמַסְיָה בֶן-זִכְרִי, הַמִּתְנַדֵּב לַיהוָה; וְעִמּוֹ מָאתַיִם אֶלֶף, גִּבּוֹר חָיִל.  {ס}	16 and next to him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the LORD, and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour; {S}
יז  וּמִן-בִּנְיָמִן--גִּבּוֹר חַיִל, אֶלְיָדָע; וְעִמּוֹ נֹשְׁקֵי-קֶשֶׁת וּמָגֵן, מָאתַיִם אָלֶף.  {ס}	17 and of Benjamin: Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield; {S}
יח  וְעַל-יָדוֹ, יְהוֹזָבָד; וְעִמּוֹ מֵאָה-וּשְׁמוֹנִים אֶלֶף, חֲלוּצֵי צָבָא.  {ס}	18 and next to him Jehozabad, and with him a hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for war. {S}
יט  אֵלֶּה, הַמְשָׁרְתִים אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ:  מִלְּבַד אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּעָרֵי הַמִּבְצָר--בְּכָל-יְהוּדָה.  {פ}	19 These were they that waited on the king beside those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah. {P}
א  וַיְהִי לִיהוֹשָׁפָט עֹשֶׁר וְכָבוֹד, לָרֹב; וַיִּתְחַתֵּן, לְאַחְאָב.	1 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance; and he allied himself with Ahab by marriage.
ב  וַיֵּרֶד לְקֵץ שָׁנִים אֶל-אַחְאָב, לְשֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיִּזְבַּח-לוֹ אַחְאָב צֹאן וּבָקָר לָרֹב, וְלָעָם אֲשֶׁר עִמּוֹ; וַיְסִיתֵהוּ, לַעֲלוֹת אֶל-רָמֹת גִּלְעָד.	2 And after a lapse of years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that were with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramoth-gilead.
ג  וַיֹּאמֶר אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, הֲתֵלֵךְ עִמִּי, רָמֹת גִּלְעָד; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, כָּמוֹנִי כָמוֹךָ וּכְעַמְּךָ עַמִּי--וְעִמְּךָ, בַּמִּלְחָמָה.	3 And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah: 'Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth-gilead?' And he answered him: 'I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.'
ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשָׁפָט, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  דְּרָשׁ-נָא כַיּוֹם, אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה.	4 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel: 'Inquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD today.'
ה  וַיִּקְבֹּץ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַנְּבִאִים, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם הֲנֵלֵךְ אֶל-רָמֹת גִּלְעָד לַמִּלְחָמָה, אִם-אֶחְדָּל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ עֲלֵה, וְיִתֵּן הָאֱלֹהִים בְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.	5 Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, four hundred men, and said unto them: 'Shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?' And they said: 'Go up; for God will deliver it into the hand of the king.'
ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הַאֵין פֹּה נָבִיא לַיהוָה, עוֹד; וְנִדְרְשָׁה, מֵאֹתוֹ.	6 But Jehoshaphat said: 'Is there not here besides a prophet of the LORD, that we might inquire of him?'
ז  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט עוֹד אִישׁ-אֶחָד לִדְרוֹשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה מֵאֹתוֹ וַאֲנִי שְׂנֵאתִיהוּ, כִּי-אֵינֶנּוּ מִתְנַבֵּא עָלַי לְטוֹבָה כִּי כָל-יָמָיו לְרָעָה--הוּא, מִיכָיְהוּ בֶן-יִמְלָא; וַיֹּאמֶר, יְהוֹשָׁפָט, אַל-יֹאמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, כֵּן.	7 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: 'There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of the LORD; but I hate him; for he never prophesieth good concerning me, but always evil; the same is Micaiah the son of Imla.' And Jehoshaphat said: 'Let not the king say so.'
ח  וַיִּקְרָא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-סָרִיס אֶחָד; וַיֹּאמֶר, מַהֵר מיכהו (מִיכָיְהוּ) בֶן-יִמְלָא.	8 Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said: 'Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.'
ט  וּמֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה יוֹשְׁבִים אִישׁ עַל-כִּסְאוֹ מְלֻבָּשִׁים בְּגָדִים, וְיֹשְׁבִים בְּגֹרֶן--פֶּתַח, שַׁעַר שֹׁמְרוֹן; וְכָל-הַנְּבִיאִים--מִתְנַבְּאִים, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	9 Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, and they sat in a threshing-floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets were prophesying before them.
י  וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ צִדְקִיָּהוּ בֶן-כְּנַעֲנָה, קַרְנֵי בַרְזֶל; וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, בְּאֵלֶּה תְּנַגַּח אֶת-אֲרָם עַד-כַּלּוֹתָם.	10 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron, and said: 'Thus saith the LORD: With these shalt thou gore the Arameans, until they be consumed.'
יא  וְכָל-הַנְּבִאִים--נִבְּאִים כֵּן, לֵאמֹר:  עֲלֵה רָמֹת גִּלְעָד, וְהַצְלַח, וְנָתַן יְהוָה, בְּיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ.	11 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying: 'Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper; for the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.'
יב  וְהַמַּלְאָךְ אֲשֶׁר-הָלַךְ לִקְרֹא לְמִיכָיְהוּ, דִּבֶּר אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה דִּבְרֵי הַנְּבִאִים פֶּה-אֶחָד טוֹב, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וִיהִי-נָא דְבָרְךָ כְּאַחַד מֵהֶם, וְדִבַּרְתָּ טּוֹב.	12 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spoke to him, saying: 'Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one mouth; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.'
יג  וַיֹּאמֶר, מִיכָיְהוּ:  חַי-יְהוָה--כִּי אֶת-אֲשֶׁר-יֹאמַר אֱלֹהַי, אֹתוֹ אֲדַבֵּר.	13 And Micaiah said: 'As the LORD liveth, what my God saith, that will I speak.'
יד  וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵלָיו מִיכָה הֲנֵלֵךְ אֶל-רָמֹת גִּלְעָד לַמִּלְחָמָה, אִם-אֶחְדָּל; וַיֹּאמֶר עֲלוּ וְהַצְלִיחוּ, וְיִנָּתְנוּ בְּיֶדְכֶם.	14 And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him: 'Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?' And he said: 'Go ye up, and prosper; and they shall be delivered into your hand.'
טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַד-כַּמֶּה פְעָמִים אֲנִי מַשְׁבִּיעֶךָ:  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תְדַבֵּר אֵלַי, רַק-אֱמֶת--בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה.	15 And the king said to him: 'How many times shall I adjure thee that thou speak unto me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD.'
טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, רָאִיתִי אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל נְפוֹצִים עַל-הֶהָרִים--כַּצֹּאן, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לָהֶן רֹעֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה לֹא-אֲדֹנִים לָאֵלֶּה, יָשׁוּבוּ אִישׁ-לְבֵיתוֹ בְּשָׁלוֹם.	16 And he said: 'I saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd; and the LORD said: These have no master, let them return every man to his house in peace.'
יז  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט:  הֲלֹא אָמַרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ, לֹא-יִתְנַבֵּא עָלַי טוֹב כִּי אִם-לְרָע.  {ס}	17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat: 'Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?' {S}
יח  וַיֹּאמֶר, לָכֵן שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה:  רָאִיתִי אֶת-יְהוָה, יוֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, וְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם עֹמְדִים, עַל-יְמִינוֹ וּשְׂמֹאלוֹ.	18 And he said: 'Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting upon His throne, and all the host of heaven standing on His right hand and on His left.
יט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, מִי יְפַתֶּה אֶת-אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיַעַל, וְיִפֹּל בְּרָמוֹת גִּלְעָד; וַיֹּאמֶר--זֶה אֹמֵר כָּכָה, וְזֶה אֹמֵר כָּכָה.	19 And the LORD said: who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one spoke saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner.
כ  וַיֵּצֵא הָרוּחַ, וַיַּעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, אֲנִי אֲפַתֶּנּוּ:  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, בַּמָּה.	20 And there came forth the spirit, and stood before the LORD, and said: I will entice him. And the LORD said unto him: Wherewith?
כא  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵצֵא וְהָיִיתִי לְרוּחַ שֶׁקֶר, בְּפִי, כָּל-נְבִיאָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר, תְּפַתֶּה וְגַם-תּוּכָל--צֵא, וַעֲשֵׂה-כֵן.	21 And he said: I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And He said: Thou shalt entice him, and shalt prevail also; go forth, and do so.
כב  וְעַתָּה, הִנֵּה נָתַן יְהוָה רוּחַ שֶׁקֶר, בְּפִי, נְבִיאֶיךָ אֵלֶּה; וַיהוָה, דִּבֶּר עָלֶיךָ רָעָה.  {ס}	22 Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets; and the LORD hath spoken evil concerning thee.' {S}
כג  וַיִּגַּשׁ צִדְקִיָּהוּ בֶן-כְּנַעֲנָה, וַיַּךְ אֶת-מִיכָיְהוּ עַל-הַלֶּחִי; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵי זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ עָבַר רוּחַ-יְהוָה מֵאִתִּי--לְדַבֵּר אֹתָךְ.	23 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said: 'Which way went the spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?'
כד  וַיֹּאמֶר מִיכָיְהוּ, הִנְּךָ רֹאֶה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֲשֶׁר תָּבוֹא חֶדֶר בְּחֶדֶר, לְהֵחָבֵא.	24 And Micaiah said: 'Behold, thou shalt see on that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.'
כה  וַיֹּאמֶר, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, קְחוּ אֶת-מִיכָיְהוּ, וַהֲשִׁיבֻהוּ אֶל-אָמוֹן שַׂר-הָעִיר--וְאֶל-יוֹאָשׁ, בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ.	25 And the king of Israel said: 'Take ye Micaiah; and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;
כו  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, כֹּה אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, שִׂימוּ זֶה, בֵּית הַכֶּלֶא; וְהַאֲכִלֻהוּ לֶחֶם לַחַץ, וּמַיִם לַחַץ, עַד, שׁוּבִי בְשָׁלוֹם.	26 and say: Thus saith the king: Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with scant bread and with scant water, until I return in peace.'
כז  וַיֹּאמֶר מִיכָיְהוּ--אִם-שׁוֹב תָּשׁוּב בְּשָׁלוֹם, לֹא-דִבֶּר יְהוָה בִּי; וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁמְעוּ עַמִּים כֻּלָּם.	27 And Micaiah said: 'If thou return at all in peace, the LORD hath not spoken by me.' And he said: 'Hear, ye peoples, all of you.'
כח  וַיַּעַל מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, אֶל-רָמֹת גִּלְעָד.	28 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
כט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הִתְחַפֵּשׂ וָבוֹא בַמִּלְחָמָה, וְאַתָּה, לְבַשׁ בְּגָדֶיךָ; וַיִּתְחַפֵּשׂ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּבֹאוּ בַּמִּלְחָמָה.	29 And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat: 'I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but put thou on thy robes.' So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went into the battle.
ל  וּמֶלֶךְ אֲרָם צִוָּה אֶת-שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, לֵאמֹר, לֹא תִּלָּחֲמוּ, אֶת-הַקָּטֹן אֶת-הַגָּדוֹל:  כִּי אִם-אֶת-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְבַדּוֹ.	30 Now the king of Aram had commanded the captains of his chariots, saying: 'Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of Israel.'
לא  וַיְהִי כִּרְאוֹת שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב אֶת-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, וְהֵמָּה אָמְרוּ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל הוּא, וַיָּסֹבּוּ עָלָיו, לְהִלָּחֵם; וַיִּזְעַק יְהוֹשָׁפָט וַיהוָה עֲזָרוֹ, וַיְסִיתֵם אֱלֹהִים מִמֶּנּוּ.	31 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said: 'It is the king of Israel.' Therefore they turned about to fight against him; but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.
לב  וַיְהִי, כִּרְאוֹת שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב, כִּי לֹא-הָיָה, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל--וַיָּשׁוּבוּ, מֵאַחֲרָיו.	32 And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
לג  וְאִישׁ, מָשַׁךְ בַּקֶּשֶׁת לְתֻמּוֹ, וַיַּךְ אֶת-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בֵּין הַדְּבָקִים וּבֵין הַשִּׁרְיָן; וַיֹּאמֶר לָרַכָּב, הֲפֹךְ ידיך (יָדְךָ) וְהוֹצֵאתַנִי מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה--כִּי הָחֳלֵיתִי.	33 And a certain man drew his bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the lower armour and the breastplate; wherefore he said to the driver of the chariot: 'Turn thy hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am sore wounded.'
לד  וַתַּעַל הַמִּלְחָמָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וּמֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל הָיָה מַעֲמִיד בַּמֶּרְכָּבָה נֹכַח אֲרָם, עַד-הָעָרֶב; וַיָּמָת, לְעֵת בּוֹא הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.	34 And the battle increased that day; howbeit the king of Israel stayed himself up in his chariot against the Arameans until the even; and about the time of the going down of the sun he died.
א  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, בְּשָׁלוֹם--לִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	1 And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem. {S}
ב  וַיֵּצֵא אֶל-פָּנָיו, יֵהוּא בֶן-חֲנָנִי הַחֹזֶה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הֲלָרָשָׁע לַעְזֹר וּלְשֹׂנְאֵי יְהוָה תֶּאֱהָב:  וּבָזֹאת עָלֶיךָ קֶּצֶף, מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה.	2 And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat: 'Shouldest thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the LORD? for this thing wrath is upon thee from before the LORD.
ג  אֲבָל, דְּבָרִים טוֹבִים נִמְצְאוּ עִמָּךְ:  כִּי-בִעַרְתָּ הָאֲשֵׁרוֹת מִן-הָאָרֶץ, וַהֲכִינוֹתָ לְבָבְךָ לִדְרֹשׁ הָאֱלֹהִים.	3 Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast put away the Asheroth out of the land, and hast set thy heart to seek God.'
ד  וַיֵּשֶׁב יְהוֹשָׁפָט, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיָּשָׁב וַיֵּצֵא בָעָם, מִבְּאֵר שֶׁבַע עַד-הַר אֶפְרַיִם, וַיְשִׁיבֵם, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.	4 And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem; and he went out again among the people from Beer-sheba to the hill-country of Ephraim, and brought them back unto the LORD, the God of their fathers.
ה  וַיַּעֲמֵד שֹׁפְטִים בָּאָרֶץ, בְּכָל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה הַבְּצֻרוֹת--לְעִיר וָעִיר.	5 And he set judges in the land throughout all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,
ו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הַשֹּׁפְטִים, רְאוּ מָה-אַתֶּם עֹשִׂים--כִּי לֹא לְאָדָם תִּשְׁפְּטוּ, כִּי לַיהוָה; וְעִמָּכֶם, בִּדְבַר מִשְׁפָּט.	6 and said to the judges: 'Consider what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD; and [He is] with you in giving judgment.
ז  וְעַתָּה, יְהִי פַחַד-יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם:  שִׁמְרוּ וַעֲשׂוּ--כִּי-אֵין עִם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ עַוְלָה וּמַשֹּׂא פָנִים, וּמִקַּח-שֹׁחַד.	7 Now therefore let the fear of the LORD be upon you; take heed and do it; for there is no iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes.'
ח  וְגַם בִּירוּשָׁלִַם הֶעֱמִיד יְהוֹשָׁפָט מִן-הַלְוִיִּם וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, וּמֵרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמִשְׁפַּט יְהוָה, וְלָרִיב; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	8 Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites and the priests, and of the heads of the fathers' houses of Israel, for the judgment of the LORD, and for controversies. And they returned to Jerusalem.
ט  וַיְצַו עֲלֵיהֶם, לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה תַעֲשׂוּן בְּיִרְאַת יְהוָה, בֶּאֱמוּנָה וּבְלֵבָב שָׁלֵם.	9 And he charged them, saying: 'Thus shall ye do in the fear of the LORD, faithfully, and with a whole heart.
י  וְכָל-רִיב אֲשֶׁר-יָבוֹא עֲלֵיכֶם מֵאֲחֵיכֶם הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּעָרֵיהֶם, בֵּין-דָּם לְדָם בֵּין-תּוֹרָה לְמִצְוָה לְחֻקִּים וּלְמִשְׁפָּטִים, וְהִזְהַרְתֶּם אֹתָם, וְלֹא יֶאְשְׁמוּ לַיהוָה וְהָיָה-קֶצֶף עֲלֵיכֶם וְעַל-אֲחֵיכֶם:  כֹּה תַעֲשׂוּן, וְלֹא תֶאְשָׁמוּ.	10 And whensoever any controversy shall come to you from your brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and ordinances, ye shall warn them, that they be not guilty towards the LORD, and so wrath come upon you and upon your brethren; thus shall ye do, and ye shall not be guilty.
יא  וְהִנֵּה אֲמַרְיָהוּ כֹהֵן הָרֹאשׁ עֲלֵיכֶם לְכֹל דְּבַר-יְהוָה, וּזְבַדְיָהוּ בֶן-יִשְׁמָעֵאל הַנָּגִיד לְבֵית-יְהוּדָה לְכֹל דְּבַר-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְשֹׁטְרִים הַלְוִיִּם, לִפְנֵיכֶם:  חִזְקוּ וַעֲשׂוּ, וִיהִי יְהוָה עִם-הַטּוֹב.  {פ}	11 And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, in all the king's matters; also the officers of the Levites before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD be with the good.' {P}
א  וַיְהִי אַחֲרֵי-כֵן בָּאוּ בְנֵי-מוֹאָב וּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן וְעִמָּהֶם מֵהָעַמּוֹנִים, עַל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט--לַמִּלְחָמָה.	1 And it came to pass after this, that the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them some of the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.
ב  וַיָּבֹאוּ, וַיַּגִּידוּ לִיהוֹשָׁפָט לֵאמֹר, בָּא עָלֶיךָ הָמוֹן רָב מֵעֵבֶר לַיָּם, מֵאֲרָם; וְהִנָּם בְּחַצְצוֹן תָּמָר, הִיא עֵין גֶּדִי.	2 Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying: 'There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea from Aram; and, behold, they are in Hazazon-tamar'--the same is En-gedi.
ג  וַיִּרָא, וַיִּתֵּן יְהוֹשָׁפָט אֶת-פָּנָיו לִדְרוֹשׁ לַיהוָה; וַיִּקְרָא-צוֹם, עַל-כָּל-יְהוּדָה.	3 And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek unto the LORD; and he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
ד  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ יְהוּדָה, לְבַקֵּשׁ מֵיְהוָה; גַּם מִכָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, בָּאוּ לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה.	4 And Judah gathered themselves together, to seek help of the LORD; even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.
ה  וַיַּעֲמֹד יְהוֹשָׁפָט, בִּקְהַל יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם--בְּבֵית יְהוָה:  לִפְנֵי, הֶחָצֵר הַחֲדָשָׁה.	5 And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the LORD, before the new court;
ו  וַיֹּאמַר, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵינוּ הֲלֹא אַתָּה-הוּא אֱלֹהִים בַּשָּׁמַיִם, וְאַתָּה מוֹשֵׁל, בְּכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הַגּוֹיִם; וּבְיָדְךָ כֹּחַ וּגְבוּרָה, וְאֵין עִמְּךָ לְהִתְיַצֵּב.	6 and he said: 'O LORD, the God of our fathers, art not Thou alone God in heaven? and art not Thou ruler over all the kingdoms of the nations? and in Thy hand is power and might, so that none is able to withstand Thee.
ז  הֲלֹא אַתָּה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הוֹרַשְׁתָּ אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, מִלִּפְנֵי, עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַתִּתְּנָהּ, לְזֶרַע אַבְרָהָם אֹהַבְךָ--לְעוֹלָם.	7 Didst not Thou, O our God, drive out the inhabitants of this land before Thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham Thy friend for ever?
ח  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ-בָהּ; וַיִּבְנוּ לְךָ בָּהּ מִקְדָּשׁ, לְשִׁמְךָ לֵאמֹר.	8 And they dwelt therein, and have built Thee a sanctuary therein for Thy name, saying:
ט  אִם-תָּבוֹא עָלֵינוּ רָעָה, חֶרֶב שְׁפוֹט וְדֶבֶר וְרָעָב, נַעַמְדָה לִפְנֵי הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה וּלְפָנֶיךָ, כִּי שִׁמְךָ בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה; וְנִזְעַק אֵלֶיךָ מִצָּרָתֵנוּ, וְתִשְׁמַע וְתוֹשִׁיעַ.	9 If evil come upon us, the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we will stand before this house, and before Thee--for Thy name is in this house--and cry unto Thee in our affliction, and Thou wilt hear and save.
י  וְעַתָּה הִנֵּה בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן וּמוֹאָב וְהַר-שֵׂעִיר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נָתַתָּה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל לָבוֹא בָהֶם, בְּבֹאָם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  כִּי סָרוּ מֵעֲלֵיהֶם, וְלֹא הִשְׁמִידוּם.	10 And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom Thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned aside from them, and destroyed them not;
יא  וְהִנֵּה-הֵם--גֹּמְלִים, עָלֵינוּ:  לָבוֹא, לְגָרְשֵׁנוּ, מִיְּרֻשָּׁתְךָ, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרַשְׁתָּנוּ.	11 behold, they render unto us [evil], to come to cast us out of Thy possession, which Thou hast given us to inherit.
יב  אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הֲלֹא תִשְׁפָּט-בָּם, כִּי אֵין בָּנוּ כֹּחַ, לִפְנֵי הֶהָמוֹן הָרָב הַזֶּה הַבָּא עָלֵינוּ; וַאֲנַחְנוּ, לֹא נֵדַע מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה--כִּי עָלֶיךָ, עֵינֵינוּ.	12 O our God, wilt Thou not execute judgment on them? for we have no might against this great multitude that cometh against us; neither know we what to do; but our eyes are upon Thee.'
יג  וְכֹל-יְהוּדָה--עֹמְדִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; גַּם-טַפָּם, נְשֵׁיהֶם וּבְנֵיהֶם.  {ס}	13 And all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones, their wives, and their children. {S}
יד  וְיַחֲזִיאֵל בֶּן-זְכַרְיָהוּ בֶּן-בְּנָיָה בֶּן-יְעִיאֵל בֶּן-מַתַּנְיָה, הַלֵּוִי--מִן-בְּנֵי אָסָף:  הָיְתָה עָלָיו רוּחַ יְהוָה, בְּתוֹךְ הַקָּהָל.	14 Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, the Levite, of the sons of Asaph, came the spirit of the LORD in the midst of the congregation;
טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, הַקְשִׁיבוּ כָל-יְהוּדָה וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ, יְהוֹשָׁפָט:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה לָכֶם, אַתֶּם אַל-תִּירְאוּ וְאַל-תֵּחַתּוּ מִפְּנֵי הֶהָמוֹן הָרָב הַזֶּה--כִּי לֹא לָכֶם הַמִּלְחָמָה, כִּי לֵאלֹהִים.	15 and he said: 'Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat: thus saith the LORD unto you: Fear not ye, neither be dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God's.
טז  מָחָר רְדוּ עֲלֵיהֶם, הִנָּם עֹלִים בְּמַעֲלֵה הַצִּיץ; וּמְצָאתֶם אֹתָם בְּסוֹף הַנַּחַל, פְּנֵי מִדְבַּר יְרוּאֵל.	16 To-morrow go ye down against them; behold, they come up by the ascent of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the valley, before the wilderness of Jeruel.
יז  לֹא לָכֶם, לְהִלָּחֵם בָּזֹאת:  הִתְיַצְּבוּ עִמְדוּ וּרְאוּ אֶת-יְשׁוּעַת יְהוָה עִמָּכֶם יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, אַל-תִּירְאוּ וְאַל-תֵּחַתּוּ--מָחָר צְאוּ לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַיהוָה עִמָּכֶם.	17 Ye shall not need to fight in this battle; set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the LORD with you, O Judah and Jerusalem; fear not, nor be dismayed; to-morrow go out against them; for the LORD is with you.'
יח  וַיִּקֹּד יְהוֹשָׁפָט אַפַּיִם, אָרְצָה; וְכָל-יְהוּדָה וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, נָפְלוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת, לַיהוָה.	18 And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before the LORD, worshipping the LORD.
יט  וַיָּקֻמוּ הַלְוִיִּם מִן-בְּנֵי הַקְּהָתִים, וּמִן-בְּנֵי הַקָּרְחִים--לְהַלֵּל, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּקוֹל גָּדוֹל, לְמָעְלָה.	19 And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites and of the children of the Korahites, stood up to praise the LORD, the God of Israel, with an exceeding loud voice.
כ  וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ בַבֹּקֶר, וַיֵּצְאוּ לְמִדְבַּר תְּקוֹעַ; וּבְצֵאתָם עָמַד יְהוֹשָׁפָט, וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁמָעוּנִי יְהוּדָה וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם--הַאֲמִינוּ בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם וְתֵאָמֵנוּ, הַאֲמִינוּ בִנְבִיאָיו וְהַצְלִיחוּ.	20 And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa; and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said: 'Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; believe in the LORD your God, so shall ye be established; believe His prophets, so shall ye prosper.'
כא  וַיִּוָּעַץ, אֶל-הָעָם, וַיַּעֲמֵד מְשֹׁרְרִים לַיהוָה, וּמְהַלְלִים לְהַדְרַת-קֹדֶשׁ--בְּצֵאת, לִפְנֵי הֶחָלוּץ, וְאֹמְרִים הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ.	21 And when he had taken counsel with the people, he appointed them that should sing unto the LORD, and praise in the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and say: 'Give thanks unto the LORD, for His mercy endureth for ever.'
כב  וּבְעֵת הֵחֵלּוּ בְרִנָּה וּתְהִלָּה, נָתַן יְהוָה מְאָרְבִים עַל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן מוֹאָב וְהַר-שֵׂעִיר הַבָּאִים לִיהוּדָה--וַיִּנָּגֵפוּ.	22 And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set liers-in-wait against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, that were come against Judah; and they were smitten.
כג  וַיַּעַמְדוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן וּמוֹאָב, עַל-יֹשְׁבֵי הַר-שֵׂעִיר--לְהַחֲרִים וּלְהַשְׁמִיד; וּכְכַלּוֹתָם בְּיוֹשְׁבֵי שֵׂעִיר, עָזְרוּ אִישׁ-בְּרֵעֵהוּ לְמַשְׁחִית.	23 For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them; and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.
כד  וִיהוּדָה בָּא עַל-הַמִּצְפֶּה, לַמִּדְבָּר; וַיִּפְנוּ, אֶל-הֶהָמוֹן, וְהִנָּם פְּגָרִים נֹפְלִים אַרְצָה, וְאֵין פְּלֵיטָה.	24 And when Judah came to the watch-tower of the wilderness, they looked upon the multitude; and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and there were none that escaped.
כה  וַיָּבֹא יְהוֹשָׁפָט וְעַמּוֹ, לָבֹז אֶת-שְׁלָלָם, וַיִּמְצְאוּ בָהֶם לָרֹב וּרְכוּשׁ וּפְגָרִים וּכְלֵי חֲמֻדוֹת, וַיְנַצְּלוּ לָהֶם לְאֵין מַשָּׂא; וַיִּהְיוּ יָמִים שְׁלוֹשָׁה, בֹּזְזִים אֶת-הַשָּׁלָל--כִּי רַב-הוּא.	25 And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches and dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away; and they were three days in taking the spoil, it was so much.
כו  וּבַיּוֹם הָרְבִעִי, נִקְהֲלוּ לְעֵמֶק בְּרָכָה--כִּי-שָׁם, בֵּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה; עַל-כֵּן קָרְאוּ אֶת-שֵׁם הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, עֵמֶק בְּרָכָה--עַד-הַיּוֹם.	26 And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Beracah; for there they blessed the LORD; therefore the name of that place was called the valley of Beracah, unto this day.
כז  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ כָּל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, וִיהוֹשָׁפָט בְּרֹאשָׁם, לָשׁוּב אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּשִׂמְחָה:  כִּי-שִׂמְּחָם יְהוָה, מֵאוֹיְבֵיהֶם.	27 Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go back to Jerusalem with joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their enemies.
כח  וַיָּבֹאוּ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בִּנְבָלִים וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת, וּבַחֲצֹצְרוֹת--אֶל-בֵּית, יְהוָה.	28 And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the LORD.
כט  וַיְהִי פַּחַד אֱלֹהִים, עַל כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאֲרָצוֹת:  בְּשָׁמְעָם--כִּי נִלְחַם יְהוָה, עִם אוֹיְבֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	29 And a terror from God was on all the kingdoms of the countries, when they heard that the LORD fought against the enemies of Israel.
ל  וַתִּשְׁקֹט, מַלְכוּת יְהוֹשָׁפָט; וַיָּנַח לוֹ אֱלֹהָיו, מִסָּבִיב.  {פ}	30 So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet; for his God gave him rest round about. {P}
לא  וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹשָׁפָט, עַל-יְהוּדָה--בֶּן-שְׁלֹשִׁים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, עֲזוּבָה בַּת-שִׁלְחִי.	31 And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah; he was thirty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
לב  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ אָבִיו אָסָא--וְלֹא-סָר מִמֶּנָּה:  לַעֲשׂוֹת הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.	32 And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD.
לג  אַךְ הַבָּמוֹת, לֹא-סָרוּ; וְעוֹד הָעָם לֹא-הֵכִינוּ לְבָבָם, לֵאלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיהֶם.	33 Howbeit the high places were not taken away; neither as yet had the people set their hearts unto the God of their fathers.
לד  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרֹנִים--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, בְּדִבְרֵי יֵהוּא בֶן-חֲנָנִי, אֲשֶׁר הֹעֲלָה, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the words of Jehu the son of Hanani, which is inserted in the book of the kings of Israel.
לה  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, אֶתְחַבַּר יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, עִם, אֲחַזְיָה מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל; הוּא, הִרְשִׁיעַ לַעֲשׂוֹת.	35 And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel; the same did very wickedly;
לו  וַיְחַבְּרֵהוּ עִמּוֹ, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֳנִיּוֹת לָלֶכֶת תַּרְשִׁישׁ; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֳנִיּוֹת, בְּעֶצְיוֹן גָּבֶר.	36 and he joined him with himself to make ships to go to Tarshish; and they made the ships in Ezion-geber.
לז  וַיִּתְנַבֵּא אֱלִיעֶזֶר בֶּן-דֹּדָוָהוּ, מִמָּרֵשָׁה, עַל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, לֵאמֹר:  כְּהִתְחַבֶּרְךָ עִם-אֲחַזְיָהוּ, פָּרַץ יְהוָה אֶת-מַעֲשֶׂיךָ, וַיִּשָּׁבְרוּ אֳנִיּוֹת, וְלֹא עָצְרוּ לָלֶכֶת אֶל-תַּרְשִׁישׁ.	37 Then Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying: 'Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the LORD hath made a breach in thy works.' And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.
א  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יְהוֹשָׁפָט עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו בְּעִיר דָּוִיד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹרָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.	1 And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David; and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.
ב  וְלוֹ-אַחִים בְּנֵי יְהוֹשָׁפָט, עֲזַרְיָה וִיחִיאֵל וּזְכַרְיָהוּ וַעֲזַרְיָהוּ, וּמִיכָאֵל, וּשְׁפַטְיָהוּ:  כָּל-אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariahu, and Michael, and Shephatiah; all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.
ג  וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם אֲבִיהֶם מַתָּנוֹת רַבּוֹת לְכֶסֶף וּלְזָהָב, וּלְמִגְדָּנוֹת, עִם-עָרֵי מְצֻרוֹת, בִּיהוּדָה; וְאֶת-הַמַּמְלָכָה נָתַן לִיהוֹרָם, כִּי-הוּא הַבְּכוֹר.  {פ}	3 And their father gave them great gifts, of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fortified cities in Judah; but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram, because he was the first-born. {P}
ד  וַיָּקָם יְהוֹרָם עַל-מַמְלֶכֶת אָבִיו, וַיִּתְחַזַּק, וַיַּהֲרֹג אֶת-כָּל-אֶחָיו, בֶּחָרֶב; וְגַם, מִשָּׂרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 Now when Jehoram was risen up over the kingdom of his father, and had strengthened himself, he slew all his brethren with the sword, and divers also of the princes of Israel.
ה  בֶּן-שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, יְהוֹרָם בְּמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׁמוֹנֶה שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	5 Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
ו  וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּדֶרֶךְ מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ בֵּית אַחְאָב--כִּי בַּת-אַחְאָב, הָיְתָה לּוֹ אִשָּׁה; וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.	6 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab; for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife; and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.
ז  וְלֹא-אָבָה יְהוָה, לְהַשְׁחִית אֶת-בֵּית דָּוִיד--לְמַעַן הַבְּרִית, אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת לְדָוִיד; וְכַאֲשֶׁר אָמַר, לָתֵת לוֹ נִיר וּלְבָנָיו--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.	7 Howbeit the LORD would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that He had made with David, and as He promised to give a lamp to him and to his children alway.
ח  בְּיָמָיו פָּשַׁע אֱדוֹם, מִתַּחַת יַד-יְהוּדָה; וַיַּמְלִיכוּ עֲלֵיהֶם, מֶלֶךְ.	8 In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.
ט  וַיַּעֲבֹר יְהוֹרָם עִם-שָׂרָיו, וְכָל-הָרֶכֶב עִמּוֹ; וַיְהִי, קָם לַיְלָה, וַיַּךְ אֶת-אֱדוֹם הַסּוֹבֵב אֵלָיו, וְאֵת שָׂרֵי הָרָכֶב.	9 Then Jehoram passed over with his captains, and all his chariots with him; and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites that compassed him about, and the captains of the chariots.
י  וַיִּפְשַׁע אֱדוֹם מִתַּחַת יַד-יְהוּדָה, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--אָז תִּפְשַׁע לִבְנָה בָּעֵת הַהִיא, מִתַּחַת יָדוֹ:  כִּי עָזַב, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתָיו.	10 So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day; then did Libnah revolt at the same time from under his hand; because he had forsaken the LORD, the God of his fathers.
יא  גַּם-הוּא עָשָׂה-בָמוֹת, בְּהָרֵי יְהוּדָה; וַיֶּזֶן אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּדַּח אֶת-יְהוּדָה.  {פ}	11 Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go astray, and drew Judah away. {P}
יב  וַיָּבֹא אֵלָיו מִכְתָּב, מֵאֵלִיָּהוּ הַנָּבִיא לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי דָּוִיד אָבִיךָ--תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָלַכְתָּ בְּדַרְכֵי יְהוֹשָׁפָט אָבִיךָ, וּבְדַרְכֵי אָסָא מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה.	12 And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father: Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah;
יג  וַתֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַתַּזְנֶה אֶת-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, כְּהַזְנוֹת בֵּית אַחְאָב; וְגַם אֶת-אַחֶיךָ בֵית-אָבִיךָ הַטּוֹבִים מִמְּךָ, הָרָגְתָּ.	13 but hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go astray, like as the house of Ahab made [Israel] to go astray; and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father's house, who were better than thyself;
יד  הִנֵּה יְהוָה, נֹגֵף מַגֵּפָה גְדוֹלָה--בְּעַמֶּךָ; וּבְבָנֶיךָ וּבְנָשֶׁיךָ, וּבְכָל-רְכוּשֶׁךָ.	14 behold, the LORD will smite with a great plague thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy substance;
טו  וְאַתָּה בָּחֳלָיִים רַבִּים, בְּמַחֲלֵה מֵעֶיךָ, עַד-יֵצְאוּ מֵעֶיךָ מִן-הַחֹלִי, יָמִים עַל-יָמִים.	15 and thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness, day by day.'
טז  וַיָּעַר יְהוָה עַל-יְהוֹרָם, אֵת רוּחַ הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים וְהָעַרְבִים, אֲשֶׁר, עַל-יַד כּוּשִׁים.	16 And the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians that are beside the Ethiopians;
יז  וַיַּעֲלוּ בִיהוּדָה, וַיִּבְקָעוּהָ, וַיִּשְׁבּוּ אֵת כָּל-הָרְכוּשׁ הַנִּמְצָא לְבֵית-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְגַם-בָּנָיו וְנָשָׁיו; וְלֹא נִשְׁאַר-לוֹ בֵּן, כִּי אִם-יְהוֹאָחָז קְטֹן בָּנָיו.	17 and they came up against Judah, and broke into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.
יח  וְאַחֲרֵי, כָּל-זֹאת--נְגָפוֹ יְהוָה בְּמֵעָיו לָחֳלִי, לְאֵין מַרְפֵּא.	18 And after all this the LORD smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.
יט  וַיְהִי לְיָמִים מִיָּמִים וּכְעֵת צֵאת הַקֵּץ לְיָמִים שְׁנַיִם, יָצְאוּ מֵעָיו עִם-חָלְיוֹ, וַיָּמָת, בְּתַחֲלֻאִים רָעִים; וְלֹא-עָשׂוּ לוֹ עַמּוֹ שְׂרֵפָה, כִּשְׂרֵפַת אֲבֹתָיו.	19 And it came to pass, that in process of time, at the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness, and he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers.
כ  בֶּן-שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ, וּשְׁמוֹנֶה שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּלֹא חֶמְדָּה, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְּעִיר דָּוִיד, וְלֹא בְּקִבְרוֹת הַמְּלָכִים.	20 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years; and he departed joyless; and they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.
א  וַיַּמְלִיכוּ יוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם אֶת-אֲחַזְיָהוּ בְנוֹ הַקָּטֹן, תַּחְתָּיו--כִּי כָל-הָרִאשֹׁנִים הָרַג הַגְּדוּד, הַבָּא בָעַרְבִים לַמַּחֲנֶה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲחַזְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹרָם, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.  {פ}	1 And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead; for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned. {P}
ב  בֶּן-אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, אֲחַזְיָהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ, וְשָׁנָה אַחַת, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, עֲתַלְיָהוּ בַּת-עָמְרִי.	2 Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.
ג  גַּם-הוּא הָלַךְ, בְּדַרְכֵי בֵּית אַחְאָב:  כִּי אִמּוֹ הָיְתָה יוֹעַצְתּוֹ, לְהַרְשִׁיעַ.	3 He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab; for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.
ד  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּבֵית אַחְאָב:  כִּי-הֵמָּה הָיוּ-לוֹ יוֹעֲצִים, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת אָבִיו--לְמַשְׁחִית לוֹ.	4 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did the house of Ahab; for they were his counsellors after the death of his father, to his destruction.
ה  גַּם בַּעֲצָתָם, הָלַךְ, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶת-יְהוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל לַמִּלְחָמָה עַל-חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, בְּרָמוֹת גִּלְעָד; וַיַּכּוּ הָרַמִּים, אֶת-יוֹרָם.	5 He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead; and the Arameans wounded Joram.
ו  וַיָּשָׁב לְהִתְרַפֵּא בְיִזְרְעֶאל, כִּי הַמַּכִּים אֲשֶׁר הִכֻּהוּ בָרָמָה, בְּהִלָּחֲמוֹ, אֶת-חֲזָהאֵל מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם; וַעֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹרָם מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, יָרַד לִרְאוֹת אֶת-יְהוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב בְּיִזְרְעֶאל--כִּי-חֹלֶה הוּא.	6 And he returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which they had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.
ז  וּמֵאֱלֹהִים, הָיְתָה תְּבוּסַת אֲחַזְיָהוּ, לָבוֹא, אֶל-יוֹרָם; וּבְבֹאוֹ, יָצָא עִם-יְהוֹרָם אֶל-יֵהוּא בֶן-נִמְשִׁי, אֲשֶׁר מְשָׁחוֹ יְהוָה, לְהַכְרִית אֶת-בֵּית אַחְאָב.	7 Now the downfall of Ahaziah was of God, in that he went unto Joram; for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.
ח  וַיְהִי, כְּהִשָּׁפֵט יֵהוּא עִם-בֵּית אַחְאָב; וַיִּמְצָא אֶת-שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה וּבְנֵי אֲחֵי אֲחַזְיָהוּ, מְשָׁרְתִים לַאֲחַזְיָהוּ--וַיַּהַרְגֵם.	8 And it came to pass, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, that he found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, ministering to Ahaziah, and slew them.
ט  וַיְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-אֲחַזְיָהוּ וַיִּלְכְּדֻהוּ וְהוּא מִתְחַבֵּא בְשֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיְבִאֻהוּ אֶל-יֵהוּא וַיְמִיתֻהוּ, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ, כִּי אָמְרוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹשָׁפָט הוּא אֲשֶׁר-דָּרַשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה בְּכָל-לְבָבוֹ; וְאֵין לְבֵית אֲחַזְיָהוּ, לַעְצֹר כֹּחַ לְמַמְלָכָה.	9 And he sought Ahaziah, and they caught him--now he was hiding in Samaria--and they brought him to Jehu, and slew him; and they buried him, for they said: 'He is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart.' And there was none of the house of Ahaziah that had power to hold the kingdom.
י  וַעֲתַלְיָהוּ אֵם אֲחַזְיָהוּ, רָאֲתָה כִּי מֵת בְּנָהּ; וַתָּקָם, וַתְּדַבֵּר אֶת-כָּל-זֶרַע הַמַּמְלָכָה--לְבֵית יְהוּדָה.	10 Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.
יא  וַתִּקַּח יְהוֹשַׁבְעַת בַּת-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-יוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-אֲחַזְיָהוּ, וַתִּגְנֹב אֹתוֹ מִתּוֹךְ בְּנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ הַמּוּמָתִים, וַתִּתֵּן אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-מֵינִקְתּוֹ, בַּחֲדַר הַמִּטּוֹת; וַתַּסְתִּירֵהוּ יְהוֹשַׁבְעַת בַּת-הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹרָם אֵשֶׁת יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן כִּי הִיא הָיְתָה אֲחוֹת אֲחַזְיָהוּ, מִפְּנֵי עֲתַלְיָהוּ--וְלֹא הֱמִיתָתְהוּ.	11 But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him away from among the king's sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in the bed-chamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest--for she was the sister of Ahaziah--hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.
יב  וַיְהִי אִתָּם בְּבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים, מִתְחַבֵּא שֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים; וַעֲתַלְיָה, מֹלֶכֶת עַל-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	12 And he was with them hid in the house of God six years; and Athaliah reigned over the land. {P}
א  וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִעִית הִתְחַזַּק יְהוֹיָדָע, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת לַעֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶן-יְרֹחָם וּלְיִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-יְהוֹחָנָן וְלַעֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶן-עוֹבֵד וְאֶת-מַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ בֶן-עֲדָיָהוּ וְאֶת-אֱלִישָׁפָט בֶּן-זִכְרִי--עִמּוֹ בַבְּרִית.	1 And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.
ב  וַיָּסֹבּוּ, בִּיהוּדָה, וַיִּקְבְּצוּ אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם מִכָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	2 And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the heads of fathers' houses of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.
ג  וַיִּכְרֹת כָּל-הַקָּהָל בְּרִית בְּבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים, עִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, הִנֵּה בֶן-הַמֶּלֶךְ יִמְלֹךְ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, עַל-בְּנֵי דָוִיד.	3 And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them: 'Behold, the king's son shall reign, as the LORD hath spoken concerning the sons of David.
ד  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשׂוּ:  הַשְּׁלִשִׁית מִכֶּם בָּאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם, לְשֹׁעֲרֵי, הַסִּפִּים.	4 This is the thing that ye shall do: a third part of you, that come in on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the doors;
ה  וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית בְּבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית בְּשַׁעַר הַיְסוֹד; וְכָל-הָעָם--בְּחַצְרוֹת, בֵּית יְהוָה.	5 and a third part shall be at the king's house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation; and all the people shall be in the courts of the house of the LORD.
ו  וְאַל-יָבוֹא בֵית-יְהוָה, כִּי אִם-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַמְשָׁרְתִים לַלְוִיִּם--הֵמָּה יָבֹאוּ, כִּי-קֹדֶשׁ הֵמָּה; וְכָל-הָעָם--יִשְׁמְרוּ, מִשְׁמֶרֶת יְהוָה.	6 But let none come into the house of the LORD, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shall come in, for they are holy; but all the people shall keep the charge of the LORD.
ז  וְהִקִּיפוּ הַלְוִיִּם אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ סָבִיב, אִישׁ וְכֵלָיו בְּיָדוֹ, וְהַבָּא אֶל-הַבַּיִת, יוּמָת; וִהְיוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּבֹאוֹ וּבְצֵאתוֹ.	7 And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever cometh into the house, let him be slain; and be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out.'
ח  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ הַלְוִיִּם וְכָל-יְהוּדָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, וַיִּקְחוּ אִישׁ אֶת-אֲנָשָׁיו, בָּאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת עִם יוֹצְאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת:  כִּי לֹא פָטַר יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַמַּחְלְקוֹת.	8 So the Levites and all Judah did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded; and they took every man his men, those that were to come in on the sabbath, with those that were to go out on the sabbath; for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.
ט  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן לְשָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת, אֶת-הַחֲנִיתִים וְאֶת-הַמָּגִנּוֹת וְאֶת-הַשְּׁלָטִים, אֲשֶׁר, לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִיד--אֲשֶׁר, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.	9 And Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds the spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king David's, which were in the house of God.
י  וַיַּעֲמֵד אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם וְאִישׁ שִׁלְחוֹ בְיָדוֹ, מִכֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת הַיְמָנִית עַד-כֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת הַשְּׂמָאלִית, לַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְלַבָּיִת--עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, סָבִיב.	10 And he set all the people, every man with his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, by the king round about.
יא  וַיּוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּתְּנוּ עָלָיו אֶת-הַנֵּזֶר וְאֶת-הָעֵדוּת, וַיַּמְלִיכוּ, אֹתוֹ; וַיִּמְשָׁחֻהוּ יְהוֹיָדָע וּבָנָיו, וַיֹּאמְרוּ יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}	11 Then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the crown and the insignia, and made him king; and Jehoiada and his sons anointed him; and they said: 'Long live the king.' {S}
יב  וַתִּשְׁמַע עֲתַלְיָהוּ, אֶת-קוֹל הָעָם הָרָצִים, וְהַמְהַלְלִים, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַתָּבוֹא אֶל-הָעָם, בֵּית יְהוָה.	12 And when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the LORD;
יג  וַתֵּרֶא וְהִנֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ עוֹמֵד עַל-עַמּוּדוֹ בַּמָּבוֹא, וְהַשָּׂרִים וְהַחֲצֹצְרוֹת עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-עַם הָאָרֶץ שָׂמֵחַ וְתוֹקֵעַ בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת, וְהַמְשׁוֹרְרִים בִּכְלֵי הַשִּׁיר וּמוֹדִיעִים לְהַלֵּל; וַתִּקְרַע עֲתַלְיָהוּ אֶת-בְּגָדֶיהָ, וַתֹּאמֶר קֶשֶׁר קָשֶׁר.  {ס}	13 and she looked, and, behold, the king stood on his platform at the entrance, and the captains and the trumpets by the king; and all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets; the singers also [played] on instruments of music, and led the singing of praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said: 'Treason, treason.' {S}
יד  וַיּוֹצֵא יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת פְּקוּדֵי הַחַיִל, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם הוֹצִיאוּהָ אֶל-מִבֵּית הַשְּׂדֵרוֹת, וְהַבָּא אַחֲרֶיהָ, יוּמַת בֶּחָרֶב:  כִּי אָמַר הַכֹּהֵן, לֹא תְמִיתוּהָ בֵּית יְהוָה.	14 And Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them: 'Have her forth between the ranks; and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword'; for the priest said: 'Slay her not in the house of the LORD.'
טו  וַיָּשִׂימוּ לָהּ יָדַיִם, וַתָּבוֹא אֶל-מְבוֹא שַׁעַר-הַסּוּסִים בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיְמִיתוּהָ, שָׁם.  {פ}	15 So they made way for her; and she went to the entry of the horse gate to the king's house; and they slew her there. {P}
טז  וַיִּכְרֹת יְהוֹיָדָע, בְּרִית--בֵּינוֹ, וּבֵין כָּל-הָעָם וּבֵין הַמֶּלֶךְ:  לִהְיוֹת לְעָם, לַיהוָה.	16 And Jehoiada made a covenant between himself, and all the people, and the king, that they should be the LORD'S people.
יז  וַיָּבֹאוּ כָל-הָעָם בֵּית-הַבַּעַל וַיִּתְּצֻהוּ, וְאֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתָיו וְאֶת-צְלָמָיו שִׁבֵּרוּ; וְאֵת, מַתָּן כֹּהֵן הַבַּעַל, הָרְגוּ, לִפְנֵי הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת.	17 And all the people went to the house of Baal, and broke it down, and broke his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.
יח  וַיָּשֶׂם יְהוֹיָדָע פְּקֻדּוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה, בְּיַד הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם אֲשֶׁר חָלַק דָּוִיד עַל-בֵּית יְהוָה, לְהַעֲלוֹת עֹלוֹת יְהוָה כַּכָּתוּב בְּתוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה, בְּשִׂמְחָה וּבְשִׁיר--עַל, יְדֵי דָוִיד.	18 And Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the LORD under the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the LORD, to offer the burnt-offerings of the LORD, as it is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, according to the direction of David.
יט  וַיַּעֲמֵד, הַשּׁוֹעֲרִים, עַל-שַׁעֲרֵי, בֵּית יְהוָה; וְלֹא-יָבוֹא טָמֵא, לְכָל-דָּבָר.	19 And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the LORD, that none that was unclean in any thing should enter in.
כ  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת וְאֶת-הָאַדִּירִים וְאֶת-הַמּוֹשְׁלִים בָּעָם וְאֵת כָּל-עַם הָאָרֶץ, וַיּוֹרֶד אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ מִבֵּית יְהוָה, וַיָּבֹאוּ בְּתוֹךְ-שַׁעַר הָעֶלְיוֹן, בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיּוֹשִׁיבוּ, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל, כִּסֵּא הַמַּמְלָכָה.	20 And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the LORD; and they came through the upper gate unto the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.
כא  וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ כָל-עַם-הָאָרֶץ, וְהָעִיר שָׁקָטָה; וְאֶת-עֲתַלְיָהוּ, הֵמִיתוּ בֶחָרֶב.	21 So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet; and they slew Athaliah with the sword.
א  בֶּן-שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, יֹאָשׁ בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְאַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, צִבְיָה מִבְּאֵר שָׁבַע.	1 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign; and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba.
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ יוֹאָשׁ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כָּל-יְמֵי, יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן.  {ס}	2 And Joash did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest. {S}
ג  וַיִּשָּׂא-לוֹ יְהוֹיָדָע, נָשִׁים שְׁתָּיִם; וַיּוֹלֶד, בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת.	3 And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begot sons and daughters.
ד  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן; הָיָה עִם-לֵב יוֹאָשׁ, לְחַדֵּשׁ אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה.	4 And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to restore the house of the LORD.
ה  וַיִּקְבֹּץ, אֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם צְאוּ לְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה וְקִבְצוּ מִכָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל כֶּסֶף לְחַזֵּק אֶת-בֵּית אֱלֹהֵיכֶם מִדֵּי שָׁנָה בְּשָׁנָה, וְאַתֶּם תְּמַהֲרוּ לַדָּבָר; וְלֹא מִהֲרוּ, הַלְוִיִּם.	5 And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them: 'Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter.' Howbeit the Levites hastened it not.
ו  וַיִּקְרָא הַמֶּלֶךְ, לִיהוֹיָדָע הָרֹאשׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ מַדּוּעַ לֹא-דָרַשְׁתָּ עַל-הַלְוִיִּם, לְהָבִיא מִיהוּדָה וּמִירוּשָׁלִַם אֶת-מַשְׂאַת מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה וְהַקָּהָל לְיִשְׂרָאֵל--לְאֹהֶל, הָעֵדוּת.	6 And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and unto him: 'Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the tax of Moses the servant of the LORD, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tent of the testimony?'
ז  כִּי עֲתַלְיָהוּ הַמִּרְשַׁעַת, בָּנֶיהָ פָרְצוּ אֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים; וְגַם כָּל-קָדְשֵׁי בֵית-יְהוָה, עָשׂוּ לַבְּעָלִים.	7 For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the hallowed things of the house of the LORD did they bestow upon the Baalim.
ח  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֲרוֹן אֶחָד; וַיִּתְּנֻהוּ בְּשַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה, חוּצָה.	8 So the king commanded, and they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the LORD.
ט  וַיִּתְּנוּ-קוֹל בִּיהוּדָה וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם, לְהָבִיא לַיהוָה מַשְׂאַת מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-הָאֱלֹהִים עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בַּמִּדְבָּר.	9 And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in for the LORD the tax that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.
י  וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ כָל-הַשָּׂרִים, וְכָל-הָעָם; וַיָּבִיאוּ וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּ לָאָרוֹן, עַד-לְכַלֵּה.	10 And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.
יא  וַיְהִי בְּעֵת יָבִיא אֶת-הָאָרוֹן אֶל-פְּקֻדַּת הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּיַד הַלְוִיִּם, וְכִרְאוֹתָם כִּי-רַב הַכֶּסֶף וּבָא סוֹפֵר הַמֶּלֶךְ וּפְקִיד כֹּהֵן הָרֹאשׁ, וִיעָרוּ אֶת-הָאָרוֹן וְיִשָּׂאֻהוּ וִישִׁיבֻהוּ אֶל-מְקֹמוֹ; כֹּה עָשׂוּ לְיוֹם בְּיוֹם, וַיַּאַסְפוּ-כֶסֶף לָרֹב.	11 And it was so, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king's officers by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the chief priest's officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it back to its place. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.
יב  וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ וִיהוֹיָדָע, אֶל-עוֹשֵׂה מְלֶאכֶת עֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-יְהוָה, וַיִּהְיוּ שֹׂכְרִים חֹצְבִים וְחָרָשִׁים, לְחַדֵּשׁ בֵּית יְהוָה; וְגַם לְחָרָשֵׁי בַרְזֶל וּנְחֹשֶׁת, לְחַזֵּק אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה.	12 And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the LORD; and they hired masons and carpenters to restore the house of the LORD, and also such as wrought iron and brass to repair the house of the LORD.
יג  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ עֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, וַתַּעַל אֲרוּכָה לַמְּלָאכָה בְּיָדָם; וַיַּעֲמִידוּ אֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, עַל-מַתְכֻּנְתּוֹ--וַיְאַמְּצֻהוּ.	13 So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set up the house of God in its state, and strengthened it.
יד  וּכְכַלּוֹתָם הֵבִיאוּ לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ וִיהוֹיָדָע אֶת-שְׁאָר הַכֶּסֶף, וַיַּעֲשֵׂהוּ כֵלִים לְבֵית-יְהוָה כְּלֵי שָׁרֵת, וְהַעֲלוֹת וְכַפּוֹת, וּכְלֵי זָהָב וָכָסֶף; וַיִּהְיוּ מַעֲלִים עֹלוֹת בְּבֵית-יְהוָה, תָּמִיד, כֹּל, יְמֵי יְהוֹיָדָע.  {פ}	14 And when they had made an end, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house of the LORD, even vessels wherewith to minister, and buckets, and pans, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt-offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the days of Jehoiada. {P}
טו  וַיִּזְקַן יְהוֹיָדָע וַיִּשְׂבַּע יָמִים, וַיָּמֹת--בֶּן-מֵאָה וּשְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה, בְּמוֹתוֹ.	15 But Jehoiada waxed old and was full of days, and he died; a hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.
טז  וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְעִיר-דָּוִיד, עִם-הַמְּלָכִים:  כִּי-עָשָׂה טוֹבָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְעִם הָאֱלֹהִים וּבֵיתוֹ.  {פ}	16 And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and His house. {P}
יז  וְאַחֲרֵי מוֹת, יְהוֹיָדָע, בָּאוּ שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַמֶּלֶךְ; אָז שָׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲלֵיהֶם.	17 Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and prostrated themselves before the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.
יח  וַיַּעַזְבוּ, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, וַיַּעַבְדוּ אֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרִים, וְאֶת-הָעֲצַבִּים; וַיְהִי-קֶצֶף, עַל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, בְּאַשְׁמָתָם, זֹאת.	18 And they forsook the house of the LORD, the God of their fathers, and served the Asherim and the idols; and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their guiltiness.
יט  וַיִּשְׁלַח בָּהֶם נְבִאִים, לַהֲשִׁיבָם אֶל-יְהוָה; וַיָּעִידוּ בָם, וְלֹא הֶאֱזִינוּ.  {ס}	19 Yet He sent prophets to them, to bring them back unto the LORD; and they admonished them, but they would not give ear. {S}
כ  וְרוּחַ אֱלֹהִים, לָבְשָׁה אֶת-זְכַרְיָה בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, וַיַּעֲמֹד, מֵעַל לָעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם כֹּה אָמַר הָאֱלֹהִים, לָמָה אַתֶּם עֹבְרִים אֶת-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה וְלֹא תַצְלִיחוּ--כִּי-עֲזַבְתֶּם אֶת-יְהוָה, וַיַּעֲזֹב אֶתְכֶם.	20 And the spirit of God clothed Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest; and he stood above the people, and said unto them: 'Thus saith God: Why transgress ye the commandments of the LORD, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the LORD, He hath also forsaken you.'
כא  וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ עָלָיו, וַיִּרְגְּמֻהוּ אֶבֶן בְּמִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ, בַּחֲצַר, בֵּית יְהוָה.	21 And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the LORD.
כב  וְלֹא-זָכַר יוֹאָשׁ הַמֶּלֶךְ, הַחֶסֶד אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוֹיָדָע אָבִיו עִמּוֹ, וַיַּהֲרֹג, אֶת-בְּנוֹ; וּכְמוֹתוֹ אָמַר, יֵרֶא יְהוָה וְיִדְרֹשׁ.  {פ}	22 Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said: 'The LORD look upon it, and require it.' {P}
כג  וַיְהִי לִתְקוּפַת הַשָּׁנָה, עָלָה עָלָיו חֵיל אֲרָם, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּשְׁחִיתוּ אֶת-כָּל-שָׂרֵי הָעָם מֵעָם; וְכָל-שְׁלָלָם שִׁלְּחוּ, לְמֶלֶךְ דַּרְמָשֶׂק.	23 And it came to pass, when the year was come about, that the army of the Arameans came up against him; and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.
כד  כִּי בְמִצְעַר אֲנָשִׁים בָּאוּ חֵיל אֲרָם, וַיהוָה נָתַן בְּיָדָם חַיִל לָרֹב מְאֹד--כִּי עָזְבוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם; וְאֶת-יוֹאָשׁ, עָשׂוּ שְׁפָטִים.	24 For the army of the Arameans came with a small company of men; and the LORD delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers. So they executed judgment upon Joash.
כה  וּבְלֶכְתָּם מִמֶּנּוּ, כִּי-עָזְבוּ אֹתוֹ בְּמַחֲלֻיִים רַבִּים, הִתְקַשְּׁרוּ עָלָיו עֲבָדָיו בִּדְמֵי בְּנֵי יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, וַיַּהַרְגֻהוּ עַל-מִטָּתוֹ וַיָּמֹת; וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְּעִיר דָּוִיד, וְלֹא קְבָרֻהוּ בְּקִבְרוֹת הַמְּלָכִים.	25 And when they were departed from him--for they left him in great diseases--his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died; and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.
כו  וְאֵלֶּה, הַמִּתְקַשְּׁרִים עָלָיו:  זָבָד, בֶּן-שִׁמְעָת הָעַמּוֹנִית, וִיהוֹזָבָד, בֶּן-שִׁמְרִית הַמּוֹאָבִית.	26 And these are they that conspired against him: Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess.
כז  וּבָנָיו ורב (יִרֶב) הַמַּשָּׂא עָלָיו, וִיסוֹד בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-מִדְרַשׁ סֵפֶר הַמְּלָכִים; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲמַצְיָהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	27 Now concerning his sons, and the multitude of the burdens against him, and the rebuilding of the house of God, behold, they are written in the commentary of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ אֲמַצְיָהוּ, וְעֶשְׂרִים וָתֵשַׁע שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יְהוֹעַדָּן מִירוּשָׁלָיִם.	1 Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  רַק, לֹא בְּלֵבָב שָׁלֵם.	2 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, but not with a whole heart.
ג  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר חָזְקָה הַמַּמְלָכָה עָלָיו; וַיַּהֲרֹג, אֶת-עֲבָדָיו, הַמַּכִּים, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ אָבִיו.	3 Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established unto him, that he slew his servants who had killed the king his father.
ד  וְאֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם, לֹא הֵמִית:  כִּי כַכָּתוּב בַּתּוֹרָה בְּסֵפֶר מֹשֶׁה אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יָמוּתוּ אָבוֹת עַל-בָּנִים וּבָנִים לֹא-יָמוּתוּ עַל-אָבוֹת--כִּי אִישׁ בְּחֶטְאוֹ, יָמוּתוּ.	4 But he put not their children to death, but did according to that which is written in the law in the book of Moses, as the LORD commanded, saying: 'The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers; but every man shall die for his own sin.'
ה  וַיִּקְבֹּץ אֲמַצְיָהוּ, אֶת-יְהוּדָה, וַיַּעֲמִידֵם לְבֵית-אָבוֹת לְשָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וּלְשָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת, לְכָל-יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן; וַיִּפְקְדֵם, לְמִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וַיִּמְצָאֵם שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף בָּחוּר יוֹצֵא צָבָא, אֹחֵז רֹמַח וְצִנָּה.	5 Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and ordered them according to their fathers' houses, under captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, even all Judah and Benjamin; and he numbered them from twenty years old and upward, and found them three hundred thousand chosen men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield.
ו  וַיִּשְׂכֹּר מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאָה אֶלֶף גִּבּוֹר חָיִל--בְּמֵאָה כִכַּר-כָּסֶף.	6 He hired also a hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for a hundred talents of silver.
ז  וְאִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, בָּא אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַל-יָבוֹא עִמְּךָ צְבָא יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי אֵין יְהוָה עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּל בְּנֵי אֶפְרָיִם.	7 But there came a man of God to him, saying: 'O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the LORD is not with Israel, even with all the children of Ephraim.
ח  כִּי אִם-בֹּא אַתָּה, עֲשֵׂה חֲזַק לַמִּלְחָמָה--יַכְשִׁילְךָ הָאֱלֹהִים לִפְנֵי אוֹיֵב, כִּי יֶשׁ-כֹּחַ בֵּאלֹהִים לַעְזוֹר וּלְהַכְשִׁיל.	8 But if thou wilt go, and do engage never so valiantly in battle, God will cast thee down before the enemy; for God hath power to help, and to cast down.'
ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲמַצְיָהוּ, לְאִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וּמַה-לַּעֲשׂוֹת לִמְאַת הַכִּכָּר, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לִגְדוּד יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, יֵשׁ לַיהוָה, לָתֶת לְךָ הַרְבֵּה מִזֶּה.	9 And Amaziah said to the man of God: 'But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel?' And the man of God answered: 'The LORD is able to give thee much more than this.'
י  וַיַּבְדִּילֵם אֲמַצְיָהוּ, לְהַגְּדוּד אֲשֶׁר-בָּא אֵלָיו מֵאֶפְרַיִם, לָלֶכֶת, לִמְקוֹמָם; וַיִּחַר אַפָּם מְאֹד בִּיהוּדָה, וַיָּשׁוּבוּ לִמְקוֹמָם בָּחֳרִי-אָף.  {ס}	10 Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go back home; wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in fierce anger. {S}
יא  וַאֲמַצְיָהוּ, הִתְחַזַּק, וַיִּנְהַג אֶת-עַמּוֹ, וַיֵּלֶךְ גֵּיא הַמֶּלַח; וַיַּךְ אֶת-בְּנֵי-שֵׂעִיר, עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים.	11 And Amaziah took courage, and led forth his people, and went to the Valley of Salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.
יב  וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים חַיִּים, שָׁבוּ בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיְבִיאוּם, לְרֹאשׁ הַסָּלַע; וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּם מֵרֹאשׁ-הַסֶּלַע, וְכֻלָּם נִבְקָעוּ.	12 And other ten thousand did the children of Judah carry away alive, and brought them unto the top of the Rock, and cast them down from the top of the Rock, that they all were broken in pieces.
יג  וּבְנֵי הַגְּדוּד, אֲשֶׁר הֵשִׁיב אֲמַצְיָהוּ מִלֶּכֶת עִמּוֹ לַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיִּפְשְׁטוּ בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, מִשֹּׁמְרוֹן וְעַד-בֵּית חוֹרוֹן; וַיַּכּוּ מֵהֶם שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וַיָּבֹזּוּ בִּזָּה רַבָּה.  {פ}	13 But the men of the army whom Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Beth-horon, and smote of them three thousand, and took much spoil. {P}
יד  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי בוֹא אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֵהַכּוֹת אֶת-אֲדוֹמִים, וַיָּבֵא אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי בְּנֵי שֵׂעִיר, וַיַּעֲמִידֵם לוֹ לֵאלֹהִים; וְלִפְנֵיהֶם יִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה, וְלָהֶם יְקַטֵּר.	14 Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and prostrated himself before them, and offered unto them.
טו  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בַּאֲמַצְיָהוּ; וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלָיו, נָבִיא, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ לָמָּה דָרַשְׁתָּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הִצִּילוּ אֶת-עַמָּם מִיָּדֶךָ.	15 Wherefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Amaziah, and He sent unto him a prophet, who said unto him: 'Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which have not delivered their own people out of thy hand?'
טז  וַיְהִי בְּדַבְּרוֹ אֵלָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הַלְיוֹעֵץ לַמֶּלֶךְ נְתַנּוּךָ--חֲדַל-לְךָ, לָמָּה יַכּוּךָ; וַיֶּחְדַּל הַנָּבִיא, וַיֹּאמֶר יָדַעְתִּי כִּי-יָעַץ אֱלֹהִים לְהַשְׁחִיתֶךָ--כִּי-עָשִׂיתָ זֹּאת, וְלֹא שָׁמַעְתָּ לַעֲצָתִי.  {פ}	16 And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that [the king] said unto him: 'Have we made thee of the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten?' Then the prophet forbore, and said: 'I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.' {P}
יז  וַיִּוָּעַץ, אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶל-יוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז בֶּן-יֵהוּא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  לְךָ, נִתְרָאֶה פָנִים.	17 Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying: 'Come, let us look one another in the face.'
יח  וַיִּשְׁלַח יוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, הַחוֹחַ אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן שָׁלַח אֶל-הָאֶרֶז אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן לֵאמֹר, תְּנָה-אֶת-בִּתְּךָ לִבְנִי לְאִשָּׁה; וַתַּעֲבֹר חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן, וַתִּרְמֹס, אֶת-הַחוֹחַ.	18 And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying: 'The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying: Give thy daughter to my son to wife; and there passed by the wild beasts that were in Lebanon, and trod down the thistle.
יט  אָמַרְתָּ, הִנֵּה הִכִּיתָ אֶת-אֱדוֹם, וּנְשָׂאֲךָ לִבְּךָ, לְהַכְבִּיד; עַתָּה, שְׁבָה בְּבֵיתֶךָ--לָמָּה תִתְגָּרֶה בְּרָעָה, וְנָפַלְתָּ אַתָּה וִיהוּדָה עִמָּךְ.	19 Thou sayest--lo, thou hast smitten Edom; will thy heart therefore lift thee up to glory therein? abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle with evil, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?'
כ  וְלֹא-שָׁמַע אֲמַצְיָהוּ--כִּי מֵהָאֱלֹהִים הִיא, לְמַעַן תִּתָּם בְּיָד:  כִּי דָרְשׁוּ, אֵת אֱלֹהֵי אֱדוֹם.	20 But Amaziah would not hear; for it was of God, that He might deliver them into the hand [of their enemies], because they had sought after the gods of Edom.
כא  וַיַּעַל יוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיִּתְרָאוּ פָנִים, הוּא וַאֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בְּבֵית שֶׁמֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה.	21 So Joash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth-shemesh, which belongeth to Judah.
כב  וַיִּנָּגֶף יְהוּדָה, לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּנֻסוּ, אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו.	22 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every man to his tent.
כג  וְאֵת אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז, תָּפַשׂ יוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּבֵית שָׁמֶשׁ; וַיְבִיאֵהוּ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּפְרֹץ בְּחוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם מִשַּׁעַר אֶפְרַיִם עַד-שַׁעַר הַפּוֹנֶה, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אַמָּה.	23 And Joash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
כד  וְכָל-הַזָּהָב וְהַכֶּסֶף וְאֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הַנִּמְצְאִים בְּבֵית-הָאֱלֹהִים עִם-עֹבֵד אֱדוֹם, וְאֶת-אוֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֵת, בְּנֵי הַתַּעֲרֻבוֹת; וַיָּשָׁב, שֹׁמְרוֹן.  {פ}	24 And [he took] all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-edom, and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria. {P}
כה  וַיְחִי אֲמַצְיָהוּ בֶן-יוֹאָשׁ, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת, יוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל--חֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה, שָׁנָה.	25 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.
כו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אֲמַצְיָהוּ, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרוֹנִים--הֲלֹא הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי-יְהוּדָה וְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	26 Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?
כז  וּמֵעֵת, אֲשֶׁר-סָר אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה, וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ עָלָיו קֶשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיָּנָס לָכִישָׁה; וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ אַחֲרָיו לָכִישָׁה, וַיְמִיתֻהוּ שָׁם.	27 Now from the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the LORD they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish; but they sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.
כח  וַיִּשָּׂאֻהוּ, עַל-הַסּוּסִים; וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר יְהוּדָה.	28 And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.
א  וַיִּקְחוּ כָּל-עַם יְהוּדָה, אֶת-עֻזִּיָּהוּ, וְהוּא, בֶּן-שֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה; וַיַּמְלִיכוּ אֹתוֹ, תַּחַת אָבִיו אֲמַצְיָהוּ.	1 And all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.
ב  הוּא בָּנָה אֶת-אֵילוֹת, וַיְשִׁיבֶהָ לִיהוּדָה, אַחֲרֵי שְׁכַב-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו.  {פ}	2 He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers. {P}
ג  בֶּן-שֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, עֻזִּיָּהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ, וַחֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יכיליה (יְכָלְיָה) מִן-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	3 Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign; and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
ד  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, אֲמַצְיָהוּ אָבִיו.	4 And he did that, which was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
ה  וַיְהִי, לִדְרֹשׁ אֱלֹהִים, בִּימֵי זְכַרְיָהוּ, הַמֵּבִין בִּרְאֹת הָאֱלֹהִים; וּבִימֵי דָּרְשׁוֹ אֶת-יְהוָה, הִצְלִיחוֹ הָאֱלֹהִים.	5 And he set himself to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the vision of God; and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him to prosper.
ו  וַיֵּצֵא, וַיִּלָּחֶם בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּפְרֹץ אֶת-חוֹמַת גַּת וְאֵת חוֹמַת יַבְנֵה, וְאֵת חוֹמַת אַשְׁדּוֹד; וַיִּבְנֶה עָרִים, בְּאַשְׁדּוֹד וּבַפְּלִשְׁתִּים.	6 And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and broke down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod; and he built cities in [the country of] Ashdod, and among the Philistines.
ז  וַיַּעְזְרֵהוּ הָאֱלֹהִים עַל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים וְעַל-הערביים (הָעַרְבִים), הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּגוּר-בָּעַל--וְהַמְּעוּנִים.	7 And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the Meunim.
ח  וַיִּתְּנוּ הָעַמּוֹנִים מִנְחָה, לְעֻזִּיָּהוּ; וַיֵּלֶךְ שְׁמוֹ עַד-לְבוֹא מִצְרַיִם, כִּי הֶחֱזִיק עַד-לְמָעְלָה.	8 And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah; and his name spread abroad even to the entrance of Egypt; for he waxed exceeding strong.
ט  וַיִּבֶן עֻזִּיָּהוּ מִגְדָּלִים בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, עַל-שַׁעַר הַפִּנָּה וְעַל-שַׁעַר הַגַּיְא וְעַל-הַמִּקְצוֹעַ; וַיְחַזְּקֵם.	9 Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the Turning, and fortified them.
י  וַיִּבֶן מִגְדָּלִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, וַיַּחְצֹב בֹּרוֹת רַבִּים--כִּי מִקְנֶה-רַּב הָיָה לוֹ, וּבַשְּׁפֵלָה וּבַמִּישׁוֹר; אִכָּרִים וְכֹרְמִים, בֶּהָרִים וּבַכַּרְמֶל--כִּי-אֹהֵב אֲדָמָה, הָיָה.  {ס}	10 And be built towers in the wilderness, and hewed out many cisterns, for he had much cattle; in the Lowland also, and in the table-land; and he had husbandmen and vinedressers in the mountains and in the fruitful fields; for he loved husbandry. {S}
יא  וַיְהִי לְעֻזִּיָּהוּ חַיִל עֹשֵׂה מִלְחָמָה יוֹצְאֵי צָבָא לִגְדוּד, בְּמִסְפַּר פְּקֻדָּתָם, בְּיַד יעואל (יְעִיאֵל) הַסּוֹפֵר, וּמַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ הַשּׁוֹטֵר--עַל, יַד-חֲנַנְיָהוּ, מִשָּׂרֵי, הַמֶּלֶךְ.	11 Moreover Uzziah had an army of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their reckoning made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.
יב  כֹּל מִסְפַּר רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לְגִבּוֹרֵי חָיִל--אַלְפַּיִם, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.	12 The whole number of the heads of fathers' houses, even the mighty men of valour, was two thousand and six hundred.
יג  וְעַל-יָדָם חֵיל צָבָא שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף, וְשִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת, עוֹשֵׂי מִלְחָמָה, בְּכֹחַ חָיִל--לַעְזֹר לַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-הָאוֹיֵב.	13 And under their hand was a trained army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.
יד  וַיָּכֶן לָהֶם עֻזִּיָּהוּ לְכָל-הַצָּבָא, מָגִנִּים וּרְמָחִים וְכוֹבָעִים, וְשִׁרְיֹנוֹת, וּקְשָׁתוֹת--וּלְאַבְנֵי, קְלָעִים.	14 And Uzziah prepared for them, even for all the host, shields, and spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, and bows, and stones for slinging.
טו  וַיַּעַשׂ בִּירוּשָׁלִַם חִשְּׁבֹנוֹת מַחֲשֶׁבֶת חוֹשֵׁב, לִהְיוֹת עַל-הַמִּגְדָּלִים וְעַל-הַפִּנּוֹת, לִירוֹא בַּחִצִּים, וּבָאֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת; וַיֵּצֵא שְׁמוֹ עַד-לְמֵרָחוֹק, כִּי-הִפְלִיא לְהֵעָזֵר עַד כִּי-חָזָק.	15 And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by skilful men, to be on the towers and upon the corners, wherewith to shoot arrows and great stones. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.
טז  וּכְחֶזְקָתוֹ, גָּבַהּ לִבּוֹ עַד-לְהַשְׁחִית, וַיִּמְעַל, בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהָיו; וַיָּבֹא אֶל-הֵיכַל יְהוָה, לְהַקְטִיר עַל-מִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת.	16 But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up so that he did corruptly, and he trespassed against the LORD his God; for he went into the temple of the LORD to burn incense upon the altar of incense.
יז  וַיָּבֹא אַחֲרָיו, עֲזַרְיָהוּ הַכֹּהֵן; וְעִמּוֹ כֹּהֲנִים לַיהוָה, שְׁמוֹנִים--בְּנֵי-חָיִל.	17 And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the LORD, that were valiant men;
יח  וַיַּעַמְדוּ עַל-עֻזִּיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ לֹא-לְךָ עֻזִּיָּהוּ לְהַקְטִיר לַיהוָה--כִּי לַכֹּהֲנִים בְּנֵי-אַהֲרֹן הַמְקֻדָּשִׁים, לְהַקְטִיר:  צֵא מִן-הַמִּקְדָּשׁ כִּי מָעַלְתָּ, וְלֹא-לְךָ לְכָבוֹד מֵיְהוָה אֱלֹהִים.	18 and they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him: 'It pertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the LORD, but to the priests the sons of Aaron that are consecrated it pertaineth to burn incense; go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thy honour from the LORD God.'
יט  וַיִּזְעַף, עֻזִּיָּהוּ, וּבְיָדוֹ מִקְטֶרֶת, לְהַקְטִיר; וּבְזַעְפּוֹ עִם-הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְהַצָּרַעַת זָרְחָה בְמִצְחוֹ לִפְנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים בְּבֵית יְהוָה, מֵעַל, לְמִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת.	19 Then Uzziah was wroth; and he had a censer in his hand to burn incense; and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy broke forth in his forehead before the priests in the house of the LORD, beside the altar of incense.
כ  וַיִּפֶן אֵלָיו עֲזַרְיָהוּ כֹהֵן הָרֹאשׁ וְכָל-הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְהִנֵּה-הוּא מְצֹרָע בְּמִצְחוֹ, וַיַּבְהִלוּהוּ, מִשָּׁם; וְגַם-הוּא נִדְחַף לָצֵאת, כִּי נִגְּעוֹ יְהוָה.	20 And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out quickly from thence; yea, himself made haste also to go out, because the LORD had smitten him.
כא  וַיְהִי עֻזִּיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ מְצֹרָע עַד-יוֹם מוֹתוֹ, וַיֵּשֶׁב בֵּית החפשות (הַחָפְשִׁית) מְצֹרָע--כִּי נִגְזַר, מִבֵּית יְהוָה; וְיוֹתָם בְּנוֹ עַל-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, שׁוֹפֵט אֶת-עַם הָאָרֶץ.	21 And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a house set apart, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the LORD; and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land.
כב  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי עֻזִּיָּהוּ, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרֹנִים--כָּתַב יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ, הַנָּבִיא.	22 Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.
כג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב עֻזִּיָּהוּ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו בִּשְׂדֵה הַקְּבוּרָה אֲשֶׁר לַמְּלָכִים--כִּי אָמְרוּ, מְצוֹרָע הוּא; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יוֹתָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	23 So Uzziah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in the field of burial which belonged to the kings; for they said: 'He is a leper'; and Jotham his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, יוֹתָם בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְשֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יְרוּשָׁה בַּת-צָדוֹק.	1 Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok.
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה עֻזִּיָּהוּ אָבִיו--רַק, לֹא-בָא אֶל-הֵיכַל יְהוָה; וְעוֹד הָעָם, מַשְׁחִיתִים.	2 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his father Uzziah had done; howbeit he entered not into the temple of the LORD. And the people did yet corruptly.
ג  הוּא, בָּנָה אֶת-שַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה--הָעֶלְיוֹן; וּבְחוֹמַת הָעֹפֶל בָּנָה, לָרֹב.	3 He built the upper gate of the house of the LORD, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.
ד  וְעָרִים בָּנָה, בְּהַר-יְהוּדָה; וּבֶחֳרָשִׁים בָּנָה, בִּירָנִיּוֹת וּמִגְדָּלִים.	4 Moreover he built cities in the hill-country of Judah, and in the forest he built castles and towers.
ה  וְהוּא נִלְחַם עִם-מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן, וַיֶּחֱזַק עֲלֵיהֶם, וַיִּתְּנוּ-לוֹ בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן בַּשָּׁנָה הַהִיא מֵאָה כִּכַּר-כֶּסֶף, וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים כֹּרִים חִטִּים וּשְׂעוֹרִים עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים:  זֹאת, הֵשִׁיבוּ לוֹ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית.	5 He fought also with the king of the children of Ammon, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year a hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon render unto him, in the second year also, and in the third.
ו  וַיִּתְחַזֵּק, יוֹתָם:  כִּי הֵכִין דְּרָכָיו, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו.	6 So Jotham became mighty, because he ordered his ways before the LORD his God.
ז  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יוֹתָם, וְכָל-מִלְחֲמֹתָיו וּדְרָכָיו--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה.	7 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
ח  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ; וְשֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	8 He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.
ט  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יוֹתָם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ בְּעִיר דָּוִיד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אָחָז בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	9 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David; and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, אָחָז בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְשֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְלֹא-עָשָׂה הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּדָוִיד אָבִיו.	1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and he did not that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, like David his father;
ב  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדַרְכֵי מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְגַם מַסֵּכוֹת עָשָׂה, לַבְּעָלִים.	2 but he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for the Baalim.
ג  וְהוּא הִקְטִיר, בְּגֵיא בֶן-הִנֹּם; וַיַּבְעֵר אֶת-בָּנָיו, בָּאֵשׁ, כְּתֹעֲבוֹת הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הֹרִישׁ יְהוָה מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 Moreover he offered in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
ד  וַיְזַבֵּחַ וַיְקַטֵּר בַּבָּמוֹת, וְעַל-הַגְּבָעוֹת, וְתַחַת, כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן.	4 And he sacrificed and offered in the high places, and on the hills, and under every leafy tree.
ה  וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, וַיַּכּוּ-בוֹ, וַיִּשְׁבּוּ מִמֶּנּוּ שִׁבְיָה גְדוֹלָה וַיָּבִיאוּ דַּרְמָשֶׂק; וְגַם בְּיַד-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, נִתָּן, וַיַּךְ-בּוֹ, מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה.  {ס}	5 Wherefore the LORD his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Aram; and they smote him, and carried away of his a great multitude of captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter. {S}
ו  וַיַּהֲרֹג פֶּקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ בִּיהוּדָה, מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף בְּיוֹם אֶחָד--הַכֹּל בְּנֵי-חָיִל:  בְּעָזְבָם, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתָם.	6 For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day, all of them valiant men; because they had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers.
ז  וַיַּהֲרֹג זִכְרִי גִּבּוֹר אֶפְרַיִם, אֶת-מַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֶת-עַזְרִיקָם, נְגִיד הַבָּיִת; וְאֶת-אֶלְקָנָה, מִשְׁנֵה הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}	7 And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the ruler of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the king. {S}
ח  וַיִּשְׁבּוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֲחֵיהֶם מָאתַיִם אֶלֶף, נָשִׁים בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת, וְגַם-שָׁלָל רָב, בָּזְזוּ מֵהֶם; וַיָּבִיאוּ אֶת-הַשָּׁלָל, לְשֹׁמְרוֹן.  {ס}	8 And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. {S}
ט  וְשָׁם הָיָה נָבִיא לַיהוָה, עֹדֵד שְׁמוֹ, וַיֵּצֵא לִפְנֵי הַצָּבָא הַבָּא לְשֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם הִנֵּה בַּחֲמַת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם עַל-יְהוּדָה נְתָנָם בְּיֶדְכֶם; וַתַּהַרְגוּ-בָם בְּזַעַף, עַד לַשָּׁמַיִם הִגִּיעַ.	9 But a prophet of the LORD was there, whose name was Oded; and he went out to meet the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them: 'Behold, because the LORD, the God of your fathers, was wroth with Judah, He hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage which hath reached up unto heaven.
י  וְעַתָּה בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, לִכְבֹּשׁ לַעֲבָדִים וְלִשְׁפָחוֹת, לָכֶם; הֲלֹא רַק-אַתֶּם עִמָּכֶם אֲשָׁמוֹת, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	10 And now ye purpose to bring the children of Judah and Jerusalem into subjection for bondmen and bondwomen unto you; but are there not even with you acts of guilt of your own against the LORD your God?
יא  וְעַתָּה שְׁמָעוּנִי--וְהָשִׁיבוּ הַשִּׁבְיָה, אֲשֶׁר שְׁבִיתֶם מֵאֲחֵיכֶם:  כִּי חֲרוֹן אַף-יְהוָה, עֲלֵיכֶם.  {ס}	11 Now hear me therefore, and send back the captives, that ye have taken captive of your brethren; for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you.' {S}
יב  וַיָּקֻמוּ אֲנָשִׁים מֵרָאשֵׁי בְנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם, עֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹחָנָן בֶּרֶכְיָהוּ בֶן-מְשִׁלֵּמוֹת, וִיחִזְקִיָּהוּ בֶּן-שַׁלֻּם, וַעֲמָשָׂא בֶּן-חַדְלָי--עַל-הַבָּאִים, מִן-הַצָּבָא.	12 Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Jehohanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,
יג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָהֶם, לֹא-תָבִיאוּ אֶת-הַשִּׁבְיָה הֵנָּה--כִּי לְאַשְׁמַת יְהוָה עָלֵינוּ אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, לְהֹסִיף עַל-חַטֹּאתֵנוּ וְעַל-אַשְׁמָתֵנוּ:  כִּי-רַבָּה אַשְׁמָה לָנוּ, וַחֲרוֹן אָף עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	13 and said unto them: 'Ye shall not bring in the captives hither; for ye purpose that which will bring upon us guilt against the LORD, to add unto our sins and to our guilt; for our guilt is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.' {S}
יד  וַיַּעֲזֹב הֶחָלוּץ, אֶת-הַשִּׁבְיָה וְאֶת-הַבִּזָּה, לִפְנֵי הַשָּׂרִים, וְכָל-הַקָּהָל.	14 So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and all the congregation.
טו  וַיָּקֻמוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-נִקְּבוּ בְשֵׁמוֹת וַיַּחֲזִיקוּ בַשִּׁבְיָה, וְכָל-מַעֲרֻמֵּיהֶם הִלְבִּישׁוּ מִן-הַשָּׁלָל, וַיַּלְבִּשֻׁם וַיַּנְעִלוּם וַיַּאֲכִלוּם וַיַּשְׁקוּם וַיְסֻכוּם וַיְנַהֲלוּם בַּחֲמֹרִים לְכָל-כּוֹשֵׁל, וַיְבִיאוּם יְרֵחוֹ עִיר-הַתְּמָרִים אֵצֶל אֲחֵיהֶם; וַיָּשׁוּבוּ, שֹׁמְרוֹן.  {פ}	15 And the men that have been mentioned by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm-trees, unto their brethren; then they returned to Samaria. {P}
טז  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, שָׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז עַל-מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר--לַעְזֹר לוֹ.	16 At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help him.
יז  וְעוֹד אֲדוֹמִים, בָּאוּ; וַיַּכּוּ בִיהוּדָה, וַיִּשְׁבּוּ-שֶׁבִי.	17 For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.
יח  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים פָּשְׁטוּ, בְּעָרֵי הַשְּׁפֵלָה וְהַנֶּגֶב לִיהוּדָה, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אֶת-בֵּית-שֶׁמֶשׁ וְאֶת-אַיָּלוֹן וְאֶת-הַגְּדֵרוֹת וְאֶת-שׂוֹכוֹ וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ וְאֶת-תִּמְנָה וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, וְאֶת-גִּמְזוֹ וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֶיהָ; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, שָׁם.	18 The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the Lowland, and of the South of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh, and Aijalon, and Gederoth, and Soco with the towns thereof, and Timnah with the towns thereof, Gimzo also and the towns thereof; and they dwelt there.
יט  כִּי-הִכְנִיעַ יְהוָה אֶת-יְהוּדָה, בַּעֲבוּר אָחָז מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי הִפְרִיעַ בִּיהוּדָה, וּמָעוֹל מַעַל בַּיהוָה.	19 For the LORD brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he had cast away restraint in Judah, and acted treacherously against the LORD.
כ  וַיָּבֹא עָלָיו, תִּלְּגַת פִּלְנְאֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וַיָּצַר לוֹ, וְלֹא חֲזָקוֹ.	20 And Tillegath-pilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not.
כא  כִּי-חָלַק אָחָז אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ וְהַשָּׂרִים; וַיִּתֵּן לְמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וְלֹא לְעֶזְרָה לוֹ.	21 For Ahaz stripped the house of the LORD, and the house of the king and the princes, and gave thereof unto the king of Assyria; but it helped him not.
כב  וּבְעֵת הָצֵר לוֹ, וַיּוֹסֶף לִמְעוֹל בַּיהוָה:  הוּא, הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז.	22 And in the time of his distress did he act even more treacherously against the LORD, this same king Ahaz.
כג  וַיִּזְבַּח, לֵאלֹהֵי דַרְמֶשֶׂק הַמַּכִּים בּוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר כִּי אֱלֹהֵי מַלְכֵי-אֲרָם הֵם מַעְזְרִים אֹתָם, לָהֶם אֲזַבֵּחַ וְיַעְזְרוּנִי; וְהֵם הָיוּ-לוֹ לְהַכְשִׁילוֹ, וּלְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him; and he said: 'Because the gods of the kings of Aram helped them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me.' But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.
כד  וַיֶּאֱסֹף אָחָז אֶת-כְּלֵי בֵית-הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיְקַצֵּץ אֶת-כְּלֵי בֵית-הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיִּסְגֹּר, אֶת-דַּלְתוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה; וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ מִזְבְּחוֹת בְּכָל-פִּנָּה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	24 And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the LORD; and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem.
כה  וּבְכָל-עִיר וָעִיר לִיהוּדָה עָשָׂה בָמוֹת, לְקַטֵּר לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים; וַיַּכְעֵס, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתָיו.	25 And in every city of Judah he made high places to offer unto other gods, and provoked the LORD, the God of his fathers.
כו  וְיֶתֶר דְּבָרָיו וְכָל-דְּרָכָיו, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרוֹנִים--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי-יְהוּדָה וְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	26 Now the rest of his acts, and all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
כז  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אָחָז עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בָעִיר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם--כִּי לֹא הֱבִיאֻהוּ, לְקִבְרֵי מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	27 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem; for they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel; and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ מָלַךְ, בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, וְעֶשְׂרִים וָתֵשַׁע שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, אֲבִיָּה בַּת-זְכַרְיָהוּ.	1 Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old; and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Abijah the daughter of Zechariah.
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, דָּוִיד אָבִיו.	2 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.
ג  הוּא בַשָּׁנָה הָרִאשׁוֹנָה לְמָלְכוֹ בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, פָּתַח אֶת-דַּלְתוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה--וַיְחַזְּקֵם.	3 He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the LORD, and repaired them.
ד  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְאֶת-הַלְוִיִּם; וַיַּאַסְפֵם, לִרְחוֹב הַמִּזְרָח.	4 And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the broad place on the east;
ה  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, שְׁמָעוּנִי הַלְוִיִּם:  עַתָּה הִתְקַדְּשׁוּ, וְקַדְּשׁוּ אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיכֶם, וְהוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-הַנִּדָּה, מִן-הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	5 and said unto them: 'Hear me, ye Levites: now sanctify yourselves, and sanctify the house of the LORD, the God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.
ו  כִּי-מָעֲלוּ אֲבֹתֵינוּ, וְעָשׂוּ הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה-אֱלֹהֵינוּ--וַיַּעַזְבֻהוּ; וַיַּסֵּבּוּ פְנֵיהֶם מִמִּשְׁכַּן יְהוָה, וַיִּתְּנוּ-עֹרֶף.	6 For our fathers have acted treacherously, and done that which was evil in the sight of the LORD our God, and have forsaken Him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD, and turned their backs.
ז  גַּם סָגְרוּ דַּלְתוֹת הָאוּלָם, וַיְכַבּוּ אֶת-הַנֵּרוֹת, וּקְטֹרֶת, לֹא הִקְטִירוּ; וְעֹלָה לֹא-הֶעֱלוּ בַקֹּדֶשׁ, לֵאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt-offerings in the holy place unto the God of Israel.
ח  וַיְהִי קֶצֶף יְהוָה, עַל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיִּתְּנֵם לזועה (לְזַעֲוָה) לְשַׁמָּה וְלִשְׁרֵקָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם רֹאִים בְּעֵינֵיכֶם.	8 Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and He hath delivered them to be a horror, an astonishment, and a hissing, as ye see with your eyes.
ט  וְהִנֵּה נָפְלוּ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, בֶּחָרֶב; וּבָנֵינוּ וּבְנוֹתֵינוּ וְנָשֵׁינוּ בַּשְּׁבִי, עַל-זֹאת.	9 For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.
י  עַתָּה, עִם-לְבָבִי, לִכְרוֹת בְּרִית, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְיָשֹׁב מִמֶּנּוּ, חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ.	10 Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of Israel, that His fierce anger may turn away from us.
יא  בָּנַי, עַתָּה אַל-תִּשָּׁלוּ:  כִּי-בָכֶם בָּחַר יְהוָה, לַעֲמֹד לְפָנָיו לְשָׁרְתוֹ, וְלִהְיוֹת לוֹ, מְשָׁרְתִים וּמַקְטִרִים.  {פ}	11 My sons, be not now negligent; for the LORD hath chosen you to stand before Him, to minister unto Him, and that ye should be His ministers, and offer unto Him.' {P}
יב  וַיָּקֻמוּ הַלְוִיִּם מַחַת בֶּן-עֲמָשַׂי וְיוֹאֵל בֶּן-עֲזַרְיָהוּ, מִן-בְּנֵי הַקְּהָתִי, וּמִן-בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, קִישׁ בֶּן-עַבְדִּי וַעֲזַרְיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהַלֶּלְאֵל;  {ס}  וּמִן-הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי--יוֹאָח בֶּן-זִמָּה, וְעֵדֶן בֶּן-יוֹאָח.	12 Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites; and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehallelel; {S} and of the Gershonites, Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah;
יג  וּמִן-בְּנֵי, אֱלִיצָפָן, שִׁמְרִי, ויעואל (וִיעִיאֵל); וּמִן-בְּנֵי אָסָף, זְכַרְיָהוּ וּמַתַּנְיָהוּ.  {ס}	13 and of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeiel; and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah; {S}
יד  וּמִן-בְּנֵי הֵימָן, יחואל (יְחִיאֵל) וְשִׁמְעִי;  {ס}  וּמִן-בְּנֵי יְדוּתוּן, שְׁמַעְיָה וְעֻזִּיאֵל.	14 and of the sons of Heman, Jehiel and Shimei; {S} and of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel.
טו  וַיַּאַסְפוּ אֶת-אֲחֵיהֶם וַיִּתְקַדְּשׁוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ כְמִצְוַת-הַמֶּלֶךְ בְּדִבְרֵי יְהוָה, לְטַהֵר, בֵּית יְהוָה.	15 And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and went in, according to the commandment of the king by the words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD.
טז  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים לִפְנִימָה בֵית-יְהוָה, לְטַהֵר, וַיּוֹצִיאוּ אֵת כָּל-הַטֻּמְאָה אֲשֶׁר מָצְאוּ בְּהֵיכַל יְהוָה, לַחֲצַר בֵּית יְהוָה; וַיְקַבְּלוּ, הַלְוִיִּם, לְהוֹצִיא לְנַחַל-קִדְרוֹן, חוּצָה.	16 And the priests went in unto the inner part of the house of the LORD, to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the LORD into the court of the house of the LORD. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad to the brook Kidron.
יז  וַיָּחֵלּוּ בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, לְקַדֵּשׁ, וּבְיוֹם שְׁמוֹנָה לַחֹדֶשׁ בָּאוּ לְאוּלָם יְהוָה, וַיְקַדְּשׁוּ אֶת-בֵּית-יְהוָה לְיָמִים שְׁמוֹנָה; וּבְיוֹם שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, כִּלּוּ.  {ס}	17 Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the LORD; and they sanctified the house of the LORD in eight days; and on the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end. {S}
יח  וַיָּבוֹאוּ פְנִימָה, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, טִהַרְנוּ אֶת-כָּל-בֵּית יְהוָה:  אֶת-מִזְבַּח הָעוֹלָה וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְאֶת-שֻׁלְחַן הַמַּעֲרֶכֶת וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו.	18 Then they went in to Hezekiah the king within [the palace], and said: 'We have cleansed all the house of the LORD, even the altar of burnt-offering, with all the vessels thereof, and the table of showbread, with all the vessels thereof.
יט  וְאֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים, אֲשֶׁר הִזְנִיחַ הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז בְּמַלְכוּתוֹ בְּמַעֲלוֹ--הֵכַנּוּ וְהִקְדָּשְׁנוּ; וְהִנָּם, לִפְנֵי מִזְבַּח יְהוָה.  {ס}	19 Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away when he acted treacherously, have we prepared and sanctified; and, behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.' {S}
כ  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם, יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֶּאֱסֹף, אֵת שָׂרֵי הָעִיר; וַיַּעַל, בֵּית יְהוָה.	20 Then Hezekiah the king arose early, and gathered the princes of the city, and went up to the house of the LORD.
כא  וַיָּבִיאוּ פָרִים-שִׁבְעָה וְאֵילִים שִׁבְעָה וּכְבָשִׂים שִׁבְעָה, וּצְפִירֵי עִזִּים שִׁבְעָה לְחַטָּאת, עַל-הַמַּמְלָכָה וְעַל-הַמִּקְדָּשׁ, וְעַל-יְהוּדָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, לִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים, לְהַעֲלוֹת, עַל-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה.	21 And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he-goats, for a sin-offering for the kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of the LORD.
כב  וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ, הַבָּקָר, וַיְקַבְּלוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים אֶת-הַדָּם, וַיִּזְרְקוּ הַמִּזְבֵּחָה; וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ הָאֵלִים, וַיִּזְרְקוּ הַדָּם הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ הַכְּבָשִׂים, וַיִּזְרְקוּ הַדָּם הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.	22 So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood, and dashed it against the altar; and they killed the rams, and dashed the blood against the altar; they killed also the lambs, and dashed the blood against the altar.
כג  וַיַּגִּישׁוּ אֶת-שְׂעִירֵי הַחַטָּאת, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ וְהַקָּהָל; וַיִּסְמְכוּ יְדֵיהֶם, עֲלֵיהֶם.	23 And they brought near the he-goats for the sin-offering before the king and the congregation, and they laid their hands upon them;
כד  וַיִּשְׁחָטוּם, הַכֹּהֲנִים, וַיְחַטְּאוּ אֶת-דָּמָם הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, לְכַפֵּר עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, הָעוֹלָה וְהַחַטָּאת.	24 and the priests killed them, and they made a sin-offering with their blood upon the altar, to make atonement for all Israel; for the king commanded that the burnt-offering and the sin-offering should be made for all Israel.
כה  וַיַּעֲמֵד אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם בֵּית יְהוָה, בִּמְצִלְתַּיִם בִּנְבָלִים וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת, בְּמִצְוַת דָּוִיד וְגָד חֹזֵה-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְנָתָן הַנָּבִיא:  כִּי בְיַד-יְהוָה הַמִּצְוָה, בְּיַד-נְבִיאָיו.	25 And he set the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king's seer, and Nathan the prophet; for the commandment was of the LORD by His prophets.
כו  וַיַּעַמְדוּ הַלְוִיִּם בִּכְלֵי דָוִיד, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת.  {פ}	26 And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets. {P}
כז  וַיֹּאמֶר, חִזְקִיָּהוּ, לְהַעֲלוֹת הָעֹלָה, לְהַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וּבְעֵת הֵחֵל הָעוֹלָה, הֵחֵל שִׁיר-יְהוָה וְהַחֲצֹצְרוֹת, וְעַל-יְדֵי, כְּלֵי דָּוִיד מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	27 And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt-offering upon the altar. And when the burnt-offering began, the song of the LORD began also, and the trumpets, together with the instruments of David king of Israel.
כח  וְכָל-הַקָּהָל, מִשְׁתַּחֲוִים, וְהַשִּׁיר מְשׁוֹרֵר, וְהַחֲצֹצְרוֹת מחצצרים (מַחְצְרִים):  הַכֹּל, עַד לִכְלוֹת הָעֹלָה.	28 And all the congregation prostrated themselves, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded; all this continued until the burnt-offering was finished.
כט  וּכְכַלּוֹת, לְהַעֲלוֹת:  כָּרְעוּ, הַמֶּלֶךְ וְכָל-הַנִּמְצְאִים אִתּוֹ--וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ.	29 And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves and prostrated themselves.
ל  וַיֹּאמֶר יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ וְהַשָּׂרִים, לַלְוִיִּם, לְהַלֵּל לַיהוָה, בְּדִבְרֵי דָוִיד וְאָסָף הַחֹזֶה; וַיְהַלְלוּ, עַד-לְשִׂמְחָה, וַיִּקְּדוּ, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ.  {פ}	30 Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praises unto the LORD with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and prostrated themselves. {P}
לא  וַיַּעַן יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ וַיֹּאמֶר, עַתָּה מִלֵּאתֶם יֶדְכֶם לַיהוָה, גֹּשׁוּ וְהָבִיאוּ זְבָחִים וְתוֹדוֹת, לְבֵית יְהוָה; וַיָּבִיאוּ הַקָּהָל זְבָחִים וְתוֹדוֹת, וְכָל-נְדִיב לֵב עֹלוֹת.	31 Then Hezekiah answered and said: 'Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the LORD, come near and bring sacrifices and thank-offerings into the house of the LORD.' And the congregation brought in sacrifices and thank-offerings; and as many as were of a willing heart brought burnt-offerings.
לב  וַיְהִי מִסְפַּר הָעֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר הֵבִיאוּ הַקָּהָל--בָּקָר שִׁבְעִים, אֵילִים מֵאָה כְּבָשִׂים מָאתָיִם:  לְעֹלָה לַיהוָה, כָּל-אֵלֶּה.	32 And the number of the burnt-offerings, which the congregation brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, a hundred rams, and two hundred lambs; all these were for a burnt-offering to the LORD.
לג  וְהַקֳּדָשִׁים--בָּקָר שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, וְצֹאן שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים.	33 And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.
לד  רַק הַכֹּהֲנִים, הָיוּ לִמְעָט, וְלֹא יָכְלוּ, לְהַפְשִׁיט אֶת-כָּל-הָעֹלוֹת; וַיְחַזְּקוּם אֲחֵיהֶם הַלְוִיִּם, עַד-כְּלוֹת הַמְּלָאכָה וְעַד יִתְקַדְּשׁוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים--כִּי הַלְוִיִּם יִשְׁרֵי לֵבָב, לְהִתְקַדֵּשׁ מֵהַכֹּהֲנִים.	34 But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt-offerings; wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, till the work was ended, and until the priests had sanctified themselves; for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
לה  וְגַם-עֹלָה לָרֹב בְּחֶלְבֵי הַשְּׁלָמִים, וּבַנְּסָכִים--לָעֹלָה; וַתִּכּוֹן, עֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-יְהוָה.	35 And also the burnt-offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace-offerings, and the drink-offerings for every burnt-offering. So the service of the house of the LORD was firmly established.
לו  וַיִּשְׂמַח יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ וְכָל-הָעָם, עַל הַהֵכִין הָאֱלֹהִים לָעָם:  כִּי בְּפִתְאֹם, הָיָה הַדָּבָר.  {פ}	36 And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, because of that which God had prepared for the people; for the thing was done suddenly. {P}
א  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה, וְגַם-אִגְּרוֹת כָּתַב עַל-אֶפְרַיִם וּמְנַשֶּׁה, לָבוֹא לְבֵית-יְהוָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם--לַעֲשׂוֹת פֶּסַח, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	1 And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the LORD, the God of Israel.
ב  וַיִּוָּעַץ הַמֶּלֶךְ וְשָׂרָיו וְכָל-הַקָּהָל, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם, לַעֲשׂוֹת הַפֶּסַח, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי.	2 For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.
ג  כִּי לֹא יָכְלוּ לַעֲשֹׂתוֹ, בָּעֵת הַהִיא:  כִּי הַכֹּהֲנִים לֹא-הִתְקַדְּשׁוּ לְמַדַּי, וְהָעָם לֹא-נֶאֶסְפוּ לִירוּשָׁלִָם.	3 For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient number, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.
ד  וַיִּישַׁר הַדָּבָר, בְּעֵינֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּבְעֵינֵי, כָּל-הַקָּהָל.	4 And the thing was right in the eyes of the king and of all the congregation.
ה  וַיַּעֲמִידוּ דָבָר, לְהַעֲבִיר קוֹל בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִבְּאֵר-שֶׁבַע וְעַד-דָּן--לָבוֹא לַעֲשׂוֹת פֶּסַח לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי לֹא לָרֹב עָשׂוּ, כַּכָּתוּב.	5 So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beer-sheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the passover unto the LORD, the God of Israel, at Jerusalem; for they had not kept it in great numbers according as it is written.
ו  וַיֵּלְכוּ הָרָצִים בָּאִגְּרוֹת מִיַּד הַמֶּלֶךְ וְשָׂרָיו, בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה, וּכְמִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֵאמֹר:  בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שׁוּבוּ אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם יִצְחָק וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיָשֹׁב אֶל-הַפְּלֵיטָה, הַנִּשְׁאֶרֶת לָכֶם מִכַּף מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר.	6 So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying: 'Ye children of Israel, turn back unto the LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that He may return to the remnant that are escaped of you out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.
ז  וְאַל-תִּהְיוּ, כַּאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם וְכַאֲחֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר מָעֲלוּ, בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם; וַיִּתְּנֵם לְשַׁמָּה, כַּאֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם רֹאִים.	7 And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, who acted treacherously against the LORD, the God of their fathers, so that He delivered them to be an astonishment, as ye see.
ח  עַתָּה, אַל-תַּקְשׁוּ עָרְפְּכֶם כַּאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם:  תְּנוּ-יָד לַיהוָה, וּבֹאוּ לְמִקְדָּשׁוֹ אֲשֶׁר הִקְדִּישׁ לְעוֹלָם, וְעִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְיָשֹׁב מִכֶּם חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ.	8 Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were; but yield yourselves unto the LORD, and enter into His sanctuary, which He hath sanctified for ever, and serve the LORD your God, that His fierce anger may turn away from you.
ט  כִּי בְשׁוּבְכֶם עַל-יְהוָה, אֲחֵיכֶם וּבְנֵיכֶם לְרַחֲמִים לִפְנֵי שׁוֹבֵיהֶם, וְלָשׁוּב, לָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת:  כִּי-חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְלֹא-יָסִיר פָּנִים מִכֶּם, אִם-תָּשׁוּבוּ אֵלָיו.  {ס}	9 For if ye turn back unto the LORD, your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them that led them captive, and shall come back into this land; for the LORD your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away His face from you, if ye return unto Him.' {S}
י  וַיִּהְיוּ הָרָצִים עֹבְרִים מֵעִיר לָעִיר, בְּאֶרֶץ-אֶפְרַיִם וּמְנַשֶּׁה--וְעַד-זְבֻלוּן; וַיִּהְיוּ מַשְׂחִיקִים עֲלֵיהֶם, וּמַלְעִגִים בָּם.	10 So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh, even unto Zebulun; but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.
יא  אַךְ-אֲנָשִׁים מֵאָשֵׁר וּמְנַשֶּׁה, וּמִזְּבֻלוּן--נִכְנְעוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ לִירוּשָׁלִָם.	11 Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.
יב  גַּם בִּיהוּדָה, הָיְתָה יַד הָאֱלֹהִים, לָתֵת לָהֶם, לֵב אֶחָד:  לַעֲשׂוֹת מִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְהַשָּׂרִים--בִּדְבַר יְהוָה.	12 Also in Judah was the hand of God to give them one heart, to do the commandment of the king and of the princes by the word of the LORD.
יג  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם עַם-רָב, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-חַג הַמַּצּוֹת בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי--קָהָל, לָרֹב מְאֹד.	13 And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.
יד  וַיָּקֻמוּ--וַיָּסִירוּ אֶת-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְאֵת כָּל-הַמְקַטְּרוֹת הֵסִירוּ, וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּ לְנַחַל קִדְרוֹן.	14 And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the brook Kidron.
טו  וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ הַפֶּסַח, בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם נִכְלְמוּ וַיִּתְקַדְּשׁוּ, וַיָּבִיאוּ עֹלוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה.	15 Then they killed the passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the second month; and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought burnt-offerings into the house of the LORD.
טז  וַיַּעַמְדוּ עַל-עָמְדָם כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם, כְּתוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים; הַכֹּהֲנִים זֹרְקִים אֶת-הַדָּם, מִיַּד הַלְוִיִּם.	16 And they stood in their place after their order, according to the law of Moses the man of God; the priests dashed the blood, which they received of the hand of the Levites.
יז  כִּי-רַבַּת בַּקָּהָל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הִתְקַדָּשׁוּ; וְהַלְוִיִּם עַל-שְׁחִיטַת הַפְּסָחִים, לְכֹל לֹא טָהוֹר--לְהַקְדִּישׁ, לַיהוָה.	17 For there were many in the congregation that had not sanctified themselves; therefore the Levites had the charge of killing the passover lambs for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the LORD.
יח  כִּי מַרְבִּית הָעָם רַבַּת מֵאֶפְרַיִם וּמְנַשֶּׁה יִשָּׂשכָר וּזְבֻלוּן, לֹא הִטֶּהָרוּ--כִּי-אָכְלוּ אֶת-הַפֶּסַח, בְּלֹא כַכָּתוּב:  כִּי הִתְפַּלֵּל יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ עֲלֵיהֶם לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה הַטּוֹב יְכַפֵּר בְּעַד.	18 For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it is written. For Hezekiah had prayed for them, saying: 'The good LORD pardon
יט  כָּל-לְבָבוֹ הֵכִין, לִדְרוֹשׁ הָאֱלֹהִים יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתָיו; וְלֹא, כְּטָהֳרַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ.  {ס}	19 every one that setteth his heart to seek God, the LORD, the God of his fathers, though [he be] not [cleansed] according to the purification that pertaineth to holy things.' {S}
כ  וַיִּשְׁמַע יְהוָה אֶל-יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, וַיִּרְפָּא אֶת-הָעָם.  {ס}	20 And the LORD hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. {S}
כא  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַנִּמְצְאִים בִּירוּשָׁלִַם אֶת-חַג הַמַּצּוֹת, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים--בְּשִׂמְחָה גְדוֹלָה; וּמְהַלְלִים לַיהוָה יוֹם בְּיוֹם הַלְוִיִּם וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, בִּכְלֵי-עֹז--לַיהוָה.  {ס}	21 And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness; and the Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, singing with loud instruments unto the LORD. {S}
כב  וַיְדַבֵּר יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, עַל-לֵב כָּל-הַלְוִיִּם--הַמַּשְׂכִּילִים שֵׂכֶל-טוֹב, לַיהוָה; וַיֹּאכְלוּ אֶת-הַמּוֹעֵד, שִׁבְעַת הַיָּמִים, מְזַבְּחִים זִבְחֵי שְׁלָמִים, וּמִתְוַדִּים לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.  {ס}	22 And Hezekiah spoke encouragingly unto all the Levites that were well skilled in the service of the LORD. So they did eat throughout the feast for the seven days, offering sacrifices of peace-offerings, and giving thanks to the LORD, the God of their fathers. {S}
כג  וַיִּוָּעֲצוּ, כָּל-הַקָּהָל, לַעֲשׂוֹת, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים אֲחֵרִים; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ שִׁבְעַת-יָמִים, שִׂמְחָה.	23 And the whole congregation took counsel to keep other seven days; and they kept other seven days with gladness.
כד  כִּי חִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה הֵרִים לַקָּהָל אֶלֶף פָּרִים, וְשִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים צֹאן,  {ס}  וְהַשָּׂרִים הֵרִימוּ לַקָּהָל פָּרִים אֶלֶף, וְצֹאן עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים; וַיִּתְקַדְּשׁוּ כֹהֲנִים, לָרֹב.	24 For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation for offerings a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; {S} and the princes gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep; and priests sanctified themselves in great numbers.
כה  וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ כָּל-קְהַל יְהוּדָה, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, וְכָל-הַקָּהָל, הַבָּאִים מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל; וְהַגֵּרִים, הַבָּאִים מֵאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהַיּוֹשְׁבִים, בִּיהוּדָה.	25 And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.
כו  וַתְּהִי שִׂמְחָה-גְדוֹלָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי מִימֵי שְׁלֹמֹה בֶן-דָּוִיד, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא כָזֹאת, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	26 So there was great joy in Jerusalem; for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem. {S}
כז  וַיָּקֻמוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם, וַיְבָרְכוּ אֶת-הָעָם, וַיִּשָּׁמַע, בְּקוֹלָם; וַתָּבוֹא תְפִלָּתָם לִמְעוֹן קָדְשׁוֹ, לַשָּׁמָיִם.  {פ}	27 Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people; and their voice was heard [of the LORD], and their prayer came up to His holy habitation, even unto heaven. {P}
א  וּכְכַלּוֹת כָּל-זֹאת, יָצְאוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַנִּמְצְאִים לְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיְשַׁבְּרוּ הַמַּצֵּבוֹת וַיְגַדְּעוּ הָאֲשֵׁרִים וַיְנַתְּצוּ אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת מִכָּל-יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן וּבְאֶפְרַיִם וּמְנַשֶּׁה, עַד-לְכַלֵּה; וַיָּשׁוּבוּ כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִישׁ לַאֲחֻזָּתוֹ--לְעָרֵיהֶם.  {פ}	1 Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and broke in pieces the pillars, and hewed down the Asherim, and broke down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities. {P}
ב  וַיַּעֲמֵד יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-מַחְלְקוֹת הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם עַל-מַחְלְקוֹתָם אִישׁ כְּפִי עֲבֹדָתוֹ, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם, לְעֹלָה, וְלִשְׁלָמִים--לְשָׁרֵת וּלְהֹדוֹת וּלְהַלֵּל, בְּשַׁעֲרֵי מַחֲנוֹת יְהוָה.  {ס}	2 And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priest and the Levites after their courses, every man according to his service, both the priests and the Levites, for burnt-offerings and for peace-offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the camp of the LORD. {S}
ג  וּמְנָת הַמֶּלֶךְ מִן-רְכוּשׁוֹ לָעֹלוֹת, לְעֹלוֹת הַבֹּקֶר וְהָעֶרֶב, וְהָעֹלוֹת, לַשַּׁבָּתוֹת וְלֶחֳדָשִׁים וְלַמֹּעֲדִים--כַּכָּתוּב, בְּתוֹרַת יְהוָה.	3 He appointed also the king's portion of his substance for the burnt-offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the appointed seasons, as it is written in the Law of the LORD.
ד  וַיֹּאמֶר לָעָם, לְיוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לָתֵת, מְנָת הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם--לְמַעַן יֶחֶזְקוּ, בְּתוֹרַת יְהוָה.	4 Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might give themselves to the law of the LORD.
ה  וְכִפְרֹץ הַדָּבָר, הִרְבּוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל רֵאשִׁית דָּגָן תִּירוֹשׁ וְיִצְהָר וּדְבַשׁ, וְכֹל, תְּבוּאַת שָׂדֶה; וּמַעְשַׂר הַכֹּל לָרֹב, הֵבִיאוּ.	5 And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of Israel gave in abundance the first-fruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.
ו  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה, הַיּוֹשְׁבִים בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה--גַּם-הֵם מַעְשַׂר בָּקָר וָצֹאן, וּמַעְשַׂר קָדָשִׁים הַמְקֻדָּשִׁים לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם:  הֵבִיאוּ, וַיִּתְּנוּ עֲרֵמוֹת עֲרֵמוֹת.  {ס}	6 And the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of hallowed things which were hallowed unto the LORD their God, and laid them by heaps. {S}
ז  בַּחֹדֶשׁ, הַשְּׁלִשִׁי, הֵחֵלּוּ הָעֲרֵמוֹת, לְיִסּוֹד; וּבַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, כִּלּוּ.  {ס}	7 In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month. {S}
ח  וַיָּבֹאוּ יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ וְהַשָּׂרִים, וַיִּרְאוּ אֶת-הָעֲרֵמוֹת; וַיְבָרְכוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה, וְאֵת, עַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	8 And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD, and His people Israel. {P}
ט  וַיִּדְרֹשׁ יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, עַל-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם--עַל-הָעֲרֵמוֹת.	9 Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.
י  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, עֲזַרְיָהוּ הַכֹּהֵן הָרֹאשׁ--לְבֵית צָדוֹק:  וַיֹּאמֶר מֵהָחֵל הַתְּרוּמָה לָבִיא בֵית-יְהוָה, אָכוֹל וְשָׂבוֹעַ וְהוֹתֵר עַד-לָרוֹב--כִּי יְהוָה בֵּרַךְ אֶת-עַמּוֹ, וְהַנּוֹתָר אֶת-הֶהָמוֹן הַזֶּה.  {ס}	10 And Azariah the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, answered him and said: 'Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house of the LORD, we have eaten and had enough, and have left plenty; for the LORD hath blessed His people; and that which is left is this great store.' {S}
יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, לְהָכִין לְשָׁכוֹת בְּבֵית יְהוָה--וַיָּכִינוּ.	11 Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the LORD; and they prepared them.
יב  וַיָּבִיאוּ אֶת-הַתְּרוּמָה וְהַמַּעֲשֵׂר וְהַקֳּדָשִׁים, בֶּאֱמוּנָה; וַעֲלֵיהֶם נָגִיד כונניהו (כָּנַנְיָהוּ) הַלֵּוִי, וְשִׁמְעִי אָחִיהוּ מִשְׁנֶה.	12 And they brought in the offerings and the tithes and the hallowed things faithfully; and over them Conaniah the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was second.
יג  וִיחִיאֵל וַעֲזַזְיָהוּ וְנַחַת וַעֲשָׂהאֵל וִירִימוֹת וְיוֹזָבָד, וֶאֱלִיאֵל וְיִסְמַכְיָהוּ, וּמַחַת, וּבְנָיָהוּ--פְּקִידִים, מִיַּד כונניהו (כָּנַנְיָהוּ) וְשִׁמְעִי אָחִיו, בְּמִפְקַד יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַעֲזַרְיָהוּ נְגִיד בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים.	13 And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.
יד  וְקוֹרֵא בֶן-יִמְנָה הַלֵּוִי הַשּׁוֹעֵר לַמִּזְרָחָה, עַל נִדְבוֹת הָאֱלֹהִים--לָתֵת תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה, וְקָדְשֵׁי הַקֳּדָשִׁים.	14 And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter at the east gate, was over the freewill-offerings of God, to distribute the offerings of the LORD, and the most holy things.
טו  וְעַל-יָדוֹ עֵדֶן וּמִנְיָמִן וְיֵשׁוּעַ וּשְׁמַעְיָהוּ אֲמַרְיָהוּ וּשְׁכַנְיָהוּ, בְּעָרֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים--בֶּאֱמוּנָה:  לָתֵת לַאֲחֵיהֶם בְּמַחְלְקוֹת, כַּגָּדוֹל כַּקָּטָן.	15 And under him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their office of trust, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as to the small;
טז  מִלְּבַד הִתְיַחְשָׂם לִזְכָרִים, מִבֶּן שָׁלוֹשׁ שָׁנִים וּלְמַעְלָה, לְכָל-הַבָּא לְבֵית-יְהוָה, לִדְבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ--לַעֲבוֹדָתָם, בְּמִשְׁמְרוֹתָם כְּמַחְלְקוֹתֵיהֶם.	16 beside them that were reckoned by genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even every one that entered into the house of the LORD, for his daily portion, for their service in their charges according to their courses;
יז  וְאֵת הִתְיַחֵשׂ הַכֹּהֲנִים, לְבֵית אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, וְהַלְוִיִּם, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וּלְמָעְלָה--בְּמִשְׁמְרוֹתֵיהֶם, בְּמַחְלְקוֹתֵיהֶם.	17 and them that were reckoned by genealogy of the priests by their fathers' houses, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by their courses;
יח  וּלְהִתְיַחֵשׂ, בְּכָל-טַפָּם נְשֵׁיהֶם וּבְנֵיהֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיהֶם--לְכָל-קָהָל:  כִּי בֶאֱמוּנָתָם, יִתְקַדְּשׁוּ-קֹדֶשׁ.	18 even to give to them that were reckoned by genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation; for in their office of trust they administered the sacred gifts;
יט  וְלִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים בִּשְׂדֵי מִגְרַשׁ עָרֵיהֶם, בְּכָל-עִיר וָעִיר, אֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר נִקְּבוּ בְּשֵׁמוֹת--לָתֵת מָנוֹת, לְכָל-זָכָר בַּכֹּהֲנִים, וּלְכָל-הִתְיַחֵשׂ, בַּלְוִיִּם.	19 also for the sons of Aaron the priests, that were in the fields of the open land about their cities, in every city, there were men that were mentioned by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were reckoned by genealogy among the Levites.
כ  וַיַּעַשׂ כָּזֹאת יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, בְּכָל-יְהוּדָה; וַיַּעַשׂ הַטּוֹב וְהַיָּשָׁר וְהָאֱמֶת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו.	20 And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah; and he wrought that which was good and right and faithful before the LORD his God.
כא  וּבְכָל-מַעֲשֶׂה אֲשֶׁר-הֵחֵל בַּעֲבוֹדַת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים, וּבַתּוֹרָה וּבַמִּצְוָה, לִדְרֹשׁ, לֵאלֹהָיו--בְּכָל-לְבָבוֹ עָשָׂה, וְהִצְלִיחַ.  {פ}	21 And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered. {P}
א  אַחֲרֵי הַדְּבָרִים וְהָאֱמֶת הָאֵלֶּה, בָּא סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר; וַיָּבֹא בִיהוּדָה, וַיִּחַן עַל-הֶעָרִים הַבְּצֻרוֹת, וַיֹּאמֶר, לְבִקְעָם אֵלָיו.	1 After these things, and this faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fortified cities, and thought to make a breach therein for himself.
ב  וַיַּרְא, יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, כִּי-בָא, סַנְחֵרִיב; וּפָנָיו, לַמִּלְחָמָה עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	2 And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem,
ג  וַיִּוָּעַץ, עִם-שָׂרָיו וְגִבֹּרָיו, לִסְתּוֹם אֶת-מֵימֵי הָעֲיָנוֹת, אֲשֶׁר מִחוּץ לָעִיר; וַיַּעְזְרוּהוּ.	3 he took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were without the city; and they helped him.
ד  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ עַם-רָב--וַיִּסְתְּמוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּעְיָנוֹת, וְאֶת-הַנַּחַל הַשּׁוֹטֵף בְּתוֹךְ-הָאָרֶץ לֵאמֹר:  לָמָּה יָבוֹאוּ מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר, וּמָצְאוּ מַיִם רַבִּים.	4 So there was gathered much people together, and they stopped all the fountains, and the brook that flowed through the midst of the land, saying: 'Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?'
ה  וַיִּתְחַזַּק וַיִּבֶן אֶת-כָּל-הַחוֹמָה הַפְּרוּצָה וַיַּעַל עַל-הַמִּגְדָּלוֹת, וְלַחוּצָה הַחוֹמָה אַחֶרֶת, וַיְחַזֵּק אֶת-הַמִּלּוֹא, עִיר דָּוִיד; וַיַּעַשׂ שֶׁלַח לָרֹב, וּמָגִנִּים.	5 And he took courage, and built up all the wall that was broken down, and raised it up to the towers, and another wall without, and strengthened Millo in the city of David, and made weapons and shields in abundance.
ו  וַיִּתֵּן שָׂרֵי מִלְחָמוֹת, עַל-הָעָם; וַיִּקְבְּצֵם אֵלָיו, אֶל-רְחוֹב שַׁעַר הָעִיר, וַיְדַבֵּר עַל-לְבָבָם, לֵאמֹר.	6 And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the broad place at the gate of the city, and spoke encouragingly to them, saying:
ז  חִזְקוּ וְאִמְצוּ--אַל-תִּירְאוּ וְאַל-תֵּחַתּוּ מִפְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וּמִלִּפְנֵי כָּל-הֶהָמוֹן אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ:  כִּי-עִמָּנוּ רַב, מֵעִמּוֹ.	7 'Be strong and of good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him; for there is a Greater with us than with him:
ח  עִמּוֹ, זְרוֹעַ בָּשָׂר, וְעִמָּנוּ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ לְעָזְרֵנוּ, וּלְהִלָּחֵם מִלְחֲמֹתֵנוּ; וַיִּסָּמְכוּ הָעָם, עַל-דִּבְרֵי יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה.  {פ}	8 with him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the LORD our God to help us, and to fight our battles.' And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah. {P}
ט  אַחַר זֶה, שָׁלַח סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר עֲבָדָיו יְרוּשָׁלַיְמָה, וְהוּא עַל-לָכִישׁ, וְכָל-מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ עִמּוֹ--עַל-יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, וְעַל-כָּל-יְהוּדָה אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר.	9 After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to Jerusalem--now he was before Lachish, and all his power with him--unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying:
י  כֹּה אָמַר, סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר:  עַל-מָה אַתֶּם בֹּטְחִים, וְיֹשְׁבִים בְּמָצוֹר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	10 'Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria: Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide the siege in Jerusalem?
יא  הֲלֹא יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, מַסִּית אֶתְכֶם, לָתֵת אֶתְכֶם, לָמוּת בְּרָעָב וּבְצָמָא לֵאמֹר:  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--יַצִּילֵנוּ, מִכַּף מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	11 Doth not Hezekiah persuade you, to give you over to die by famine and by thirst, saying: The LORD our God will deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
יב  הֲלֹא-הוּא, יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, הֵסִיר אֶת-בָּמֹתָיו, וְאֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר לִיהוּדָה וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם, לֵאמֹר, לִפְנֵי מִזְבֵּחַ אֶחָד תִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ, וְעָלָיו תַּקְטִירוּ.	12 Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away His high places and His altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying: Ye shall worship before one altar, and upon it shall ye offer?
יג  הֲלֹא תֵדְעוּ, מֶה עָשִׂיתִי אֲנִי וַאֲבוֹתַי, לְכֹל, עַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת:  הֲיָכוֹל יָכְלוּ, אֱלֹהֵי גּוֹיֵ הָאֲרָצוֹת, לְהַצִּיל אֶת-אַרְצָם, מִיָּדִי.	13 Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands in any wise able to deliver their land out of my hand?
יד  מִי בְּכָל-אֱלֹהֵי הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱרִימוּ אֲבוֹתַי, אֲשֶׁר יָכוֹל, לְהַצִּיל אֶת-עַמּוֹ מִיָּדִי:  כִּי יוּכַל אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, לְהַצִּיל אֶתְכֶם מִיָּדִי.	14 Who was there among all the gods of those nations which my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of my hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of my hand?
טו  וְעַתָּה אַל-יַשִּׁיא אֶתְכֶם חִזְקִיָּהוּ וְאַל-יַסִּית אֶתְכֶם כָּזֹאת, וְאַל-תַּאֲמִינוּ לוֹ--כִּי-לֹא יוּכַל כָּל-אֱלוֹהַּ כָּל-גּוֹי וּמַמְלָכָה, לְהַצִּיל עַמּוֹ מִיָּדִי וּמִיַּד אֲבוֹתָי:  אַף כִּי אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, לֹא-יַצִּילוּ אֶתְכֶם מִיָּדִי.	15 Now therefore let not Hezekiah beguile you, nor persuade you after this manner, neither believe ye him; for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers; how much less shall your God deliver you out of my hand?'
טז  וְעוֹד דִּבְּרוּ עֲבָדָיו, עַל-יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים, וְעַל, יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ עַבְדּוֹ.	16 And his servants spoke yet more against the LORD God, and against His servant Hezekiah.
יז  וּסְפָרִים כָּתַב--לְחָרֵף, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  וְלֵאמֹר עָלָיו לֵאמֹר, כֵּאלֹהֵי גּוֹיֵי הָאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הִצִּילוּ עַמָּם מִיָּדִי--כֵּן לֹא-יַצִּיל אֱלֹהֵי יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ עַמּוֹ, מִיָּדִי.	17 He wrote also a letter, to taunt the LORD, the God of Israel, and to speak against Him, saying: 'As the gods of the nations of the lands, which have not delivered their people out of my hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver His people out of my hand.'
יח  וַיִּקְרְאוּ בְקוֹל-גָּדוֹל יְהוּדִית, עַל-עַם יְרוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַחוֹמָה, לְיָרְאָם, וּלְבַהֲלָם--לְמַעַן, יִלְכְּדוּ אֶת-הָעִיר.	18 And they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language unto the people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to terrify them, and to affright them; that they might take the city.
יט  וַיְדַבְּרוּ, אֶל-אֱלֹהֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  כְּעַל, אֱלֹהֵי עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ--מַעֲשֵׂה, יְדֵי הָאָדָם.  {ס}	19 And they spoke of the God of Jerusalem, as of the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of men's hands. {S}
כ  וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, וִישַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ הַנָּבִיא--עַל-זֹאת; וַיִּזְעֲקוּ, הַשָּׁמָיִם.  {ס}	20 And Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, prayed because of this, and cried to heaven. {S}
כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה, מַלְאָךְ, וַיַּכְחֵד כָּל-גִּבּוֹר חַיִל וְנָגִיד וְשָׂר, בְּמַחֲנֵה מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וַיָּשָׁב בְּבֹשֶׁת פָּנִים לְאַרְצוֹ, וַיָּבֹא בֵּית אֱלֹהָיו, ומיציאו (וּמִיצִיאֵי) מֵעָיו, שָׁם הִפִּילֻהוּ בֶחָרֶב.	21 And the LORD sent an angel, who cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains, in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the sword.
כב  וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה אֶת-יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ וְאֵת יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מִיַּד סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר--וּמִיַּד-כֹּל; וַיְנַהֲלֵם, מִסָּבִיב.	22 Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all, and guided them on every side.
כג  וְרַבִּים מְבִיאִים מִנְחָה לַיהוָה, לִירוּשָׁלִַם, וּמִגְדָּנוֹת, לִיחִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּנַּשֵּׂא לְעֵינֵי כָל-הַגּוֹיִם, מֵאַחֲרֵי-כֵן.  {פ}	23 And many brought gifts unto the LORD to Jerusalem, and precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah; so that he was exalted in the sight of all nations from thenceforth. {P}
כד  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, חָלָה יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ עַד-לָמוּת; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, וּמוֹפֵת נָתַן לוֹ.	24 In those days Hezekiah was sick even unto death; and he prayed unto the LORD; and He spoke unto him, and gave him a sign.
כה  וְלֹא-כִגְמֻל עָלָיו הֵשִׁיב יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, כִּי גָבַהּ לִבּוֹ; וַיְהִי עָלָיו קֶצֶף, וְעַל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם.	25 But Hezekiah rendered not according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up; therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.
כו  וַיִּכָּנַע יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ בְּגֹבַהּ לִבּוֹ, הוּא וְיוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְלֹא-בָא עֲלֵיהֶם קֶצֶף יְהוָה, בִּימֵי יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ.	26 Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
כז  וַיְהִי לִיחִזְקִיָּהוּ עֹשֶׁר וְכָבוֹד, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד; וְאֹצָרוֹת עָשָׂה-לוֹ לְכֶסֶף וּלְזָהָב וּלְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה, וְלִבְשָׂמִים וּלְמָגִנִּים, וּלְכֹל, כְּלֵי חֶמְדָּה.	27 And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour; and he provided him treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of goodly vessels;
כח  וּמִסְכְּנוֹת--לִתְבוּאַת דָּגָן, וְתִירוֹשׁ וְיִצְהָר; וְאֻרָוֺת לְכָל-בְּהֵמָה וּבְהֵמָה, וַעֲדָרִים לָאֲוֵרֹת.	28 store-houses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and flocks in folds.
כט  וְעָרִים עָשָׂה לוֹ, וּמִקְנֵה-צֹאן וּבָקָר לָרֹב:  כִּי נָתַן-לוֹ אֱלֹהִים, רְכוּשׁ רַב מְאֹד.	29 Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance; for God had given him very much substance.
ל  וְהוּא יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, סָתַם אֶת-מוֹצָא מֵימֵי גִיחוֹן הָעֶלְיוֹן, וַיַּישְּׁרֵם לְמַטָּה-מַּעְרָבָה, לְעִיר דָּוִיד; וַיַּצְלַח יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, בְּכָל-מַעֲשֵׂהוּ.	30 This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper spring of the waters of Gihon, and brought them straight down on the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.
לא  וְכֵן בִּמְלִיצֵי שָׂרֵי בָבֶל, הַמְשַׁלְּחִים עָלָיו לִדְרֹשׁ הַמּוֹפֵת אֲשֶׁר הָיָה בָאָרֶץ, עֲזָבוֹ, הָאֱלֹהִים--לְנַסּוֹתוֹ, לָדַעַת כָּל-בִּלְבָבוֹ.	31 Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that He might know all that was in his heart.
לב  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, וַחֲסָדָיו--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, בַּחֲזוֹן יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ הַנָּבִיא, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי-יְהוּדָה, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	32 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his good deeds, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, and in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
לג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְּמַעֲלֵה קִבְרֵי בְנֵי-דָוִיד, וְכָבוֹד עָשׂוּ-לוֹ בְמוֹתוֹ, כָּל-יְהוּדָה וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַיִּמְלֹךְ מְנַשֶּׁה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	33 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the ascent of the sepulchres of the sons of David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead. {P}
א  בֶּן-שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מְנַשֶּׁה בְמָלְכוֹ; וַחֲמִשִּׁים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign; and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem.
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  כְּתוֹעֲבוֹת, הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, after the abominations of the nations, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
ג  וַיָּשָׁב, וַיִּבֶן אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת, אֲשֶׁר נִתַּץ, יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ אָבִיו; וַיָּקֶם מִזְבְּחוֹת לַבְּעָלִים, וַיַּעַשׂ אֲשֵׁרוֹת, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַיַּעֲבֹד אֹתָם.	3 For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down; and he reared up altars for the Baalim, and made Asheroth, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.
ד  וּבָנָה מִזְבְּחוֹת, בְּבֵית יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם יִהְיֶה-שְּׁמִי לְעוֹלָם.	4 And he built altars in the house of the LORD, whereof the LORD said: 'In Jerusalem shall My name be for ever.'
ה  וַיִּבֶן מִזְבְּחוֹת, לְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמָיִם, בִּשְׁתֵּי, חַצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה.	5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.
ו  וְהוּא הֶעֱבִיר אֶת-בָּנָיו בָּאֵשׁ, בְּגֵי בֶן-הִנֹּם, וְעוֹנֵן וְנִחֵשׁ וְכִשֵּׁף, וְעָשָׂה אוֹב וְיִדְּעוֹנִי:  הִרְבָּה, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--לְהַכְעִיסוֹ.	6 He also made his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom; and he practised soothsaying, and used enchantments, and practised sorcery, and appointed them that divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit; he wrought much evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke Him.
ז  וַיָּשֶׂם, אֶת-פֶּסֶל הַסֶּמֶל אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה--בְּבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר אֱלֹהִים אֶל-דָּוִיד וְאֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ, בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתִּי מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָשִׂים אֶת-שְׁמִי לְעֵילוֹם.	7 And he set the graven image of the idol, which he had made, in the house of God, of which God said to David and to Solomon his son: 'In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will I put My name for ever;
ח  וְלֹא אֹסִיף, לְהָסִיר אֶת-רֶגֶל יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעַל הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱמַדְתִּי לַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם:  רַק אִם-יִשְׁמְרוּ לַעֲשׂוֹת, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִים, לְכָל-הַתּוֹרָה וְהַחֻקִּים וְהַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	8 neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from off the land which I have appointed for your fathers; if only they will observe to do all that I have commanded them, even all the law and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses.'
ט  וַיֶּתַע מְנַשֶּׁה, אֶת-יְהוּדָה וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  לַעֲשׂוֹת רָע--מִן-הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁמִיד יְהוָה מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	9 And Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, so that they did evil more than did the nations, whom the LORD destroyed before the children of Israel. {P}
י  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מְנַשֶּׁה וְאֶל-עַמּוֹ, וְלֹא הִקְשִׁיבוּ.	10 And the LORD spoke to Manasseh, and to his people; but they gave no heed.
יא  וַיָּבֵא יְהוָה עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַצָּבָא אֲשֶׁר לְמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אֶת-מְנַשֶּׁה, בַּחֹחִים; וַיַּאַסְרֻהוּ, בַּנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם, וַיּוֹלִיכֻהוּ, בָּבֶלָה.	11 Wherefore the LORD brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh with hooks, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.
יב  וּכְהָצֵר לוֹ--חִלָּה, אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו; וַיִּכָּנַע מְאֹד, מִלִּפְנֵי אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתָיו.	12 And when he was in distress, he besought the LORD his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers.
יג  וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל אֵלָיו, וַיֵּעָתֶר לוֹ וַיִּשְׁמַע תְּחִנָּתוֹ, וַיְשִׁיבֵהוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לְמַלְכוּתוֹ; וַיֵּדַע מְנַשֶּׁה, כִּי יְהוָה הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים.	13 And he prayed unto Him; and He was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him back to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD He was God.
יד  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן בָּנָה חוֹמָה חִיצוֹנָה לְעִיר-דָּוִיד מַעְרָבָה לְגִיחוֹן בַּנַּחַל וְלָבוֹא בְשַׁעַר הַדָּגִים, וְסָבַב לָעֹפֶל, וַיַּגְבִּיהֶהָ, מְאֹד; וַיָּשֶׂם שָׂרֵי-חַיִל בְּכָל-הֶעָרִים הַבְּצֻרוֹת, בִּיהוּדָה.	14 Now after this he built an outer wall to the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entrance at the fish gate; and he compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height; and he put captains of the army in all the fortified cities of Judah.
טו  וַיָּסַר אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הַנֵּכָר וְאֶת-הַסֶּמֶל, מִבֵּית יְהוָה, וְכָל-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה בְּהַר בֵּית-יְהוָה, וּבִירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ, חוּצָה לָעִיר.	15 And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the LORD, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.
טז  ויכן (וַיִּבֶן), אֶת-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, וַיִּזְבַּח עָלָיו, זִבְחֵי שְׁלָמִים וְתוֹדָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, לִיהוּדָה, לַעֲבוֹד, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	16 And he built up the altar of the LORD, and offered thereon sacrifices of peace-offerings and of thanksgiving, and commanded Judah to serve the LORD, the God of Israel.
יז  אֲבָל עוֹד הָעָם, זֹבְחִים בַּבָּמוֹת:  רַק, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.	17 Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, but only unto the LORD their God.
יח  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, וּתְפִלָּתוֹ אֶל-אֱלֹהָיו, וְדִבְרֵי הַחֹזִים, הַמְדַבְּרִים אֵלָיו בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--הִנָּם, עַל-דִּבְרֵי מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	18 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God, and the words of the seers that spoke to him in the name of the LORD, the God of Israel, behold, they are written among the acts of the kings of Israel.
יט  וּתְפִלָּתוֹ וְהֵעָתֶר-לוֹ, וְכָל-חַטָּאתוֹ וּמַעְלוֹ, וְהַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה בָהֶם בָּמוֹת וְהֶעֱמִיד הָאֲשֵׁרִים וְהַפְּסִלִים, לִפְנֵי הִכָּנְעוֹ--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל דִּבְרֵי חוֹזָי.	19 His prayer also, and how [God] was entreated of him, and all his sin and his transgression, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up the Asherim and the graven images, before he humbled himself; behold, they are written in the history of the seers.
כ  וַיִּשְׁכַּב מְנַשֶּׁה עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בֵּיתוֹ; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אָמוֹן בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	20 So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house; and Amon his son reigned in his stead. {P}
כא  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, אָמוֹן בְּמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	21 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem.
כב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה מְנַשֶּׁה אָבִיו; וּלְכָל-הַפְּסִילִים, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה מְנַשֶּׁה אָבִיו--זִבַּח אָמוֹן, וַיַּעַבְדֵם.	22 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did Manasseh his father; and Amon sacrificed unto all the graven images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them.
כג  וְלֹא נִכְנַע מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, כְּהִכָּנַע מְנַשֶּׁה אָבִיו:  כִּי הוּא אָמוֹן, הִרְבָּה אַשְׁמָה.	23 And he humbled not himself before the LORD, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but this same Amon became guilty more and more.
כד  וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ עָלָיו עֲבָדָיו, וַיְמִיתֻהוּ בְּבֵיתוֹ.	24 And his servants conspired against him, and put him to death in his own house.
כה  וַיַּכּוּ, עַם-הָאָרֶץ, אֵת כָּל-הַקֹּשְׁרִים, עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אָמוֹן; וַיַּמְלִיכוּ עַם-הָאָרֶץ אֶת-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	25 But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead. {P}
א  בֶּן-שְׁמוֹנֶה שָׁנִים, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign; and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem.
ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדַרְכֵי דָּוִיד אָבִיו, וְלֹא-סָר, יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול.	2 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left.
ג  וּבִשְׁמוֹנֶה שָׁנִים לְמָלְכוֹ, וְהוּא עוֹדֶנּוּ נַעַר, הֵחֵל, לִדְרוֹשׁ לֵאלֹהֵי דָּוִיד אָבִיו; וּבִשְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, הֵחֵל לְטַהֵר אֶת-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, מִן-הַבָּמוֹת וְהָאֲשֵׁרִים, וְהַפְּסִלִים וְהַמַּסֵּכוֹת.	3 For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the Asherim, and the graven images, and the molten images.
ד  וַיְנַתְּצוּ לְפָנָיו, אֵת מִזְבְּחוֹת הַבְּעָלִים, וְהַחַמָּנִים אֲשֶׁר-לְמַעְלָה מֵעֲלֵיהֶם, גִּדֵּעַ; וְהָאֲשֵׁרִים וְהַפְּסִלִים וְהַמַּסֵּכוֹת, שִׁבַּר וְהֵדַק, וַיִּזְרֹק עַל-פְּנֵי הַקְּבָרִים, הַזֹּבְחִים לָהֶם.	4 And they broke down the altars of the Baalim in his presence; and the sun-images, that were on high above them, he hewed down; and the Asherim, and the graven images, and the molten images, he broke in pieces, and made dust of them, and strewed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.
ה  וְעַצְמוֹת, כֹּהֲנִים, שָׂרַף, עַל-מזבחותים (מִזְבְּחוֹתָם); וַיְטַהֵר אֶת-יְהוּדָה, וְאֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	5 And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem.
ו  וּבְעָרֵי מְנַשֶּׁה וְאֶפְרַיִם וְשִׁמְעוֹן, וְעַד-נַפְתָּלִי, בחר בתיהם (בְּחַרְבֹתֵיהֶם), סָבִיב.	6 And so did he in the cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their axes round about.
ז  וַיְנַתֵּץ אֶת-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת, וְאֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרִים וְהַפְּסִלִים כִּתַּת לְהֵדַק, וְכָל-הַחַמָּנִים גִּדַּע, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּשָׁב, לִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	7 And he broke down the altars, and beat the Asherim and the graven images into powder, and hewed down all the sun-images throughout all the land of Israel, and returned to Jerusalem. {P}
ח  וּבִשְׁנַת שְׁמוֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה לְמָלְכוֹ, לְטַהֵר הָאָרֶץ וְהַבָּיִת--שָׁלַח אֶת-שָׁפָן בֶּן-אֲצַלְיָהוּ וְאֶת-מַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ שַׂר-הָעִיר, וְאֵת יוֹאָח בֶּן-יוֹאָחָז הַמַּזְכִּיר, לְחַזֵּק, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו.	8 Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God.
ט  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל, וַיִּתְּנוּ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף הַמּוּבָא בֵית-אֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר אָסְפוּ-הַלְוִיִּם שֹׁמְרֵי הַסַּף מִיַּד מְנַשֶּׁה וְאֶפְרַיִם וּמִכֹּל שְׁאֵרִית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִכָּל-יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן; וישבי (וַיָּשֻׁבוּ), יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	9 And they came to Hilkiah the high priest, and delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites, the keepers of the door, had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin, and they returned to Jerusalem.
י  וַיִּתְּנוּ, עַל-יַד עֹשֵׂה הַמְּלָאכָה, הַמֻּפְקָדִים, בְּבֵית יְהוָה; וַיִּתְּנוּ אֹתוֹ עוֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר עֹשִׂים בְּבֵית יְהוָה, לִבְדּוֹק וּלְחַזֵּק, הַבָּיִת.	10 And they delivered it into the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of the house of the LORD; and the workmen that wrought in the house of the LORD gave it to mend and repair the house;
יא  וַיִּתְּנוּ, לֶחָרָשִׁים וְלַבֹּנִים, לִקְנוֹת אַבְנֵי מַחְצֵב, וְעֵצִים לַמְחַבְּרוֹת; וּלְקָרוֹת, אֶת-הַבָּתִּים, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁחִיתוּ, מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.  {ס}	11 even to the carpenters and to the builders gave they it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to make beams for the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed. {S}
יב  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים עֹשִׂים בֶּאֱמוּנָה בַּמְּלָאכָה, וַעֲלֵיהֶם מֻפְקָדִים יַחַת וְעֹבַדְיָהוּ הַלְוִיִּם מִן-בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, וּזְכַרְיָה וּמְשֻׁלָּם מִן-בְּנֵי הַקְּהָתִים, לְנַצֵּחַ; וְהַלְוִיִּם--כָּל-מֵבִין, בִּכְלֵי-שִׁיר.	12 And the men did the work faithfully; and the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to preside over it; and other of the Levites, all that had skill with instruments of music.
יג  וְעַל הַסַּבָּלִים, וּמְנַצְּחִים לְכֹל עֹשֵׂה מְלָאכָה, לַעֲבוֹדָה, וַעֲבוֹדָה; וּמֵהַלְוִיִּם, סוֹפְרִים וְשֹׁטְרִים וְשׁוֹעֲרִים.	13 Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and presided over all that did the work in every manner of service; and of the Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.
יד  וּבְהוֹצִיאָם אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף, הַמּוּבָא בֵּית יְהוָה--מָצָא חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-סֵפֶר תּוֹרַת-יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	14 And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found the book of the Law of the LORD given by Moses.
טו  וַיַּעַן חִלְקִיָּהוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-שָׁפָן הַסּוֹפֵר, סֵפֶר הַתּוֹרָה מָצָאתִי, בְּבֵית יְהוָה; וַיִּתֵּן חִלְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר, אֶל-שָׁפָן.	15 and Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe: 'I have found the book of the Law in the house of the LORD.' And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.
טז  וַיָּבֵא שָׁפָן אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיָּשֶׁב עוֹד אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּבָר לֵאמֹר:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-נִתַּן בְּיַד-עֲבָדֶיךָ, הֵם עֹשִׂים.	16 And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and moreover brought back word unto the king, saying: 'All that was committed to thy servants, they do it.
יז  וַיַּתִּיכוּ, אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף הַנִּמְצָא בְּבֵית-יְהוָה; וַיִּתְּנוּהוּ, עַל-יַד הַמֻּפְקָדִים, וְעַל-יַד, עוֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה.	17 And they have poured out the money that was found in the house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers, and into the hand of the workmen.'
יח  וַיַּגֵּד שָׁפָן הַסּוֹפֵר, לַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר--סֵפֶר נָתַן לִי, חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן; וַיִּקְרָא-בוֹ שָׁפָן, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	18 And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying: 'Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a book.' And Shaphan read therein before the king.
יט  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת דִּבְרֵי הַתּוֹרָה--וַיִּקְרַע, אֶת-בְּגָדָיו.	19 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the Law, that he rent his clothes.
כ  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-חִלְקִיָּהוּ וְאֶת-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן וְאֶת-עַבְדּוֹן בֶּן-מִיכָה וְאֵת שָׁפָן הַסּוֹפֵר, וְאֵת עֲשָׂיָה עֶבֶד-הַמֶּלֶךְ--לֵאמֹר.	20 And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's servant, saying:
כא  לְכוּ דִרְשׁוּ אֶת-יְהוָה בַּעֲדִי, וּבְעַד הַנִּשְׁאָר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל וּבִיהוּדָה, עַל-דִּבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר, אֲשֶׁר נִמְצָא:  כִּי-גְדוֹלָה חֲמַת-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר נִתְּכָה בָנוּ, עַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמְרוּ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת כְּכָל-הַכָּתוּב עַל-הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה.	21 'Go ye, inquire of the LORD for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found; for great is the wrath of the LORD that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the LORD, to do according unto all that is written in this book.'
כב  וַיֵּלֶךְ חִלְקִיָּהוּ וַאֲשֶׁר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-חֻלְדָּה הַנְּבִיאָה אֵשֶׁת שַׁלֻּם בֶּן-תוקהת (תָּקְהַת) בֶּן-חַסְרָה שׁוֹמֵר הַבְּגָדִים, וְהִיא יוֹשֶׁבֶת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, בַּמִּשְׁנֶה; וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֵלֶיהָ, כָּזֹאת.	22 So Hilkiah, and they whom the king [had commanded], went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe--now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter--and they spoke to her to that effect.
כג  וַתֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אִמְרוּ לָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח אֶתְכֶם אֵלָי.  {ס}	23 And she said unto them: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Tell ye the man that sent you unto me: {S}
כד  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא רָעָה עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה וְעַל-יוֹשְׁבָיו:  אֵת כָּל-הָאָלוֹת, הַכְּתוּבוֹת עַל-הַסֵּפֶר, אֲשֶׁר קָרְאוּ, לִפְנֵי מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	24 Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah;
כה  תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר עֲזָבוּנִי, ויקטירו (וַיְקַטְּרוּ) לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--לְמַעַן הַכְעִיסֵנִי, בְּכֹל מַעֲשֵׂי יְדֵיהֶם; וְתִתַּךְ חֲמָתִי בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וְלֹא תִכְבֶּה.	25 because they have forsaken Me, and have offered unto other gods, that they might provoke Me with all the works of their hands; therefore is My wrath poured out upon this place, and it shall not be quenched.
כו  וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, הַשֹּׁלֵחַ אֶתְכֶם לִדְרוֹשׁ בַּיהוָה--כֹּה תֹאמְרוּ, אֵלָיו:  {ס}  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁמָעְתָּ.	26 But unto the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD, thus shall ye say to him: {S} Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: As touching the words which thou hast heard,
כז  יַעַן רַךְ-לְבָבְךָ וַתִּכָּנַע מִלִּפְנֵי אֱלֹהִים, בְּשָׁמְעֲךָ אֶת-דְּבָרָיו עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה וְעַל-יֹשְׁבָיו, וַתִּכָּנַע לְפָנַי, וַתִּקְרַע אֶת-בְּגָדֶיךָ וַתֵּבְךְּ לְפָנָי; וְגַם-אֲנִי שָׁמַעְתִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	27 because thy heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest His words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and hast humbled thyself before Me, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before Me; I also have heard thee, saith the LORD.
כח  הִנְנִי אֹסִפְךָ אֶל-אֲבֹתֶיךָ, וְנֶאֱסַפְתָּ אֶל-קִבְרוֹתֶיךָ בְּשָׁלוֹם, וְלֹא-תִרְאֶינָה עֵינֶיךָ, בְּכֹל הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מֵבִיא עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה וְעַל-יֹשְׁבָיו; וַיָּשִׁיבוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, דָּבָר.  {ס}	28 Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof.' And they brought back word unto the king. {S}
כט  וַיִּשְׁלַח, הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֶּאֱסֹף, אֶת-כָּל-זִקְנֵי יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם.	29 Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
ל  וַיַּעַל הַמֶּלֶךְ בֵּית-יְהוָה וְכָל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, וְכָל-הָעָם, מִגָּדוֹל וְעַד-קָטָן; וַיִּקְרָא בְאָזְנֵיהֶם, אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי סֵפֶר הַבְּרִית, הַנִּמְצָא, בֵּית יְהוָה.	30 And the king went up to the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, both great and small; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of the LORD.
לא  וַיַּעֲמֹד הַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-עָמְדוֹ, וַיִּכְרֹת אֶת-הַבְּרִית לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לָלֶכֶת אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה וְלִשְׁמוֹר אֶת-מִצְוֺתָיו וְעֵדְוֺתָיו וְחֻקָּיו, בְּכָל-לְבָבוֹ וּבְכָל-נַפְשׁוֹ--לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית, הַכְּתוּבִים עַל-הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה.	31 And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep His commandments, and His testimonies, and His statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant that were written in this book.
לב  וַיַּעֲמֵד, אֵת כָּל-הַנִּמְצָא בִירוּשָׁלִַם וּבִנְיָמִן; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ יוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, כִּבְרִית אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.	32 And he caused all that were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
לג  וַיָּסַר יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַתֹּעֵבוֹת, מִכָּל-הָאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעֲבֵד אֵת כָּל-הַנִּמְצָא בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲבוֹד אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם:  כָּל-יָמָיו--לֹא סָרוּ, מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.  {ס}	33 And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were found in Israel to serve, even to serve the LORD their God. All his days they departed not from following the LORD, the God of their fathers. {S}
א  וַיַּעַשׂ יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בִירוּשָׁלִַם פֶּסַח, לַיהוָה; וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ הַפֶּסַח, בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן.	1 And Josiah kept a passover unto the LORD in Jerusalem; and they killed the passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the first month.
ב  וַיַּעֲמֵד הַכֹּהֲנִים, עַל-מִשְׁמְרוֹתָם; וַיְחַזְּקֵם, לַעֲבוֹדַת בֵּית יְהוָה.  {ס}	2 And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the service of the house of the LORD. {S}
ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לַלְוִיִּם המבונים (הַמְּבִינִים) לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַקְּדוֹשִׁים לַיהוָה, תְּנוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן-הַקֹּדֶשׁ בַּבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה בֶן-דָּוִיד מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֵין-לָכֶם מַשָּׂא, בַּכָּתֵף; עַתָּה, עִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְאֵת, עַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 And he said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, that were holy unto the LORD: 'Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build; there shall no more be a burden upon your shoulders; now serve the LORD your God, and His people Israel.
ד  והכונו (וְהָכִינוּ) לְבֵית-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, כְּמַחְלְקוֹתֵיכֶם--בִּכְתָב, דָּוִיד מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבְמִכְתַּב, שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ.	4 And prepare ye after your fathers' houses by your courses, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.
ה  וְעִמְדוּ בַקֹּדֶשׁ, לִפְלוּגֹּת בֵּית הָאָבוֹת, לַאֲחֵיכֶם, בְּנֵי הָעָם--וַחֲלֻקַּת בֵּית-אָב, לַלְוִיִּם.	5 And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the fathers' houses of your brethren the children of the people, and [let there be for each] a portion of a father's house of the Levites.
ו  וְשַׁחֲטוּ, הַפָּסַח; וְהִתְקַדְּשׁוּ וְהָכִינוּ לַאֲחֵיכֶם, לַעֲשׂוֹת כִּדְבַר-יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	6 And kill the passover lamb, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare for your brethren, to do according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.' {P}
ז  וַיָּרֶם יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ לִבְנֵי הָעָם צֹאן כְּבָשִׂים וּבְנֵי-עִזִּים, הַכֹּל לַפְּסָחִים, לְכָל-הַנִּמְצָא לְמִסְפַּר שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, וּבָקָר שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים:  אֵלֶּה, מֵרְכוּשׁ הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}	7 And Josiah gave to the children of the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all of them for the passover-offerings, unto all that were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks; these were of the king's substance. {S}
ח  וְשָׂרָיו לִנְדָבָה לָעָם, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם--הֵרִימוּ:  חִלְקִיָּה וּזְכַרְיָהוּ וִיחִיאֵל, נְגִידֵי בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, לַכֹּהֲנִים נָתְנוּ לַפְּסָחִים אַלְפַּיִם וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, וּבָקָר שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת.	8 And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, the rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover-offerings two thousand and six hundred [small cattle], and three hundred oxen.
ט  וכונניהו (וְכָנַנְיָהוּ) וּשְׁמַעְיָהוּ וּנְתַנְאֵל אֶחָיו, וַחֲשַׁבְיָהוּ וִיעִיאֵל וְיוֹזָבָד--שָׂרֵי הַלְוִיִּם:  הֵרִימוּ לַלְוִיִּם לַפְּסָחִים חֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וּבָקָר חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for the passover-offerings five thousand [small cattle], and five hundred oxen.
י  וַתִּכּוֹן, הָעֲבוֹדָה; וַיַּעַמְדוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים עַל-עָמְדָם וְהַלְוִיִּם עַל-מַחְלְקוֹתָם, כְּמִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ.	10 So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites by their courses, according to the king's commandment.
יא  וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ, הַפָּסַח; וַיִּזְרְקוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים מִיָּדָם, וְהַלְוִיִּם מַפְשִׁיטִים.	11 And they killed the passover lamb, and the priests dashed [the blood, which they received] of their hand, and the Levites flayed them.
יב  וַיָּסִירוּ הָעֹלָה לְתִתָּם לְמִפְלַגּוֹת לְבֵית-אָבוֹת, לִבְנֵי הָעָם, לְהַקְרִיב לַיהוָה, כַּכָּתוּב בְּסֵפֶר מֹשֶׁה; וְכֵן, לַבָּקָר.	12 And they removed the portions that were to be burnt, that they might give them to the divisions of the fathers' houses of the children of the people, to present unto the LORD, as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they with the oxen.
יג  וַיְבַשְּׁלוּ הַפֶּסַח בָּאֵשׁ, כַּמִּשְׁפָּט; וְהַקֳּדָשִׁים בִּשְּׁלוּ, בַּסִּירוֹת וּבַדְּוָדִים וּבַצֵּלָחוֹת, וַיָּרִיצוּ, לְכָל-בְּנֵי הָעָם.	13 And they roasted the passover with fire according to the ordinance; and the holy offerings sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and carried them quickly to all the children of the people.
יד  וְאַחַר, הֵכִינוּ לָהֶם וְלַכֹּהֲנִים--כִּי הַכֹּהֲנִים בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, בְּהַעֲלוֹת הָעוֹלָה וְהַחֲלָבִים עַד-לָיְלָה; וְהַלְוִיִּם הֵכִינוּ לָהֶם, וְלַכֹּהֲנִים בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן.	14 And afterward they prepared for themselves, and for the priests; because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering the portions that were to be burnt and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.
טו  וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים בְּנֵי-אָסָף עַל-מַעֲמָדָם, כְּמִצְוַת דָּוִיד וְאָסָף וְהֵימָן וִידֻתוּן חוֹזֵה הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְהַשֹּׁעֲרִים, לְשַׁעַר וָשָׁעַר:  אֵין לָהֶם, לָסוּר מֵעַל עֲבֹדָתָם--כִּי-אֲחֵיהֶם הַלְוִיִּם, הֵכִינוּ לָהֶם.	15 And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer; and the porters were at every gate; they needed not to depart from their service, for their brethren the Levites prepared for them.
טז  וַתִּכּוֹן כָּל-עֲבוֹדַת יְהוָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, לַעֲשׂוֹת הַפֶּסַח, וְהַעֲלוֹת עֹלוֹת, עַל מִזְבַּח יְהוָה--כְּמִצְוַת, הַמֶּלֶךְ יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ.	16 So all the service of the LORD was prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and to offer burnt-offerings upon the altar of the LORD, according to the commandment of king Josiah.
יז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַנִּמְצְאִים אֶת-הַפֶּסַח, בָּעֵת הַהִיא, וְאֶת-חַג הַמַּצּוֹת, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.	17 And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.
יח  וְלֹא-נַעֲשָׂה פֶסַח כָּמֹהוּ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, מִימֵי שְׁמוּאֵל הַנָּבִיא; וְכָל-מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא-עָשׂוּ כַּפֶּסַח אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וְכָל-יְהוּדָה, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל הַנִּמְצָא, וְיוֹשְׁבֵי, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	18 And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did any of the kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. {S}
יט  בִּשְׁמוֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לְמַלְכוּת יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ--נַעֲשָׂה, הַפֶּסַח הַזֶּה.	19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover kept.
כ  אַחֲרֵי כָל-זֹאת, אֲשֶׁר הֵכִין יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ אֶת-הַבַּיִת, עָלָה נְכוֹ מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם לְהִלָּחֵם בְּכַרְכְּמִישׁ, עַל-פְּרָת; וַיֵּצֵא לִקְרָאתוֹ, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ.	20 After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt went up to fight against Carchemish by the Euphrates; and Josiah went out against him.
כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלָיו מַלְאָכִים לֵאמֹר מַה-לִּי וָלָךְ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, לֹא-עָלֶיךָ אַתָּה הַיּוֹם כִּי אֶל-בֵּית מִלְחַמְתִּי, וֵאלֹהִים, אָמַר לְבַהֲלֵנִי:  חֲדַל-לְךָ מֵאֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר-עִמִּי, וְאַל-יַשְׁחִיתֶךָ.	21 But he sent ambassadors to him, saying: 'What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war; and God hath given command to speed me; forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that He destroy thee not.'
כב  וְלֹא-הֵסֵב יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ פָנָיו מִמֶּנּוּ, כִּי לְהִלָּחֵם-בּוֹ הִתְחַפֵּשׂ, וְלֹא שָׁמַע אֶל-דִּבְרֵי נְכוֹ, מִפִּי אֱלֹהִים; וַיָּבֹא, לְהִלָּחֵם בְּבִקְעַת מְגִדּוֹ.	22 Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Neco, from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo.
כג  וַיֹּרוּ, הַיֹּרִים, לַמֶּלֶךְ, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ לַעֲבָדָיו הַעֲבִירוּנִי, כִּי הָחֳלֵיתִי מְאֹד.	23 And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants: 'Have me away; for I am sore wounded.'
כד  וַיַּעֲבִירֻהוּ עֲבָדָיו מִן-הַמֶּרְכָּבָה, וַיַּרְכִּיבֻהוּ עַל רֶכֶב הַמִּשְׁנֶה אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, וַיּוֹלִיכֻהוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיָּמָת וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּקִבְרוֹת אֲבֹתָיו; וְכָל-יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִַם, מִתְאַבְּלִים, עַל-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ.  {פ}	24 So his servants took him out of the chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had, and brought him to Jerusalem; and he died, and was buried in the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. {P}
כה  וַיְקוֹנֵן יִרְמְיָהוּ, עַל-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הַשָּׁרִים וְהַשָּׁרוֹת בְּקִינוֹתֵיהֶם עַל-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ עַד-הַיּוֹם, וַיִּתְּנוּם לְחֹק עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-הַקִּינוֹת.	25 And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, unto this day; and they made them an ordinance in Israel; and, behold, they are written in the lamentations.
כו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, וַחֲסָדָיו--כַּכָּתוּב, בְּתוֹרַת יְהוָה.	26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his good deeds, according to that which is written in the Law of the LORD,
כז  וּדְבָרָיו, הָרִאשֹׁנִים וְהָאַחֲרֹנִים--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה.	27 and his acts, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
א  וַיִּקְחוּ, עַם-הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-יְהוֹאָחָז, בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ; וַיַּמְלִיכֻהוּ תַחַת-אָבִיו, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	1 Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem.
ב  בֶּן-שָׁלוֹשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, יוֹאָחָז בְּמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	2 Joahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
ג  וַיְסִירֵהוּ מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּעֲנֹשׁ, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, מֵאָה כִכַּר-כֶּסֶף, וְכִכַּר זָהָב.	3 And the king of Egypt deposed him at Jerusalem, and fined the land a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
ד  וַיַּמְלֵךְ מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם אֶת-אֶלְיָקִים אָחִיו, עַל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּסֵּב אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, יְהוֹיָקִים; וְאֶת-יוֹאָחָז אָחִיו לָקַח נְכוֹ, וַיְבִיאֵהוּ מִצְרָיְמָה.  {פ}	4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. And Neco took Joahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt. {P}
ה  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, יְהוֹיָקִים בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו.	5 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God.
ו  עָלָיו עָלָה, נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל; וַיַּאַסְרֵהוּ, בַּנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם, לְהֹלִיכוֹ, בָּבֶלָה.	6 Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.
ז  וּמִכְּלֵי בֵּית יְהוָה, הֵבִיא נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר לְבָבֶל; וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּהֵיכָלוֹ, בְּבָבֶל.	7 Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the LORD to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.
ח  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹיָקִים וְתֹעֲבֹתָיו אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, וְהַנִּמְצָא עָלָיו--הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים עַל-סֵפֶר מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וִיהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹיָכִין בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}	8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah; and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead. {P}
ט  בֶּן-שְׁמוֹנֶה שָׁנִים, יְהוֹיָכִין בְּמָלְכוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים וַעֲשֶׂרֶת יָמִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.	9 Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem; and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.
י  וְלִתְשׁוּבַת הַשָּׁנָה, שָׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר, וַיְבִאֵהוּ בָבֶלָה, עִם-כְּלֵי חֶמְדַּת בֵּית-יְהוָה; וַיַּמְלֵךְ אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ אָחִיו, עַל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	10 And at the return of the year king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the LORD, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem. {P}
יא  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, צִדְקִיָּהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ; וְאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	11 Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem;
יב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו:  לֹא נִכְנַע, מִלִּפְנֵי יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא--מִפִּי יְהוָה.	12 and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God; he humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the LORD.
יג  וְגַם בַּמֶּלֶךְ נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר, מָרָד, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁבִּיעוֹ, בֵּאלֹהִים; וַיֶּקֶשׁ אֶת-עָרְפּוֹ, וַיְאַמֵּץ אֶת-לְבָבוֹ, מִשּׁוּב, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	13 And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God; but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the LORD, the God of Israel.
יד  גַּם כָּל-שָׂרֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהָעָם, הִרְבּוּ למעול- (לִמְעָל-) מַעַל, כְּכֹל, תֹּעֲבוֹת הַגּוֹיִם; וַיְטַמְּאוּ אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הִקְדִּישׁ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	14 Moreover all the chiefs of the priests, and the people, transgressed very greatly after all the abominations of the nations; and they polluted the house of the LORD which He had hallowed in Jerusalem.
טו  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם עֲלֵיהֶם, בְּיַד מַלְאָכָיו--הַשְׁכֵּם וְשָׁלוֹחַ:  כִּי-חָמַל עַל-עַמּוֹ, וְעַל-מְעוֹנוֹ.	15 And the LORD, the God of their fathers, sent to them by His messengers, sending betimes and often; because He had compassion on His people, and on His dwelling-place;
טז  וַיִּהְיוּ מַלְעִבִים, בְּמַלְאֲכֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, וּבוֹזִים דְּבָרָיו, וּמִתַּעְתְּעִים בִּנְבִאָיו:  עַד עֲלוֹת חֲמַת-יְהוָה, בְּעַמּוֹ--עַד-לְאֵין מַרְפֵּא.	16 but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised His words, and scoffed at His prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against His people, till there was no remedy.
יז  וַיַּעַל עֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-מֶלֶךְ כשדיים (כַּשְׂדִּים), וַיַּהֲרֹג בַּחוּרֵיהֶם בַּחֶרֶב בְּבֵית מִקְדָּשָׁם, וְלֹא חָמַל עַל-בָּחוּר וּבְתוּלָה, זָקֵן וְיָשֵׁשׁ:  הַכֹּל, נָתַן בְּיָדוֹ.	17 Therefore He brought upon them the king of the Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man or hoary-headed; He gave them all into his hand.
יח  וְכֹל כְּלֵי בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, הַגְּדֹלִים וְהַקְּטַנִּים, וְאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה, וְאֹצְרוֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ וְשָׂרָיו--הַכֹּל, הֵבִיא בָבֶל.	18 And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all these he brought to Babylon.
יט  וַיִּשְׂרְפוּ, אֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיְנַתְּצוּ, אֵת חוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְכָל-אַרְמְנוֹתֶיהָ שָׂרְפוּ בָאֵשׁ, וְכָל-כְּלֵי מַחֲמַדֶּיהָ לְהַשְׁחִית.	19 And they burnt the house of God, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.
כ  וַיֶּגֶל הַשְּׁאֵרִית מִן-הַחֶרֶב, אֶל-בָּבֶל; וַיִּהְיוּ-לוֹ וּלְבָנָיו לַעֲבָדִים, עַד-מְלֹךְ מַלְכוּת פָּרָס.	20 And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon; and they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia;
כא  לְמַלֹּאות דְּבַר-יְהוָה בְּפִי יִרְמְיָהוּ, עַד-רָצְתָה הָאָרֶץ אֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתֶיהָ:  כָּל-יְמֵי הָשַּׁמָּה שָׁבָתָה, לְמַלֹּאות שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה.  {ס}	21 to fulfil the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had been paid her sabbaths; for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years. {S}
כב  וּבִשְׁנַת אַחַת, לְכוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ פָּרַס, לִכְלוֹת דְּבַר-יְהוָה, בְּפִי יִרְמְיָהוּ--הֵעִיר יְהוָה, אֶת-רוּחַ כּוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ-פָּרַס, וַיַּעֲבֶר-קוֹל בְּכָל-מַלְכוּתוֹ, וְגַם-בְּמִכְתָּב לֵאמֹר.  {ס}	22 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying: {S}
כג  כֹּה-אָמַר כּוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ פָּרַס, כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ נָתַן לִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְהוּא-פָקַד עָלַי לִבְנוֹת-לוֹ בַיִת, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר בִּיהוּדָה:  מִי-בָכֶם מִכָּל-עַמּוֹ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו עִמּוֹ--וְיָעַל.  {ש}	23 'Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia: All the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD, the God of heaven, given me; and He hath charged me to build Him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whosoever there is among you of all His people--the LORD his God be with him--let him go up.' {P}
