1.1 א  וַיִּפְשַׁע מוֹאָב בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת אַחְאָב.    1 And Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.
1.2 ב  וַיִּפֹּל אֲחַזְיָה בְּעַד הַשְּׂבָכָה, בַּעֲלִיָּתוֹ אֲשֶׁר בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן--וַיָּחַל; וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם לְכוּ דִרְשׁוּ בְּבַעַל זְבוּב אֱלֹהֵי עֶקְרוֹן, אִם-אֶחְיֶה, מֵחֳלִי זֶה.  {ס}    2 And Ahaziah fell down through the lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria, and was sick; and he sent messengers, and said unto them: 'Go, inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover of this sickness.' {S}
1.3 ג  וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, דִּבֶּר אֶל-אֵלִיָּה הַתִּשְׁבִּי, קוּם עֲלֵה, לִקְרַאת מַלְאֲכֵי מֶלֶךְ-שֹׁמְרוֹן; וְדַבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם--הֲמִבְּלִי אֵין-אֱלֹהִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, אַתֶּם הֹלְכִים לִדְרֹשׁ בְּבַעַל זְבוּב אֱלֹהֵי עֶקְרוֹן.    3 But an angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite: 'Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them: Is it because there is no God in Israel, that ye go to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron?
1.4 ד  וְלָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, הַמִּטָּה אֲשֶׁר-עָלִיתָ שָּׁם לֹא-תֵרֵד מִמֶּנָּה, כִּי מוֹת תָּמוּת; וַיֵּלֶךְ, אֵלִיָּה.    4 Now therefore thus saith the LORD: Thou shalt not come down from the bed whither thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.' And Elijah departed.
1.5 ה  וַיָּשׁוּבוּ הַמַּלְאָכִים, אֵלָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, מַה-זֶּה שַׁבְתֶּם.    5 And the messengers returned unto him, and he said unto them: 'Why is it that ye are returned?'
1.6 ו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו אִישׁ עָלָה לִקְרָאתֵנוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֵינוּ לְכוּ שׁוּבוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח אֶתְכֶם, וְדִבַּרְתֶּם אֵלָיו כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הֲמִבְּלִי אֵין-אֱלֹהִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל אַתָּה שֹׁלֵחַ לִדְרֹשׁ בְּבַעַל זְבוּב אֱלֹהֵי עֶקְרוֹן; לָכֵן הַמִּטָּה אֲשֶׁר-עָלִיתָ שָּׁם, לֹא-תֵרֵד מִמֶּנָּה--כִּי-מוֹת תָּמוּת.    6 And they said unto him: 'There came up a man to meet us, and said unto us: Go, return unto the king that sent you, and say unto him: Thus saith the LORD: Is it because there is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from the bed whither thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.'
1.7 ז  וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם--מֶה מִשְׁפַּט הָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר עָלָה לִקְרַאתְכֶם; וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיכֶם, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.    7 And he said unto them: 'What manner of man was he that came up to meet you, and told you these words?'
1.8 ח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, אִישׁ בַּעַל שֵׂעָר, וְאֵזוֹר עוֹר, אָזוּר בְּמָתְנָיו; וַיֹּאמַר, אֵלִיָּה הַתִּשְׁבִּי הוּא.    8 And they answered him: 'He was a hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins.' And he said: 'It is Elijah the Tishbite.'
1.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלָיו שַׂר-חֲמִשִּׁים, וַחֲמִשָּׁיו; וַיַּעַל אֵלָיו, וְהִנֵּה יֹשֵׁב עַל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר, וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלָיו, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים הַמֶּלֶךְ דִּבֶּר רֵדָה.    9 Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he went up to him; and, behold, he sat on the top of the hill. And he spoke unto him: 'O man of God, the king hath said: Come down.'
1.10 י  וַיַּעֲנֶה אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיְדַבֵּר אֶל-שַׂר הַחֲמִשִּׁים, וְאִם-אִישׁ אֱלֹהִים אָנִי, תֵּרֶד אֵשׁ מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְתֹאכַל אֹתְךָ וְאֶת-חֲמִשֶּׁיךָ; וַתֵּרֶד אֵשׁ מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַתֹּאכַל אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-חֲמִשָּׁיו.    10 And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty: 'If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty.' And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
1.11 יא  וַיָּשָׁב וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלָיו, שַׂר-חֲמִשִּׁים אַחֵר--וַחֲמִשָּׁיו; וַיַּעַן, וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלָיו, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, כֹּה-אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ מְהֵרָה רֵדָה.    11 And again he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And he answered and said unto him: 'O man of God, thus hath the king said: Come down quickly.'
1.12 יב  וַיַּעַן אֵלִיָּה, וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם, אִם-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים אָנִי, תֵּרֶד אֵשׁ מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְתֹאכַל אֹתְךָ וְאֶת-חֲמִשֶּׁיךָ; וַתֵּרֶד אֵשׁ-אֱלֹהִים מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַתֹּאכַל אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-חֲמִשָּׁיו.    12 And Elijah answered and said unto them: 'If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty.' And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
1.13 יג  וַיָּשָׁב, וַיִּשְׁלַח שַׂר-חֲמִשִּׁים שְׁלִשִׁים--וַחֲמִשָּׁיו; וַיַּעַל וַיָּבֹא שַׂר-הַחֲמִשִּׁים הַשְּׁלִישִׁי וַיִּכְרַע עַל-בִּרְכָּיו לְנֶגֶד אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיִּתְחַנֵּן אֵלָיו וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלָיו, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, תִּיקַר-נָא נַפְשִׁי וְנֶפֶשׁ עֲבָדֶיךָ אֵלֶּה חֲמִשִּׁים בְּעֵינֶיךָ.    13 And again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him: 'O man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.
1.14 יד  הִנֵּה יָרְדָה אֵשׁ, מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַתֹּאכַל אֶת-שְׁנֵי שָׂרֵי הַחֲמִשִּׁים הָרִאשֹׁנִים, וְאֶת-חֲמִשֵּׁיהֶם; וְעַתָּה, תִּיקַר נַפְשִׁי בְּעֵינֶיךָ.  {ס}    14 Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and consumed the two former captains of fifty with their fifties; but now let my life be precious in thy sight' {S}
1.15 טו  וַיְדַבֵּר מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ, רֵד אוֹתוֹ, אַל-תִּירָא מִפָּנָיו; וַיָּקָם וַיֵּרֶד אוֹתוֹ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.    15 And the angel of the LORD said unto Elijah: 'Go down with him; be not afraid of him.' And he arose, and went down with him unto the king.
1.16 טז  וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלָיו כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַחְתָּ מַלְאָכִים לִדְרֹשׁ בְּבַעַל זְבוּב אֱלֹהֵי עֶקְרוֹן--הֲמִבְּלִי אֵין-אֱלֹהִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, לִדְרֹשׁ בִּדְבָרוֹ; לָכֵן הַמִּטָּה אֲשֶׁר-עָלִיתָ שָּׁם, לֹא-תֵרֵד מִמֶּנָּה--כִּי-מוֹת תָּמוּת.    16 And he said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD: Forasmuch as thou hast sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron, is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of His word? therefore thou shalt not come down from the bed whether thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.'
1.17 יז  וַיָּמָת כִּדְבַר יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֵלִיָּהוּ, וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹרָם תַּחְתָּיו,  {פ} בִּשְׁנַת שְׁתַּיִם, לִיהוֹרָם בֶּן-יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  כִּי לֹא-הָיָה לוֹ, בֵּן.  {ס}    17 So he died according to the word of the LORD which Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram began to reign in his stead {P} in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; because he had no son. {S}
1.18 יח  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אֲחַזְיָהוּ, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלוֹא-הֵמָּה כְתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    18 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? {P}
2.1 א  וַיְהִי, בְּהַעֲלוֹת יְהוָה אֶת-אֵלִיָּהוּ, בַּסְעָרָה, הַשָּׁמָיִם; וַיֵּלֶךְ אֵלִיָּהוּ וֶאֱלִישָׁע, מִן-הַגִּלְגָּל.    1 And it came to pass, when the LORD would take up Elijah by a whirlwind into heaven, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.
2.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלִיָּהוּ אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע שֵׁב-נָא פֹה, כִּי יְהוָה שְׁלָחַנִי עַד-בֵּית-אֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע, חַי-יְהוָה וְחֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ אִם-אֶעֶזְבֶךָּ; וַיֵּרְדוּ, בֵּית-אֵל.    2 And Elijah said unto Elisha: 'Tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me as far as Beth-el.' And Elisha said: 'As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' So they went down to Beth-el.--
2.3 ג  וַיֵּצְאוּ בְנֵי-הַנְּבִיאִים אֲשֶׁר-בֵּית-אֵל, אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, הֲיָדַעְתָּ כִּי הַיּוֹם יְהוָה לֹקֵחַ אֶת-אֲדֹנֶיךָ מֵעַל רֹאשֶׁךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר גַּם-אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי, הֶחֱשׁוּ.    3 And the sons of the prophets that were at Beth-el came forth to Elisha, and said unto him: 'Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy master from thy head to-day?' And he said: 'Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.'--
2.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אֵלִיָּהוּ אֱלִישָׁע שֵׁב-נָא פֹה, כִּי יְהוָה שְׁלָחַנִי יְרִיחוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר, חַי-יְהוָה וְחֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ אִם-אֶעֶזְבֶךָּ; וַיָּבֹאוּ, יְרִיחוֹ.    4 And Elijah said unto him: 'Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me to Jericho.' And he said: 'As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' So they came to Jericho.--
2.5 ה  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ בְנֵי-הַנְּבִיאִים אֲשֶׁר-בִּירִיחוֹ, אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, הֲיָדַעְתָּ כִּי הַיּוֹם יְהוָה לֹקֵחַ אֶת-אֲדֹנֶיךָ מֵעַל רֹאשֶׁךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר גַּם-אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי, הֶחֱשׁוּ.    5 And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came near to Elisha, and said unto him: 'Knowest thou that the LORD will take away thy master from thy head to-day?' And he answered: 'Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.'--
2.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אֵלִיָּהוּ שֵׁב-נָא פֹה, כִּי יְהוָה שְׁלָחַנִי הַיַּרְדֵּנָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, חַי-יְהוָה וְחֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ אִם-אֶעֶזְבֶךָּ; וַיֵּלְכוּ, שְׁנֵיהֶם.    6 And Elijah said unto him: 'Tarry here, I pray thee; for the LORD hath sent me to the Jordan.' And he said: 'As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' And they two went on.
2.7 ז  וַחֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ מִבְּנֵי הַנְּבִיאִים, הָלְכוּ, וַיַּעַמְדוּ מִנֶּגֶד, מֵרָחוֹק; וּשְׁנֵיהֶם, עָמְדוּ עַל-הַיַּרְדֵּן.    7 And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood over against them afar off; and they two stood by the Jordan.
2.8 ח  וַיִּקַּח אֵלִיָּהוּ אֶת-אַדַּרְתּוֹ וַיִּגְלֹם וַיַּכֶּה אֶת-הַמַּיִם, וַיֵּחָצוּ הֵנָּה וָהֵנָּה; וַיַּעַבְרוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם, בֶּחָרָבָה.    8 And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground.
2.9 ט  וַיְהִי כְעָבְרָם, וְאֵלִיָּהוּ אָמַר אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע שְׁאַל מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ, בְּטֶרֶם, אֶלָּקַח מֵעִמָּךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע, וִיהִי נָא פִּי-שְׁנַיִם בְּרוּחֲךָ אֵלָי.    9 And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha: 'Ask what I shall do for thee, before I am taken from thee.' And Elisha said: 'I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.'
2.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, הִקְשִׁיתָ לִשְׁאוֹל; אִם-תִּרְאֶה אֹתִי לֻקָּח מֵאִתָּךְ, יְהִי-לְךָ כֵן, וְאִם-אַיִן, לֹא יִהְיֶה.    10 And he said: 'Thou hast asked a hard thing; nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so.'
2.11 יא  וַיְהִי, הֵמָּה הֹלְכִים הָלוֹךְ וְדַבֵּר, וְהִנֵּה רֶכֶב-אֵשׁ וְסוּסֵי אֵשׁ, וַיַּפְרִדוּ בֵּין שְׁנֵיהֶם; וַיַּעַל, אֵלִיָּהוּ, בַּסְעָרָה, הַשָּׁמָיִם.    11 And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, which parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.
2.12 יב  וֶאֱלִישָׁע רֹאֶה, וְהוּא מְצַעֵק אָבִי אָבִי רֶכֶב יִשְׂרָאֵל וּפָרָשָׁיו, וְלֹא רָאָהוּ, עוֹד; וַיַּחֲזֵק, בִּבְגָדָיו, וַיִּקְרָעֵם, לִשְׁנַיִם קְרָעִים.    12 And Elisha saw it, and he cried: 'My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof!' And he saw him no more; and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.
2.13 יג  וַיָּרֶם אֶת-אַדֶּרֶת אֵלִיָּהוּ, אֲשֶׁר נָפְלָה מֵעָלָיו; וַיָּשָׁב וַיַּעֲמֹד, עַל-שְׂפַת הַיַּרְדֵּן.    13 He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of the Jordan.
2.14 יד  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-אַדֶּרֶת אֵלִיָּהוּ אֲשֶׁר-נָפְלָה מֵעָלָיו, וַיַּכֶּה אֶת-הַמַּיִם, וַיֹּאמַר, אַיֵּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ; אַף-הוּא וַיַּכֶּה אֶת-הַמַּיִם, וַיֵּחָצוּ הֵנָּה וָהֵנָּה, וַיַּעֲבֹר, אֱלִישָׁע.    14 And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said: 'Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah?' and when he also had smitten the waters, they were divided hither and thither; and Elisha went over.
2.15 טו  וַיִּרְאֻהוּ בְנֵי-הַנְּבִיאִים אֲשֶׁר-בִּירִיחוֹ, מִנֶּגֶד, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, נָחָה רוּחַ אֵלִיָּהוּ עַל-אֱלִישָׁע; וַיָּבֹאוּ, לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ-לוֹ, אָרְצָה.    15 And when the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho some way off saw him, they said: 'The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha.' And they came to meet him, and bowed down to the ground before him.
2.16 טז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו הִנֵּה-נָא יֵשׁ-אֶת-עֲבָדֶיךָ חֲמִשִּׁים אֲנָשִׁים בְּנֵי-חַיִל, יֵלְכוּ נָא וִיבַקְשׁוּ אֶת-אֲדֹנֶיךָ--פֶּן-נְשָׂאוֹ רוּחַ יְהוָה, וַיַּשְׁלִכֵהוּ בְּאַחַד הֶהָרִים אוֹ בְּאַחַת הגיאות (הַגֵּיאָיוֹת); וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא תִשְׁלָחוּ.    16 And they said unto him: 'Behold now, there are with thy servants fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master; lest peradventure the spirit of the LORD hath taken him up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley.' And he said: 'Ye shall not send.'
2.17 יז  וַיִּפְצְרוּ-בוֹ עַד-בֹּשׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר שְׁלָחוּ; וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ חֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ, וַיְבַקְשׁוּ שְׁלֹשָׁה-יָמִים וְלֹא מְצָאֻהוּ.    17 And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said: 'Send.' They sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him not.
2.18 יח  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ אֵלָיו, וְהוּא יֹשֵׁב בִּירִיחוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, הֲלֹא-אָמַרְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם אַל-תֵּלֵכוּ.  {ס}    18 And they came back to him, while he tarried at Jericho; and he said unto them: 'Did I not say unto you: Go not?' {S}
2.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע, הִנֵּה-נָא מוֹשַׁב הָעִיר טוֹב, כַּאֲשֶׁר אֲדֹנִי רֹאֶה; וְהַמַּיִם רָעִים, וְהָאָרֶץ מְשַׁכָּלֶת.    19 And the men of the city said unto Elisha: 'Behold, we pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord seeth; but the water is bad, and the land miscarrieth.
2.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר, קְחוּ-לִי צְלֹחִית חֲדָשָׁה, וְשִׂימוּ שָׁם, מֶלַח; וַיִּקְחוּ, אֵלָיו.    20 And he said: 'Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein.' And they brought it to him.
2.21 כא  וַיֵּצֵא אֶל-מוֹצָא הַמַּיִם, וַיַּשְׁלֶךְ-שָׁם מֶלַח; וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, רִפִּאתִי לַמַּיִם הָאֵלֶּה--לֹא-יִהְיֶה מִשָּׁם עוֹד, מָוֶת וּמְשַׁכָּלֶת.    21 And he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast salt therein, and said: 'Thus saith the LORD: I have healed these waters; there shall not be from thence any more death or miscarrying.'
2.22 כב  וַיֵּרָפוּ הַמַּיִם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, כִּדְבַר אֱלִישָׁע, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר.  {פ}    22 So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the word of Elisha which he spoke. {P}
2.23 כג  וַיַּעַל מִשָּׁם, בֵּית-אֵל; וְהוּא עֹלֶה בַדֶּרֶךְ, וּנְעָרִים קְטַנִּים יָצְאוּ מִן-הָעִיר, וַיִּתְקַלְּסוּ-בוֹ וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ, עֲלֵה קֵרֵחַ עֲלֵה קֵרֵחַ.    23 And he went up from thence unto Beth-el; and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him: 'Go up, thou baldhead; go up, thou baldhead.'
2.24 כד  וַיִּפֶן אַחֲרָיו וַיִּרְאֵם, וַיְקַלְלֵם בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה; וַתֵּצֶאנָה שְׁתַּיִם דֻּבִּים, מִן-הַיַּעַר, וַתְּבַקַּעְנָה מֵהֶם, אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנֵי יְלָדִים.    24 And he looked behind him and saw them, and cursed them in the name of the LORD. And there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tore forty and two children of them.
2.25 כה  וַיֵּלֶךְ מִשָּׁם, אֶל-הַר הַכַּרְמֶל; וּמִשָּׁם, שָׁב שֹׁמְרוֹן.  {פ}    25 And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he returned to Samaria. {P}
3.1 א  וִיהוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב, מָלַךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, בִּשְׁנַת שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה, לִיהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ, שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה.    1 Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years.
3.2 ב  וַיַּעֲשֶׂה הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--רַק, לֹא כְאָבִיו וּכְאִמּוֹ; וַיָּסַר אֶת-מַצְּבַת הַבַּעַל, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אָבִיו.    2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; but not like his father, and like his mother; for he put away the pillar of Baal that his father had made.
3.3 ג  רַק בְּחַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--דָּבֵק:  לֹא-סָר, מִמֶּנָּה.  {פ}    3 Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom. {P}
3.4 ד  וּמֵישַׁע מֶלֶךְ-מוֹאָב, הָיָה נֹקֵד; וְהֵשִׁיב לְמֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאָה-אֶלֶף כָּרִים, וּמֵאָה אֶלֶף אֵילִים צָמֶר.    4 Now Mesha king of Moab was a sheep-master; and he rendered unto the king of Israel the wool of a hundred thousand lambs, and of a hundred thousand rams.
3.5 ה  וַיְהִי, כְּמוֹת אַחְאָב; וַיִּפְשַׁע מֶלֶךְ-מוֹאָב, בְּמֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    5 But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
3.6 ו  וַיֵּצֵא הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹרָם, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--מִשֹּׁמְרוֹן; וַיִּפְקֹד, אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    6 And king Jehoram went out of Samaria at that time, and mustered all Israel.
3.7 ז  וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶל-יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב פָּשַׁע בִּי--הֲתֵלֵךְ אִתִּי אֶל-מוֹאָב, לַמִּלְחָמָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶעֱלֶה, כָּמוֹנִי כָמוֹךָ כְּעַמִּי כְעַמֶּךָ כְּסוּסַי כְּסוּסֶיךָ.    7 And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying: 'The king of Moab hath rebelled against me; wilt thou go with me against Moab to battle?' And he said: 'I will go up; I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.'
3.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵי-זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ נַעֲלֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר, דֶּרֶךְ מִדְבַּר אֱדוֹם.    8 And he said: 'Which way shall we go up?' And he answered: 'The way of the wilderness of Edom.'
3.9 ט  וַיֵּלֶךְ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל וּמֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, וּמֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם, וַיָּסֹבּוּ, דֶּרֶךְ שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; וְלֹא-הָיָה מַיִם לַמַּחֲנֶה וְלַבְּהֵמָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּרַגְלֵיהֶם.    9 So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of Edom; and they made a circuit of seven days' journey; and there was no water for the host, nor for the beasts that followed them.
3.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲהָהּ--כִּי-קָרָא יְהוָה לִשְׁלֹשֶׁת הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה, לָתֵת אוֹתָם בְּיַד-מוֹאָב.  {ס}    10 And the king of Israel said: 'Alas! for the LORD hath called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.' {S}
3.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשָׁפָט, הַאֵין פֹּה נָבִיא לַיהוָה, וְנִדְרְשָׁה אֶת-יְהוָה, מֵאוֹתוֹ; וַיַּעַן אֶחָד מֵעַבְדֵי מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר, פֹּה אֱלִישָׁע בֶּן-שָׁפָט, אֲשֶׁר-יָצַק מַיִם עַל-יְדֵי אֵלִיָּהוּ.    11 But Jehoshaphat said: 'Is there not here a prophet of the LORD, that we may inquire of the LORD by him?' And one of the king of Israel's servants answered and said: 'Elisha the son of Shaphat is here, who poured water on the hands of Elijah.'
3.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר, יְהוֹשָׁפָט, יֵשׁ אוֹתוֹ, דְּבַר-יְהוָה; וַיֵּרְדוּ אֵלָיו, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוֹשָׁפָט--וּמֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם.    12 And Jehoshaphat said: 'The word of the LORD is with him.' So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.
3.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מַה-לִּי וָלָךְ--לֵךְ אֶל-נְבִיאֵי אָבִיךָ, וְאֶל-נְבִיאֵי אִמֶּךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַל כִּי-קָרָא יְהוָה לִשְׁלֹשֶׁת הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה, לָתֵת אוֹתָם בְּיַד-מוֹאָב.    13 And Elisha said unto the king of Israel: 'What have I to do with thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of thy mother.' And the king of Israel said unto him: 'Nay; for the LORD hath called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.'
3.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע, חַי-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֲשֶׁר עָמַדְתִּי לְפָנָיו, כִּי לוּלֵי פְּנֵי יְהוֹשָׁפָט מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, אֲנִי נֹשֵׂא--אִם-אַבִּיט אֵלֶיךָ, וְאִם-אֶרְאֶךָּ.    14 And Elisha said: 'As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.
3.15 טו  וְעַתָּה, קְחוּ-לִי מְנַגֵּן; וְהָיָה כְּנַגֵּן הַמְנַגֵּן, וַתְּהִי עָלָיו יַד-יְהוָה.    15 But now bring me a minstrel.' And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the LORD came upon him.
3.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  עָשֹׂה הַנַּחַל הַזֶּה, גֵּבִים גֵּבִים.    16 And he said: 'Thus saith the LORD: Make this valley full of trenches.
3.17 יז  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, לֹא-תִרְאוּ רוּחַ וְלֹא-תִרְאוּ גֶשֶׁם, וְהַנַּחַל הַהוּא, יִמָּלֵא מָיִם; וּשְׁתִיתֶם אַתֶּם וּמִקְנֵיכֶם, וּבְהֶמְתְּכֶם.    17 For thus saith the LORD: Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled with water; and ye shall drink, both ye and your cattle and your beasts.
3.18 יח  וְנָקַל זֹאת, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וְנָתַן אֶת-מוֹאָב, בְּיֶדְכֶם.    18 And this is but a light thing in the sight of the LORD; He will also deliver the Moabites into your hand.
3.19 יט  וְהִכִּיתֶם כָּל-עִיר מִבְצָר, וְכָל-עִיר מִבְחוֹר, וְכָל-עֵץ טוֹב תַּפִּילוּ, וְכָל-מַעְיְנֵי-מַיִם תִּסְתֹּמוּ; וְכֹל הַחֶלְקָה הַטּוֹבָה, תַּכְאִבוּ בָּאֲבָנִים.    19 And ye shall smite every fortified city, and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop all fountains of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.'
3.20 כ  וַיְהִי בַבֹּקֶר כַּעֲלוֹת הַמִּנְחָה, וְהִנֵּה-מַיִם בָּאִים מִדֶּרֶךְ אֱדוֹם; וַתִּמָּלֵא הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-הַמָּיִם.    20 And it came to pass in the morning, about the time of making the offering, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water.
3.21 כא  וְכָל-מוֹאָב, שָׁמְעוּ, כִּי-עָלוּ הַמְּלָכִים, לְהִלָּחֶם בָּם; וַיִּצָּעֲקוּ, מִכֹּל חֹגֵר חֲגֹרָה וָמַעְלָה, וַיַּעַמְדוּ, עַל-הַגְּבוּל.    21 Now when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to fight against them, they gathered themselves together, all that were able to put on armour, and upward, and stood on the border.
3.22 כב  וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ בַבֹּקֶר, וְהַשֶּׁמֶשׁ זָרְחָה עַל-הַמָּיִם; וַיִּרְאוּ מוֹאָב מִנֶּגֶד אֶת-הַמַּיִם, אֲדֻמִּים כַּדָּם.    22 And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the water, and the Moabites saw the water some way off as red as blood;
3.23 כג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, דָּם זֶה, הָחֳרֵב נֶחֶרְבוּ הַמְּלָכִים, וַיַּכּוּ אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ; וְעַתָּה לַשָּׁלָל, מוֹאָב.    23 and they said: 'This is blood: the kings have surely fought together, and they have smitten each man his fellow; now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.'
3.24 כד  וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-מַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּקֻמוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-מוֹאָב, וַיָּנֻסוּ מִפְּנֵיהֶם; ויבו- (וַיַּכּוּ-) בָהּ, וְהַכּוֹת אֶת-מוֹאָב.    24 And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them. And they smote the land, even Moab, mightily.
3.25 כה  וְהֶעָרִים יַהֲרֹסוּ וְכָל-חֶלְקָה טוֹבָה יַשְׁלִיכוּ אִישׁ-אַבְנוֹ וּמִלְאוּהָ, וְכָל-מַעְיַן-מַיִם יִסְתֹּמוּ וְכָל-עֵץ-טוֹב יַפִּילוּ, עַד-הִשְׁאִיר אֲבָנֶיהָ בַּקִּיר, חֲרָשֶׂת; וַיָּסֹבּוּ הַקַּלָּעִים, וַיַּכּוּהָ.    25 And they beat down the cities; and on every good piece of land they cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the fountains of water, and felled all the good trees; until there was left only Kir-hareseth with the stones of the wall thereof; so the slingers encompassed it, and smote it.
3.26 כו  וַיַּרְא מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב, כִּי-חָזַק מִמֶּנּוּ הַמִּלְחָמָה; וַיִּקַּח אוֹתוֹ שְׁבַע-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ שֹׁלֵף חֶרֶב, לְהַבְקִיעַ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם--וְלֹא יָכֹלוּ.    26 And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew sword, to break through unto the king of Edom; but they could not.
3.27 כז  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-בְּנוֹ הַבְּכוֹר אֲשֶׁר-יִמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו, וַיַּעֲלֵהוּ עֹלָה עַל-הַחֹמָה, וַיְהִי קֶצֶף-גָּדוֹל, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵעָלָיו, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, לָאָרֶץ.  {פ}    27 Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt-offering upon the wall. And there came great wrath upon Israel; and they departed from him, and returned to their own land. {P}
4.1 א  וְאִשָּׁה אַחַת מִנְּשֵׁי בְנֵי-הַנְּבִיאִים צָעֲקָה אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע לֵאמֹר, עַבְדְּךָ אִישִׁי מֵת, וְאַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ, כִּי עַבְדְּךָ הָיָה יָרֵא אֶת-יְהוָה; וְהַנֹּשֶׁה--בָּא לָקַחַת אֶת-שְׁנֵי יְלָדַי לוֹ, לַעֲבָדִים.    1 Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets unto Elisha, saying: 'Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the LORD; and the creditor is come to take unto him my two children to be bondmen.'
4.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ אֱלִישָׁע, מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ, הַגִּידִי לִי, מַה-יֶּשׁ-לכי (לָךְ) בַּבָּיִת; וַתֹּאמֶר, אֵין לְשִׁפְחָתְךָ כֹל בַּבַּיִת, כִּי, אִם-אָסוּךְ שָׁמֶן.    2 And Elisha said unto her: 'What shall I do for thee? tell me; what hast thou in the house?' And she said: 'Thy handmaid hath not any thing in the house, save a pot of oil.'
4.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר, לְכִי שַׁאֲלִי-לָךְ כֵּלִים מִן-הַחוּץ, מֵאֵת, כָּל-שכנכי (שְׁכֵנָיִךְ)--כֵּלִים רֵקִים, אַל-תַּמְעִיטִי.    3 Then he said: 'Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.
4.4 ד  וּבָאת, וְסָגַרְתְּ הַדֶּלֶת בַּעֲדֵךְ וּבְעַד-בָּנַיִךְ, וְיָצַקְתְּ, עַל כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הָאֵלֶּה; וְהַמָּלֵא, תַּסִּיעִי.    4 And thou shalt go in, and shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels; and thou shalt set aside that which is full.'
4.5 ה  וַתֵּלֶךְ, מֵאִתּוֹ, וַתִּסְגֹּר הַדֶּלֶת, בַּעֲדָהּ וּבְעַד בָּנֶיהָ; הֵם מַגִּישִׁים אֵלֶיהָ, וְהִיא מיצקת (מוֹצָקֶת).    5 So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons; they brought the vessels to her, and she poured out.
4.6 ו  וַיְהִי כִּמְלֹאת הַכֵּלִים, וַתֹּאמֶר אֶל-בְּנָהּ הַגִּישָׁה אֵלַי עוֹד כֶּלִי, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ, אֵין עוֹד כֶּלִי; וַיַּעֲמֹד, הַשָּׁמֶן.    6 And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said unto her son: 'Bring me yet a vessel.' And he said unto her: 'There is not a vessel more.' And the oil stayed.
4.7 ז  וַתָּבֹא, וַתַּגֵּד לְאִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמֶר לְכִי מִכְרִי אֶת-הַשֶּׁמֶן, וְשַׁלְּמִי אֶת-נשיכי (נִשְׁיֵךְ); וְאַתְּ בניכי (וּבָנַיִךְ), תִּחְיִי בַּנּוֹתָר.  {פ}    7 Then she came and told the man of God. And he said: 'Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy sons of the rest.' {P}
4.8 ח  וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם וַיַּעֲבֹר אֱלִישָׁע אֶל-שׁוּנֵם, וְשָׁם אִשָּׁה גְדוֹלָה, וַתַּחֲזֶק-בּוֹ, לֶאֱכָל-לָחֶם; וַיְהִי מִדֵּי עָבְרוֹ, יָסֻר שָׁמָּה לֶאֱכָל-לָחֶם.    8 And it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.
4.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-אִישָׁהּ, הִנֵּה-נָא יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי אִישׁ אֱלֹהִים קָדוֹשׁ הוּא--עֹבֵר עָלֵינוּ, תָּמִיד.    9 And she said unto her husband: 'Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God, that passeth by us continually.
4.10 י  נַעֲשֶׂה-נָּא עֲלִיַּת-קִיר קְטַנָּה, וְנָשִׂים לוֹ שָׁם מִטָּה וְשֻׁלְחָן וְכִסֵּא וּמְנוֹרָה; וְהָיָה בְּבֹאוֹ אֵלֵינוּ, יָסוּר שָׁמָּה.    10 Let us make, I pray thee, a little chamber on the roof; and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick; and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither.'
4.11 יא  וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם, וַיָּבֹא שָׁמָּה; וַיָּסַר אֶל-הָעֲלִיָּה, וַיִּשְׁכַּב-שָׁמָּה.    11 And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turned into the upper chamber and lay there.
4.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-גֵּיחֲזִי נַעֲרוֹ, קְרָא לַשּׁוּנַמִּית הַזֹּאת; וַיִּקְרָא-לָהּ--וַתַּעֲמֹד, לְפָנָיו.    12 And he said to Gehazi his servant: 'Call this Shunammite.' And when he had called her, she stood before him.
4.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, אֱמָר-נָא אֵלֶיהָ הִנֵּה חָרַדְתְּ אֵלֵינוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַחֲרָדָה הַזֹּאת, מֶה לַעֲשׂוֹת לָךְ, הֲיֵשׁ לְדַבֶּר-לָךְ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אוֹ אֶל-שַׂר הַצָּבָא; וַתֹּאמֶר, בְּתוֹךְ עַמִּי אָנֹכִי יֹשָׁבֶת.    13 And he said unto him: 'Say now unto her: Behold, thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host?' And she answered: 'I dwell among mine own people.'
4.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר, וּמֶה לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהּ; וַיֹּאמֶר גֵּיחֲזִי, אֲבָל בֵּן אֵין-לָהּ--וְאִישָׁהּ זָקֵן.    14 And he said: 'What then is to be done for her?' And Gehazi answered: 'Verily she hath no son, and her husband is old.'
4.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, קְרָא-לָהּ; וַיִּקְרָא-לָהּ--וַתַּעֲמֹד, בַּפָּתַח.    15 And he said: 'Call her.' And when he had called her, she stood in the door.
4.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, לַמּוֹעֵד הַזֶּה כָּעֵת חַיָּה, אתי (אַתְּ), חֹבֶקֶת בֵּן; וַתֹּאמֶר, אַל-אֲדֹנִי אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים--אַל-תְּכַזֵּב, בְּשִׁפְחָתֶךָ.    16 And he said: 'At this season, when the time cometh round, thou shalt embrace a son.' And she said: 'Nay, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thy handmaid.'
4.17 יז  וַתַּהַר הָאִשָּׁה, וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן, לַמּוֹעֵד הַזֶּה כָּעֵת חַיָּה, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֵלֶיהָ אֱלִישָׁע.    17 And the woman conceived, and bore a son at that season, when the time came round, as Elisha had said unto her.
4.18 יח  וַיִּגְדַּל, הַיָּלֶד; וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם, וַיֵּצֵא אֶל-אָבִיו אֶל-הַקֹּצְרִים.    18 And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out to his father to the reapers.
4.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-אָבִיו, רֹאשִׁי רֹאשִׁי; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-הַנַּעַר, שָׂאֵהוּ, אֶל-אִמּוֹ.    19 And he said unto his father: 'My head, my head.' And he said to his servant: 'Carry him to his mother.'
4.20 כ  וַיִּשָּׂאֵהוּ--וַיְבִיאֵהוּ, אֶל-אִמּוֹ; וַיֵּשֶׁב עַל-בִּרְכֶּיהָ עַד-הַצָּהֳרַיִם, וַיָּמֹת.    20 And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and then died.
4.21 כא  וַתַּעַל, וַתַּשְׁכִּבֵהוּ, עַל-מִטַּת, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים; וַתִּסְגֹּר בַּעֲדוֹ, וַתֵּצֵא.    21 And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the door upon him, and went out.
4.22 כב  וַתִּקְרָא, אֶל-אִישָׁהּ, וַתֹּאמֶר שִׁלְחָה נָא לִי אֶחָד מִן-הַנְּעָרִים, וְאַחַת הָאֲתֹנוֹת; וְאָרוּצָה עַד-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וְאָשׁוּבָה.    22 And she called unto her husband, and said: 'Send me, I pray thee, one of the servants, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man of God, and come back.'
4.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר, מַדּוּעַ אתי (אַתְּ) הלכתי (הֹלֶכֶת) אֵלָיו הַיּוֹם--לֹא-חֹדֶשׁ, וְלֹא שַׁבָּת; וַתֹּאמֶר, שָׁלוֹם.    23 And he said: Wherefore wilt thou go to him today? it is neither new moon nor sabbath.' And she said: 'It shall be well.'
4.24 כד  וַתַּחֲבֹשׁ, הָאָתוֹן, וַתֹּאמֶר אֶל-נַעֲרָהּ, נְהַג וָלֵךְ; אַל-תַּעֲצָר-לִי לִרְכֹּב, כִּי אִם-אָמַרְתִּי לָךְ.    24 Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant: 'Drive, and go forward; slacken me not the riding, except I bid thee.'
4.25 כה  וַתֵּלֶךְ, וַתָּבֹא אֶל-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים--אֶל-הַר הַכַּרְמֶל; וַיְהִי כִּרְאוֹת אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים אֹתָהּ, מִנֶּגֶד, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-גֵּיחֲזִי נַעֲרוֹ, הִנֵּה הַשּׁוּנַמִּית הַלָּז.    25 So she went, and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. And it came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to Gehazi his servant: 'Behold, yonder is that Shunammite.
4.26 כו  עַתָּה, רוּץ-נָא לִקְרָאתָהּ, וֶאֱמָר-לָהּ הֲשָׁלוֹם לָךְ הֲשָׁלוֹם לְאִישֵׁךְ, הֲשָׁלוֹם לַיָּלֶד; וַתֹּאמֶר, שָׁלוֹם.    26 Run, I pray thee, now to meet her, and say unto her: Is it well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with the child?' And she answered: 'It is well.'
4.27 כז  וַתָּבֹא אֶל-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶל-הָהָר, וַתַּחֲזֵק, בְּרַגְלָיו; וַיִּגַּשׁ גֵּיחֲזִי לְהָדְפָהּ, וַיֹּאמֶר אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים הַרְפֵּה-לָהּ כִּי-נַפְשָׁהּ מָרָה-לָהּ, וַיהוָה הֶעְלִים מִמֶּנִּי, וְלֹא הִגִּיד לִי.    27 And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught hold of his feet. And Gehazi came near to thrust her away; but the man of God said: 'Let her alone; for her soul is bitter within her; and the LORD hath hid it from me, and hath not told Me.'
4.28 כח  וַתֹּאמֶר, הֲשָׁאַלְתִּי בֵן מֵאֵת אֲדֹנִי; הֲלֹא אָמַרְתִּי, לֹא תַשְׁלֶה אֹתִי.    28 Then she said: 'Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say: Do not deceive me?'
4.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר לְגֵיחֲזִי חֲגֹר מָתְנֶיךָ, וְקַח מִשְׁעַנְתִּי בְיָדְךָ וָלֵךְ, כִּי-תִמְצָא אִישׁ לֹא תְבָרְכֶנּוּ, וְכִי-יְבָרֶכְךָ אִישׁ לֹא תַעֲנֶנּוּ; וְשַׂמְתָּ מִשְׁעַנְתִּי, עַל-פְּנֵי הַנָּעַר.    29 Then he said to Gehazi: 'Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thy hand, and go thy way; if thou meet any man, salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not; and lay my staff upon the face of the child.'
4.30 ל  וַתֹּאמֶר אֵם הַנַּעַר, חַי-יְהוָה וְחֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ אִם-אֶעֶזְבֶךָּ; וַיָּקָם, וַיֵּלֶךְ אַחֲרֶיהָ.    30 And the mother of the child said: 'As the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.' And he arose, and followed her.
4.31 לא  וְגֵחֲזִי עָבַר לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַמִּשְׁעֶנֶת עַל-פְּנֵי הַנַּעַר, וְאֵין קוֹל, וְאֵין קָשֶׁב; וַיָּשָׁב לִקְרָאתוֹ וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ לֵאמֹר, לֹא הֵקִיץ הַנָּעַר.    31 And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face of the child; but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore he returned to meet him, and told him, saying: 'The child is not awaked.'
4.32 לב  וַיָּבֹא אֱלִישָׁע, הַבָּיְתָה; וְהִנֵּה הַנַּעַר מֵת, מֻשְׁכָּב עַל-מִטָּתוֹ.    32 And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed.
4.33 לג  וַיָּבֹא, וַיִּסְגֹּר הַדֶּלֶת בְּעַד שְׁנֵיהֶם; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-יְהוָה.    33 He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the LORD.
4.34 לד  וַיַּעַל וַיִּשְׁכַּב עַל-הַיֶּלֶד, וַיָּשֶׂם פִּיו עַל-פִּיו וְעֵינָיו עַל-עֵינָיו וְכַפָּיו עַל-כַּפָּו, וַיִּגְהַר, עָלָיו; וַיָּחָם, בְּשַׂר הַיָּלֶד.    34 And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands; and he stretched himself upon him; and the flesh of the child waxed warm.
4.35 לה  וַיָּשָׁב וַיֵּלֶךְ בַּבַּיִת, אַחַת הֵנָּה וְאַחַת הֵנָּה, וַיַּעַל, וַיִּגְהַר עָלָיו; וַיְזוֹרֵר הַנַּעַר עַד-שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים, וַיִּפְקַח הַנַּעַר אֶת-עֵינָיו.    35 Then he returned, and walked in the house once to and fro; and went up, and stretched himself upon him; and the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.
4.36 לו  וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-גֵּיחֲזִי, וַיֹּאמֶר קְרָא אֶל-הַשֻּׁנַמִּית הַזֹּאת, וַיִּקְרָאֶהָ, וַתָּבֹא אֵלָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר, שְׂאִי בְנֵךְ.    36 And he called Gehazi, and said: 'Call this Shunammite.' So he called her. And when she was come in unto him, he said: 'Take up thy son.'
4.37 לז  וַתָּבֹא וַתִּפֹּל עַל-רַגְלָיו, וַתִּשְׁתַּחוּ אָרְצָה; וַתִּשָּׂא אֶת-בְּנָהּ, וַתֵּצֵא.  {פ}    37 Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed down to the ground; and she took up her son, and went out. {P}
4.38 לח  וֶאֱלִישָׁע שָׁב הַגִּלְגָּלָה, וְהָרָעָב בָּאָרֶץ, וּבְנֵי הַנְּבִיאִים, יֹשְׁבִים לְפָנָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר לְנַעֲרוֹ, שְׁפֹת הַסִּיר הַגְּדוֹלָה, וּבַשֵּׁל נָזִיד, לִבְנֵי הַנְּבִיאִים.    38 And Elisha came again to Gilgal; and there was a dearth in the land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him; and he said unto his servant: 'Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets.'
4.39 לט  וַיֵּצֵא אֶחָד אֶל-הַשָּׂדֶה, לְלַקֵּט אֹרֹת, וַיִּמְצָא גֶּפֶן שָׂדֶה, וַיְלַקֵּט מִמֶּנּוּ פַּקֻּעֹת שָׂדֶה מְלֹא בִגְדוֹ; וַיָּבֹא, וַיְפַלַּח אֶל-סִיר הַנָּזִיד--כִּי-לֹא יָדָעוּ.    39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage; for they knew them not.
4.40 מ  וַיִּצְקוּ לַאֲנָשִׁים, לֶאֱכוֹל; וַיְהִי כְּאָכְלָם מֵהַנָּזִיד וְהֵמָּה צָעָקוּ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ מָוֶת בַּסִּיר אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וְלֹא יָכְלוּ, לֶאֱכֹל.    40 So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said: 'O man of God, there is death in the pot.' And they could not eat thereof.
4.41 מא  וַיֹּאמֶר, וּקְחוּ-קֶמַח, וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ, אֶל-הַסִּיר; וַיֹּאמֶר, צַק לָעָם וְיֹאכֵלוּ, וְלֹא הָיָה דָּבָר רָע, בַּסִּיר.  {ס}    41 But he said: 'Then bring meal.' And he cast it into the pot; and he said: 'Pour out for the people, that they may eat.' And there was no harm in the pot. {S}
4.42 מב  וְאִישׁ בָּא מִבַּעַל שָׁלִשָׁה, וַיָּבֵא לְאִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים לֶחֶם בִּכּוּרִים עֶשְׂרִים-לֶחֶם שְׂעֹרִים, וְכַרְמֶל, בְּצִקְלֹנוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר, תֵּן לָעָם וְיֹאכֵלוּ.    42 And there came a man from Baal-shalishah, and brought the man of God bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack. And he said: 'Give unto the people, that they may eat.'
4.43 מג  וַיֹּאמֶר, מְשָׁרְתוֹ, מָה אֶתֵּן זֶה, לִפְנֵי מֵאָה אִישׁ; וַיֹּאמֶר, תֵּן לָעָם וְיֹאכֵלוּ--כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, אָכֹל וְהוֹתֵר.    43 And his servant said: 'How should I set this before a hundred men?' But he said: 'Give the people, that they may eat; for thus saith the LORD: They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.'
4.44 מד  וַיִּתֵּן לִפְנֵיהֶם וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיּוֹתִרוּ, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה.  {פ}    44 So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof, according to the word of the LORD. {P}
5.1 א  וְנַעֲמָן שַׂר-צְבָא מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם הָיָה אִישׁ גָּדוֹל לִפְנֵי אֲדֹנָיו, וּנְשֻׂא פָנִים--כִּי-בוֹ נָתַן-יְהוָה תְּשׁוּעָה, לַאֲרָם; וְהָאִישׁ, הָיָה גִּבּוֹר חַיִל--מְצֹרָע.    1 Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Aram, was a great man with his master, and held in esteem, because by him the LORD had given victory unto Aram; he was also a mighty man of valour, but he was a leper.
5.2 ב  וַאֲרָם יָצְאוּ גְדוּדִים, וַיִּשְׁבּוּ מֵאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל נַעֲרָה קְטַנָּה; וַתְּהִי, לִפְנֵי אֵשֶׁת נַעֲמָן.    2 And the Arameans had gone out in bands, and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on Naaman's wife.
5.3 ג  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-גְּבִרְתָּהּ, אַחֲלֵי אֲדֹנִי, לִפְנֵי הַנָּבִיא אֲשֶׁר בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; אָז יֶאֱסֹף אֹתוֹ, מִצָּרַעְתּוֹ.    3 And she said unto her mistress: 'Would that my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria! then would he recover him of his leprosy.'
5.4 ד  וַיָּבֹא, וַיַּגֵּד לַאדֹנָיו לֵאמֹר:  כָּזֹאת וְכָזֹאת דִּבְּרָה הַנַּעֲרָה, אֲשֶׁר מֵאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    4 And he went in, and told his lord, saying: 'Thus and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel.'
5.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם לֶךְ-בֹּא, וְאֶשְׁלְחָה סֵפֶר אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיִּקַּח בְּיָדוֹ עֶשֶׂר כִּכְּרֵי-כֶסֶף, וְשֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים זָהָב, וְעֶשֶׂר, חֲלִיפוֹת בְּגָדִים.    5 And the king of Aram said: 'Go now, and I will send a letter unto the king of Israel.' And he departed, and took with him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment.
5.6 ו  וַיָּבֵא הַסֵּפֶר, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  וְעַתָּה, כְּבוֹא הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה אֵלֶיךָ, הִנֵּה שָׁלַחְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ אֶת-נַעֲמָן עַבְדִּי, וַאֲסַפְתּוֹ מִצָּרַעְתּוֹ.    6 And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying: 'And now when this letter is come unto thee, behold, I have sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.'
5.7 ז  וַיְהִי כִּקְרֹא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר וַיִּקְרַע בְּגָדָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר הַאֱלֹהִים אָנִי לְהָמִית וּלְהַחֲיוֹת, כִּי-זֶה שֹׁלֵחַ אֵלַי, לֶאֱסֹף אִישׁ מִצָּרַעְתּוֹ:  כִּי אַךְ-דְּעוּ-נָא וּרְאוּ, כִּי-מִתְאַנֶּה הוּא לִי.    7 And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that he rent his clothes, and said: 'Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy? but consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh an occasion against me.'
5.8 ח  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ אֱלִישָׁע אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, כִּי-קָרַע מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, לָמָּה קָרַעְתָּ בְּגָדֶיךָ; יָבֹא-נָא אֵלַי--וְיֵדַע, כִּי יֵשׁ נָבִיא בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    8 And it was so, when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying: 'Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.'
5.9 ט  וַיָּבֹא נַעֲמָן, בְּסוּסָו וּבְרִכְבּוֹ; וַיַּעֲמֹד פֶּתַח-הַבַּיִת, לֶאֱלִישָׁע.    9 So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariots, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha.
5.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלָיו אֱלִישָׁע, מַלְאָךְ לֵאמֹר:  הָלוֹךְ, וְרָחַצְתָּ שֶׁבַע-פְּעָמִים בַּיַּרְדֵּן, וְיָשֹׁב בְּשָׂרְךָ לְךָ, וּטְהָר.    10 And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying: 'Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come back to thee, and thou shalt be clean.'
5.11 יא  וַיִּקְצֹף נַעֲמָן, וַיֵּלַךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה אָמַרְתִּי אֵלַי יֵצֵא יָצוֹא, וְעָמַד וְקָרָא בְּשֵׁם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, וְהֵנִיף יָדוֹ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם, וְאָסַף הַמְּצֹרָע.    11 But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said: 'Behold, I thought: He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the LORD his God, and wave his hand over the place, and recover the leper.
5.12 יב  הֲלֹא טוֹב אבנה (אֲמָנָה) וּפַרְפַּר נַהֲרוֹת דַּמֶּשֶׂק, מִכֹּל מֵימֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--הֲלֹא-אֶרְחַץ בָּהֶם, וְטָהָרְתִּי; וַיִּפֶן, וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּחֵמָה.    12 Are not Amanah and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean?' So he turned, and went away in a rage.
5.13 יג  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ עֲבָדָיו, וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֵלָיו, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אָבִי דָּבָר גָּדוֹל הַנָּבִיא דִּבֶּר אֵלֶיךָ, הֲלוֹא תַעֲשֶׂה; וְאַף כִּי-אָמַר אֵלֶיךָ, רְחַץ וּטְהָר.    13 And his servants came near, and spoke unto him, and said: 'My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee: Wash, and be clean?'
5.14 יד  וַיֵּרֶד, וַיִּטְבֹּל בַּיַּרְדֵּן שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים, כִּדְבַר, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיָּשָׁב בְּשָׂרוֹ, כִּבְשַׂר נַעַר קָטֹן--וַיִּטְהָר.    14 Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God; and his flesh came back like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.
5.15 טו  וַיָּשָׁב אֶל-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים הוּא וְכָל-מַחֲנֵהוּ, וַיָּבֹא וַיַּעֲמֹד לְפָנָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה-נָא יָדַעְתִּי כִּי אֵין אֱלֹהִים בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ, כִּי אִם-בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וְעַתָּה קַח-נָא בְרָכָה, מֵאֵת עַבְדֶּךָ.    15 And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came, and stood before him; and he said: 'Behold now, I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel; now therefore, I pray thee, take a present of thy servant.'
5.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, חַי-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר-עָמַדְתִּי לְפָנָיו אִם-אֶקָּח; וַיִּפְצַר-בּוֹ לָקַחַת, וַיְמָאֵן.    16 But he said: 'As the LORD liveth, before whom I stand, I will receive none.' And he urged him to take it; but he refused.
5.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר, נַעֲמָן, וָלֹא, יֻתַּן-נָא לְעַבְדְּךָ מַשָּׂא צֶמֶד-פְּרָדִים אֲדָמָה:  כִּי לוֹא-יַעֲשֶׂה עוֹד עַבְדְּךָ עֹלָה וָזֶבַח, לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--כִּי, אִם-לַיהוָה.    17 And Naaman said: 'If not, yet I pray thee let there be given to thy servant two mules' burden of earth; for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the LORD.
5.18 יח  לַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, יִסְלַח יְהוָה לְעַבְדֶּךָ--בְּבוֹא אֲדֹנִי בֵית-רִמּוֹן לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת שָׁמָּה וְהוּא נִשְׁעָן עַל-יָדִי, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֵיתִי בֵּית רִמֹּן, בְּהִשְׁתַּחֲוָיָתִי בֵּית רִמֹּן, יִסְלַח-נא (  ) יְהוָה לְעַבְדְּךָ בַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    18 In this thing the LORD pardon thy servant: when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I prostrate myself in the house of Rimmon, when I prostrate myself in the house of Rimmon, the LORD pardon thy servant in this thing.'
5.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, לֵךְ לְשָׁלוֹם; וַיֵּלֶךְ מֵאִתּוֹ, כִּבְרַת-אָרֶץ.  {ס}    19 And he said unto him: 'Go in peace.' So he departed from him some way. {S}
5.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר גֵּיחֲזִי, נַעַר אֱלִישָׁע אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, הִנֵּה חָשַׂךְ אֲדֹנִי אֶת-נַעֲמָן הָאֲרַמִּי הַזֶּה, מִקַּחַת מִיָּדוֹ אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הֵבִיא; חַי-יְהוָה כִּי-אִם-רַצְתִּי אַחֲרָיו, וְלָקַחְתִּי מֵאִתּוֹ מְאוּמָה.    20 But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said: 'Behold, my master hath spared this Naaman the Aramean, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought; as the LORD liveth, I will surely run after him, and take somewhat of him.'
5.21 כא  וַיִּרְדֹּף גֵּיחֲזִי, אַחֲרֵי נַעֲמָן; וַיִּרְאֶה נַעֲמָן, רָץ אַחֲרָיו, וַיִּפֹּל מֵעַל הַמֶּרְכָּבָה לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר הֲשָׁלוֹם.    21 So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw one running after him, he alighted from the chariot to meet him, and said: 'Is all well?'
5.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר שָׁלוֹם, אֲדֹנִי שְׁלָחַנִי לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה עַתָּה זֶה בָּאוּ אֵלַי שְׁנֵי-נְעָרִים מֵהַר אֶפְרַיִם, מִבְּנֵי הַנְּבִיאִים; תְּנָה-נָּא לָהֶם כִּכַּר-כֶּסֶף, וּשְׁתֵּי חֲלִפוֹת בְּגָדִים.    22 And he said: 'All is well. My master hath sent me, saying: Behold, even now there are come to me from the hill-country of Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets; give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two changes of raiment.'
5.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר נַעֲמָן, הוֹאֵל קַח כִּכָּרָיִם; וַיִּפְרָץ-בּוֹ, וַיָּצַר כִּכְּרַיִם כֶּסֶף בִּשְׁנֵי חֲרִטִים וּשְׁתֵּי חֲלִפוֹת בְּגָדִים, וַיִּתֵּן אֶל-שְׁנֵי נְעָרָיו, וַיִּשְׂאוּ לְפָנָיו.    23 And Naaman said: 'Be content, take two talents.' And he urged him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of raiment, and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bore them before him.
5.24 כד  וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-הָעֹפֶל, וַיִּקַּח מִיָּדָם, וַיִּפְקֹד בַּבָּיִת; וַיְשַׁלַּח אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיֵּלֵכוּ.    24 And when he came to the hill, he took them from their hand, and deposited them in the house; and he let the men go, and they departed.
5.25 כה  וְהוּא-בָא, וַיַּעֲמֹד אֶל-אֲדֹנָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אֱלִישָׁע, מאן (מֵאַיִן) גֵּחֲזִי; וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא-הָלַךְ עַבְדְּךָ אָנֶה וָאָנָה.    25 But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto him: 'Whence comest thou, Gehazi?' And he said: 'Thy servant went no whither.'
5.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו לֹא-לִבִּי הָלַךְ, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָפַךְ-אִישׁ מֵעַל מֶרְכַּבְתּוֹ לִקְרָאתֶךָ; הַעֵת לָקַחַת אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף, וְלָקַחַת בְּגָדִים, וְזֵיתִים וּכְרָמִים וְצֹאן וּבָקָר, וַעֲבָדִים וּשְׁפָחוֹת.    26 And he said unto him: 'Went not my heart [with thee], when the man turned back from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards and vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and men-servants and maid-servants?
5.27 כז  וְצָרַעַת נַעֲמָן תִּדְבַּק-בְּךָ, וּבְזַרְעֲךָ לְעוֹלָם; וַיֵּצֵא מִלְּפָנָיו, מְצֹרָע כַּשָּׁלֶג.    27 The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever.' And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.
6.1 א  וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְנֵי-הַנְּבִיאִים, אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע:  הִנֵּה-נָא הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר אֲנַחְנוּ יֹשְׁבִים שָׁם לְפָנֶיךָ--צַר מִמֶּנּוּ.    1 And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha: 'Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too strait for us.
6.2 ב  נֵלְכָה-נָּא עַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וְנִקְחָה מִשָּׁם אִישׁ קוֹרָה אֶחָת, וְנַעֲשֶׂה-לָּנוּ שָׁם מָקוֹם, לָשֶׁבֶת שָׁם; וַיֹּאמֶר, לֵכוּ.    2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto the Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell.' And he answered: 'Go ye.'
6.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר, הָאֶחָד, הוֹאֶל נָא, וְלֵךְ אֶת-עֲבָדֶיךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֲנִי אֵלֵךְ.    3 And one said: 'Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants.' And he answered: 'I will go.'
6.4 ד  וַיֵּלֶךְ, אִתָּם; וַיָּבֹאוּ, הַיַּרְדֵּנָה, וַיִּגְזְרוּ, הָעֵצִים.    4 So he went with them. And when they came to the Jordan, they cut down wood.
6.5 ה  וַיְהִי הָאֶחָד מַפִּיל הַקּוֹרָה, וְאֶת-הַבַּרְזֶל נָפַל אֶל-הַמָּיִם; וַיִּצְעַק וַיֹּאמֶר אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנִי, וְהוּא שָׁאוּל.    5 But as one was felling a beam, the axe-head fell into the water; and he cried, and said: 'Alas, my master! for it was borrowed.'
6.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, אָנָה נָפָל; וַיַּרְאֵהוּ, אֶת-הַמָּקוֹם, וַיִּקְצָב-עֵץ וַיַּשְׁלֶךְ-שָׁמָּה, וַיָּצֶף הַבַּרְזֶל.    6 And the man of God said: 'Where fell it?' And he showed him the place. And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither, and made the iron to swim.
6.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר, הָרֶם לָךְ; וַיִּשְׁלַח יָדוֹ, וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ.  {פ}    7 And he said: 'Take it up to thee.' So he put out his hand, and took it. {P}
6.8 ח  וּמֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, הָיָה נִלְחָם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּוָּעַץ אֶל-עֲבָדָיו לֵאמֹר, אֶל-מְקוֹם פְּלֹנִי אַלְמֹנִי תַּחֲנֹתִי.    8 Now the king of Aram warred against Israel; and he took counsel with his servants, saying: 'In such and such a place shall be my camp.'
6.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁלַח אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר, הִשָּׁמֶר, מֵעֲבֹר הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי-שָׁם, אֲרָם נְחִתִּים.    9 And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying: 'Beware that thou pass not such a place; for thither the Arameans are coming down.'
6.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר אָמַר-לוֹ אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים וְהִזְהִירֹה--וְנִשְׁמַר שָׁם:  לֹא אַחַת, וְלֹא שְׁתָּיִם.    10 And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and warned him of; and he guarded himself there, not once nor twice.
6.11 יא  וַיִּסָּעֵר לֵב מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, עַל-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-עֲבָדָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, הֲלוֹא תַּגִּידוּ לִי, מִי מִשֶּׁלָּנוּ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    11 And the heart of the king of Aram was sore troubled for this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them: 'Will ye not tell me which of us is for the king of Israel?'
6.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר אַחַד מֵעֲבָדָיו, לוֹא אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כִּי-אֱלִישָׁע הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, יַגִּיד לְמֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר תְּדַבֵּר בַּחֲדַר מִשְׁכָּבֶךָ.    12 And one of his servants said: 'Nay, my lord, O king; but Elisha, the prophet that is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that thou speakest in thy bed-chamber.'
6.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר, לְכוּ וּרְאוּ אֵיכֹה הוּא, וְאֶשְׁלַח, וְאֶקָּחֵהוּ; וַיֻּגַּד-לוֹ לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה בְדֹתָן.    13 And he said: 'Go and see where he is, that I may send and fetch him.' And it was told him, saying: 'Behold, he is in Dothan.'
6.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח-שָׁמָּה סוּסִים וְרֶכֶב, וְחַיִל כָּבֵד; וַיָּבֹאוּ לַיְלָה, וַיַּקִּפוּ עַל-הָעִיר.    14 Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host; and they came by night, and compassed the city about.
6.15 טו  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם מְשָׁרֵת אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, לָקוּם, וַיֵּצֵא, וְהִנֵּה-חַיִל סוֹבֵב אֶת-הָעִיר וְסוּס וָרָכֶב; וַיֹּאמֶר נַעֲרוֹ אֵלָיו אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנִי, אֵיכָה נַעֲשֶׂה.    15 And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, a host with horses and chariots was round about the city. And his servant said unto him: 'Alas, my master! how shall we do?'
6.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַל-תִּירָא:  כִּי רַבִּים אֲשֶׁר אִתָּנוּ, מֵאֲשֶׁר אוֹתָם.    16 And he answered: 'Fear not: for they that are with us are more than they that are with them.'
6.17 יז  וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל אֱלִישָׁע, וַיֹּאמַר, יְהוָה, פְּקַח-נָא אֶת-עֵינָיו וְיִרְאֶה; וַיִּפְקַח יְהוָה, אֶת-עֵינֵי הַנַּעַר, וַיַּרְא וְהִנֵּה הָהָר מָלֵא סוּסִים וְרֶכֶב אֵשׁ, סְבִיבֹת אֱלִישָׁע.    17 And Elisha prayed, and said: 'LORD, I pray Thee, open his eyes, that he may see.' And the LORD opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw; and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.
6.18 יח  וַיֵּרְדוּ, אֵלָיו, וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל אֱלִישָׁע אֶל-יְהוָה וַיֹּאמַר, הַךְ-נָא אֶת-הַגּוֹי-הַזֶּה בַּסַּנְוֵרִים; וַיַּכֵּם בַּסַּנְוֵרִים, כִּדְבַר אֱלִישָׁע.    18 And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the LORD, and said: 'Smite this people, I pray Thee, with blindness.' And He smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.
6.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם אֱלִישָׁע, לֹא זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ וְלֹא זֹה הָעִיר--לְכוּ אַחֲרַי, וְאוֹלִיכָה אֶתְכֶם אֶל-הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר תְּבַקֵּשׁוּן; וַיֹּלֶךְ אוֹתָם, שֹׁמְרוֹנָה.    19 And Elisha said unto them: 'This is not the way, neither is this the city; follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek.' And he led them to Samaria.
6.20 כ  וַיְהִי, כְּבֹאָם שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע, יְהוָה פְּקַח אֶת-עֵינֵי-אֵלֶּה וְיִרְאוּ; וַיִּפְקַח יְהוָה, אֶת-עֵינֵיהֶם, וַיִּרְאוּ, וְהִנֵּה בְּתוֹךְ שֹׁמְרוֹן.    20 And it came to pass, when they were come into Samaria, that Elisha said: 'LORD, open the eyes of these men, that they may see.' And the LORD opened their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria.
6.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-אֱלִישָׁע, כִּרְאֹתוֹ אוֹתָם:  הַאַכֶּה אַכֶּה, אָבִי.    21 And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them: 'My father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them?'
6.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא תַכֶּה, הַאֲשֶׁר שָׁבִיתָ בְּחַרְבְּךָ וּבְקַשְׁתְּךָ אַתָּה מַכֶּה; שִׂים לֶחֶם וָמַיִם לִפְנֵיהֶם, וְיֹאכְלוּ וְיִשְׁתּוּ, וְיֵלְכוּ, אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיהֶם.    22 And he answered: 'Thou shalt not smite them; hast thou taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow those whom thou wouldest smite? set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.'
6.23 כג  וַיִּכְרֶה לָהֶם כֵּרָה גְדוֹלָה, וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׁתּוּ, וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם, וַיֵּלְכוּ אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיהֶם; וְלֹא-יָסְפוּ עוֹד גְּדוּדֵי אֲרָם, לָבוֹא בְּאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    23 And he prepared great provision for them; and when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. And the bands of Aram came no more into the land of Israel. {P}
6.24 כד  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיִּקְבֹּץ בֶּן-הֲדַד מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, אֶת-כָּל-מַחֲנֵהוּ; וַיַּעַל, וַיָּצַר עַל-שֹׁמְרוֹן.    24 And it came to pass after this, that Ben-hadad king of Aram gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria.
6.25 כה  וַיְהִי רָעָב גָּדוֹל בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, וְהִנֵּה צָרִים עָלֶיהָ:  עַד הֱיוֹת רֹאשׁ-חֲמוֹר בִּשְׁמֹנִים כֶּסֶף, וְרֹבַע הַקַּב חרי (דִּב-) יוֹנִים בַּחֲמִשָּׁה-כָסֶף.    25 And there was a great famine in Samaria; and, behold, they besieged it, until an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a kab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver.
6.26 כו  וַיְהִי מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֹבֵר עַל-הַחֹמָה; וְאִשָּׁה, צָעֲקָה אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר, הוֹשִׁיעָה, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    26 And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saying: 'Help, my lord, O king.'
6.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר אַל-יוֹשִׁעֵךְ יְהוָה, מֵאַיִן אוֹשִׁיעֵךְ; הֲמִן-הַגֹּרֶן, אוֹ מִן-הַיָּקֶב.    27 And he said: 'If the LORD do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the threshingfloor, or out of the winepress?'
6.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר-לָהּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, מַה-לָּךְ; וַתֹּאמֶר, הָאִשָּׁה הַזֹּאת אָמְרָה אֵלַי תְּנִי אֶת-בְּנֵךְ וְנֹאכְלֶנּוּ הַיּוֹם, וְאֶת-בְּנִי, נֹאכַל מָחָר.    28 And the king said unto her: 'What aileth thee?' And she answered: 'This woman said unto me: Give thy son, that we may eat him to-day, and we will eat my son to-morrow.
6.29 כט  וַנְּבַשֵּׁל אֶת-בְּנִי, וַנֹּאכְלֵהוּ; וָאֹמַר אֵלֶיהָ בַּיּוֹם הָאַחֵר, תְּנִי אֶת-בְּנֵךְ וְנֹאכְלֶנּוּ, וַתַּחְבִּא, אֶת-בְּנָהּ.    29 So we boiled my son, and did eat him; and I said unto her on the next day: Give thy son, that we may eat him; and she hath hid her son.'
6.30 ל  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הָאִשָּׁה, וַיִּקְרַע אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וְהוּא, עֹבֵר עַל-הַחֹמָה; וַיַּרְא הָעָם, וְהִנֵּה הַשַּׂק עַל-בְּשָׂרוֹ מִבָּיִת.    30 And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman, that he rent his clothes--now he was passing by upon the wall--and the people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.
6.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר, כֹּה-יַעֲשֶׂה-לִּי אֱלֹהִים וְכֹה יוֹסִף:  אִם-יַעֲמֹד רֹאשׁ אֱלִישָׁע בֶּן-שָׁפָט, עָלָיו--הַיּוֹם.    31 Then he said: 'God do so to me, and more also, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.'
6.32 לב  וֶאֱלִישָׁע יֹשֵׁב בְּבֵיתוֹ, וְהַזְּקֵנִים יֹשְׁבִים אִתּוֹ; וַיִּשְׁלַח אִישׁ מִלְּפָנָיו, בְּטֶרֶם יָבֹא הַמַּלְאָךְ אֵלָיו וְהוּא אָמַר אֶל-הַזְּקֵנִים הַרְּאִיתֶם כִּי-שָׁלַח בֶּן-הַמְרַצֵּחַ הַזֶּה לְהָסִיר אֶת-רֹאשִׁי, רְאוּ כְּבֹא הַמַּלְאָךְ סִגְרוּ הַדֶּלֶת וּלְחַצְתֶּם אֹתוֹ בַּדֶּלֶת, הֲלוֹא קוֹל רַגְלֵי אֲדֹנָיו אַחֲרָיו.    32 But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the king sent a man from before him; but ere the messenger came to him, he said to the elders: 'See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to take away my head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door, and hold the door fast against him; is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?'
6.33 לג  עוֹדֶנּוּ מְדַבֵּר עִמָּם, וְהִנֵּה הַמַּלְאָךְ יֹרֵד אֵלָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה-זֹאת הָרָעָה מֵאֵת יְהוָה--מָה-אוֹחִיל לַיהוָה, עוֹד.  {פ}    33 And while he yet talked with them, behold, the messenger came down unto him; and [the king] said: 'Behold, this evil is of the LORD; why should I wait for the LORD any longer?' {P}
7.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-יְהוָה:  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, כָּעֵת מָחָר סְאָה-סֹלֶת בְּשֶׁקֶל וְסָאתַיִם שְׂעֹרִים בְּשֶׁקֶל--בְּשַׁעַר שֹׁמְרוֹן.    1 And Elisha said: 'Hear ye the word of the LORD; thus saith the LORD: To-morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.'
7.2 ב  וַיַּעַן הַשָּׁלִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-לַמֶּלֶךְ נִשְׁעָן עַל-יָדוֹ אֶת-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמַר, הִנֵּה יְהוָה עֹשֶׂה אֲרֻבּוֹת בַּשָּׁמַיִם, הֲיִהְיֶה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנְּכָה רֹאֶה בְּעֵינֶיךָ, וּמִשָּׁם, לֹא תֹאכֵל.  {פ}    2 Then the captain on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God, and said: 'Behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might this thing be?' And he said: 'Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.' {P}
7.3 ג  וְאַרְבָּעָה אֲנָשִׁים הָיוּ מְצֹרָעִים, פֶּתַח הַשָּׁעַר; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ, מָה אֲנַחְנוּ יֹשְׁבִים פֹּה, עַד-מָתְנוּ.    3 Now there were four leprous men at the entrance of the gate; and they said one to another: 'Why sit we here until we die?
7.4 ד  אִם-אָמַרְנוּ נָבוֹא הָעִיר וְהָרָעָב בָּעִיר, וָמַתְנוּ שָׁם, וְאִם-יָשַׁבְנוּ פֹה, וָמָתְנוּ; וְעַתָּה, לְכוּ וְנִפְּלָה אֶל-מַחֲנֵה אֲרָם--אִם-יְחַיֻּנוּ נִחְיֶה, וְאִם-יְמִיתֻנוּ, וָמָתְנוּ.    4 If we say: We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there; and if we sit still here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Arameans; if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.'
7.5 ה  וַיָּקֻמוּ בַנֶּשֶׁף, לָבוֹא אֶל-מַחֲנֵה אֲרָם; וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-קְצֵה מַחֲנֵה אֲרָם, וְהִנֵּה אֵין-שָׁם, אִישׁ.    5 And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the Arameans; and when they were come to the outermost part of the camp of the Arameans, behold, there was no man there.
7.6 ו  וַאדֹנָי הִשְׁמִיעַ אֶת-מַחֲנֵה אֲרָם, קוֹל רֶכֶב קוֹל סוּס--קוֹל, חַיִל גָּדוֹל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו, הִנֵּה שָׂכַר-עָלֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-מַלְכֵי הַחִתִּים וְאֶת-מַלְכֵי מִצְרַיִם--לָבוֹא עָלֵינוּ.    6 For the Lord had made the host of the Arameans to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host; and they said one to another: 'Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.'
7.7 ז  וַיָּקוּמוּ, וַיָּנוּסוּ בַנֶּשֶׁף, וַיַּעַזְבוּ אֶת-אָהֳלֵיהֶם וְאֶת-סוּסֵיהֶם וְאֶת-חֲמֹרֵיהֶם, הַמַּחֲנֶה כַּאֲשֶׁר-הִיא; וַיָּנֻסוּ, אֶל-נַפְשָׁם.    7 Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life.
7.8 ח  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַמְצֹרָעִים הָאֵלֶּה עַד-קְצֵה הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-אֹהֶל אֶחָד וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׁתּוּ, וַיִּשְׂאוּ מִשָּׁם כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב וּבְגָדִים, וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיַּטְמִנוּ; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-אֹהֶל אַחֵר, וַיִּשְׂאוּ מִשָּׁם, וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיַּטְמִנוּ.    8 And when these lepers came to the outermost part of the camp, they went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver, and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and they came back, and entered into another tent, and carried thence also, and went and hid it.
7.9 ט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ לֹא-כֵן אֲנַחְנוּ עֹשִׂים, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה יוֹם-בְּשֹׂרָה הוּא, וַאֲנַחְנוּ מַחְשִׁים וְחִכִּינוּ עַד-אוֹר הַבֹּקֶר, וּמְצָאָנוּ עָווֹן; וְעַתָּה לְכוּ וְנָבֹאָה, וְנַגִּידָה בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ.    9 Then they said one to another: 'We do not well; this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace; if we tarry till the morning light, punishment will overtake us; now therefore come, let us go and tell the king's household.'
7.10 י  וַיָּבֹאוּ, וַיִּקְרְאוּ אֶל-שֹׁעֵר הָעִיר, וַיַּגִּידוּ לָהֶם לֵאמֹר, בָּאנוּ אֶל-מַחֲנֵה אֲרָם וְהִנֵּה אֵין-שָׁם אִישׁ וְקוֹל אָדָם:  כִּי אִם-הַסּוּס אָסוּר וְהַחֲמוֹר אָסוּר, וְאֹהָלִים כַּאֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה.    10 So they came and called unto the porters of the city; and they told them, saying. 'We came to the camp of the Arameans, and, behold, there was no man there, neither voice of man, but the horses tied, and the asses tied, and the tents as they were.'
7.11 יא  וַיִּקְרָא, הַשֹּׁעֲרִים; וַיַּגִּידוּ, בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ פְּנִימָה.    11 And the porters called, and they told it to the king's household within.
7.12 יב  וַיָּקָם הַמֶּלֶךְ לַיְלָה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-עֲבָדָיו, אַגִּידָה-נָּא לָכֶם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ לָנוּ אֲרָם:  יָדְעוּ כִּי-רְעֵבִים אֲנַחְנוּ, וַיֵּצְאוּ מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה לְהֵחָבֵה בהשדה (בַשָּׂדֶה) לֵאמֹר, כִּי-יֵצְאוּ מִן-הָעִיר וְנִתְפְּשֵׂם חַיִּים, וְאֶל-הָעִיר נָבֹא.    12 And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants: 'I will now tell you what the Arameans have done to us. They know that we are hungry; therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field, saying: When they come out of the city, we shall take them alive, and get into the city.'
7.13 יג  וַיַּעַן אֶחָד מֵעֲבָדָיו וַיֹּאמֶר, וְיִקְחוּ-נָא חֲמִשָּׁה מִן-הַסּוּסִים הַנִּשְׁאָרִים אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁאֲרוּ-בָהּ, הִנָּם כְּכָל-ההמון (הֲמוֹן) יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁאֲרוּ-בָהּ, הִנָּם כְּכָל-הֲמוֹן יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר-תָּמּוּ; וְנִשְׁלְחָה, וְנִרְאֶה.    13 And one of his servants answered and said: 'Let some take, I pray thee, five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city--behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it; behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are consumed--and let us send and see.'
7.14 יד  וַיִּקְחוּ, שְׁנֵי רֶכֶב סוּסִים; וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ אַחֲרֵי מַחֲנֵה-אֲרָם, לֵאמֹר--לְכוּ וּרְאוּ.    14 They took therefore two chariots with horses; and the king sent after the host of the Arameans, saying: 'Go and see.'
7.15 טו  וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵיהֶם, עַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וְהִנֵּה כָל-הַדֶּרֶךְ מְלֵאָה בְגָדִים וְכֵלִים, אֲשֶׁר-הִשְׁלִיכוּ אֲרָם בהחפזם (בְּחָפְזָם); וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, הַמַּלְאָכִים, וַיַּגִּדוּ, לַמֶּלֶךְ.    15 And they went after them unto the Jordan; and, lo, all the way was full of garments and vessels, which the Arameans had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.
7.16 טז  וַיֵּצֵא הָעָם--וַיָּבֹזּוּ, אֵת מַחֲנֵה אֲרָם; וַיְהִי סְאָה-סֹלֶת בְּשֶׁקֶל, וְסָאתַיִם שְׂעֹרִים בְּשֶׁקֶל--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה.    16 And the people went out, and spoiled the camp of the Arameans. So a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD.
7.17 יז  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ הִפְקִיד אֶת-הַשָּׁלִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁעָן עַל-יָדוֹ, עַל-הַשַּׁעַר, וַיִּרְמְסֻהוּ הָעָם בַּשַּׁעַר, וַיָּמֹת:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּרֶדֶת הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵלָיו.    17 And the king appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate; and the people trod upon him in the gate, and he died as the man of God had said, who spoke when the king came down to him.
7.18 יח  וַיְהִי, כְּדַבֵּר אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֵאמֹר:  סָאתַיִם שְׂעֹרִים בְּשֶׁקֶל, וּסְאָה-סֹלֶת בְּשֶׁקֶל, יִהְיֶה כָּעֵת מָחָר, בְּשַׁעַר שֹׁמְרוֹן.    18 And it came to pass, as the man of God had spoken to the king, saying: 'Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be to-morrow about this time in the gate of Samaria';
7.19 יט  וַיַּעַן הַשָּׁלִישׁ אֶת-אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמַר, וְהִנֵּה יְהוָה עֹשֶׂה אֲרֻבּוֹת בַּשָּׁמַיִם, הֲיִהְיֶה כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנְּךָ רֹאֶה בְּעֵינֶיךָ, וּמִשָּׁם, לֹא תֹאכֵל.    19 and that captain answered the man of God, and said: 'Now, behold, if the LORD should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be?' and he said: 'Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof';
7.20 כ  וַיְהִי-לוֹ, כֵּן; וַיִּרְמְסוּ אֹתוֹ הָעָם בַּשַּׁעַר, וַיָּמֹת.  {ס}    20 it came to pass even so unto him; for the people trod upon him in the gate, and he died. {S}
8.1 א  וֶאֱלִישָׁע דִּבֶּר אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱיָה אֶת-בְּנָהּ לֵאמֹר, קוּמִי וּלְכִי אתי (אַתְּ) וּבֵיתֵךְ, וְגוּרִי, בַּאֲשֶׁר תָּגוּרִי:  כִּי-קָרָא יְהוָה לָרָעָב, וְגַם-בָּא אֶל-הָאָרֶץ שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים.    1 Now Elisha had spoken unto the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying: 'Arise, and go thou and thy household, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst sojourn; for the LORD hath called for a famine; and it shall also come upon the land seven years.'
8.2 ב  וַתָּקָם, הָאִשָּׁה, וַתַּעַשׂ, כִּדְבַר אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים; וַתֵּלֶךְ הִיא וּבֵיתָהּ, וַתָּגָר בְּאֶרֶץ-פְּלִשְׁתִּים שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים.    2 And the woman arose, and did according to the word of the man of God; and she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.
8.3 ג  וַיְהִי, מִקְצֵה שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, וַתָּשָׁב הָאִשָּׁה, מֵאֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַתֵּצֵא לִצְעֹק אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-בֵּיתָהּ וְאֶל-שָׂדָהּ.    3 And it came to pass at the seven years' end, that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines; and she went forth to cry unto the king for her house and for her land.
8.4 ד  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ, מְדַבֵּר אֶל-גֵּחֲזִי, נַעַר אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, לֵאמֹר:  סַפְּרָה-נָּא לִי, אֵת כָּל-הַגְּדֹלוֹת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה אֱלִישָׁע.  {ס}    4 Now the king was talking with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying: 'Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha hath done.' {S}
8.5 ה  וַיְהִי הוּא מְסַפֵּר לַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱיָה אֶת-הַמֵּת, וְהִנֵּה הָאִשָּׁה אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱיָה אֶת-בְּנָהּ צֹעֶקֶת אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-בֵּיתָהּ וְעַל-שָׂדָהּ; וַיֹּאמֶר גֵּחֲזִי, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ--זֹאת הָאִשָּׁה, וְזֶה-בְּנָהּ אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱיָה אֱלִישָׁע.    5 And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored to life him that was dead, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said: 'My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.'
8.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁאַל הַמֶּלֶךְ לָאִשָּׁה, וַתְּסַפֶּר-לוֹ; וַיִּתֶּן-לָהּ הַמֶּלֶךְ סָרִיס אֶחָד לֵאמֹר, הָשֵׁיב אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לָהּ וְאֵת כָּל-תְּבוּאֹת הַשָּׂדֶה, מִיּוֹם עָזְבָה אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְעַד-עָתָּה.  {פ}    6 And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed unto her a certain officer, saying: 'Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.' {P}
8.7 ז  וַיָּבֹא אֱלִישָׁע דַּמֶּשֶׂק, וּבֶן-הֲדַד מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם חֹלֶה; וַיֻּגַּד-לוֹ לֵאמֹר, בָּא אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים עַד-הֵנָּה.    7 And Elisha came to Damascus; and Ben-hadad the king of Aram was sick; and it was told him, saying. 'The man of God is come hither.'
8.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-חֲזָהאֵל, קַח בְּיָדְךָ מִנְחָה, וְלֵךְ, לִקְרַאת אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים; וְדָרַשְׁתָּ אֶת-יְהוָה מֵאוֹתוֹ לֵאמֹר, הַאֶחְיֶה מֵחֳלִי זֶה.    8 And the king said unto Hazael: 'Take a present in thy hand, and go meet the man of God, and inquire of the LORD by him, saying: Shall I recover of this sickness?'
8.9 ט  וַיֵּלֶךְ חֲזָאֵל, לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַיִּקַּח מִנְחָה בְיָדוֹ וְכָל-טוּב דַּמֶּשֶׂק, מַשָּׂא אַרְבָּעִים גָּמָל; וַיָּבֹא, וַיַּעֲמֹד לְפָנָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר בִּנְךָ בֶן-הֲדַד מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם שְׁלָחַנִי אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר, הַאֶחְיֶה מֵחֳלִי זֶה.    9 So Hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels' burden, and came and stood before him, and said: 'Thy son Ben-hadad king of Aram hath sent me to thee, saying: Shall I recover of this sickness?'
8.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אֱלִישָׁע, לֵךְ אֱמָר-לא (לוֹ) חָיֹה תִחְיֶה; וְהִרְאַנִי יְהוָה, כִּי-מוֹת יָמוּת.    10 And Elisha said unto him: 'Go, say unto him: Thou shalt surely recover; howbeit the LORD hath shown me that he shall surely die.'
8.11 יא  וַיַּעֲמֵד אֶת-פָּנָיו, וַיָּשֶׂם עַד-בֹּשׁ; וַיֵּבְךְּ, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים.    11 And he settled his countenance stedfastly upon him, until he was ashamed; and the man of God wept.
8.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר חֲזָאֵל, מַדּוּעַ אֲדֹנִי בֹכֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר כִּי-יָדַעְתִּי אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תַּעֲשֶׂה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל רָעָה, מִבְצְרֵיהֶם תְּשַׁלַּח בָּאֵשׁ וּבַחֻרֵיהֶם בַּחֶרֶב תַּהֲרֹג, וְעֹלְלֵיהֶם תְּרַטֵּשׁ, וְהָרֹתֵיהֶם תְּבַקֵּעַ.    12 And Hazael said: 'Why weepeth my lord?' And he answered: 'Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their strongholds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash in pieces their little ones, and rip up their women with child.'
8.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר חֲזָהאֵל--כִּי מָה עַבְדְּךָ הַכֶּלֶב, כִּי יַעֲשֶׂה הַדָּבָר הַגָּדוֹל הַזֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע, הִרְאַנִי יְהוָה אֹתְךָ מֶלֶךְ עַל-אֲרָם.    13 And Hazael said: 'But what is thy servant, who is but a dog, that he should do this great thing?' And Elisha answered: 'The LORD hath shown me that thou shalt be king over Aram.'
8.14 יד  וַיֵּלֶךְ מֵאֵת אֱלִישָׁע, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-אֲדֹנָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, מָה-אָמַר לְךָ אֱלִישָׁע; וַיֹּאמֶר, אָמַר לִי חָיֹה תִחְיֶה.    14 Then he departed from Elisha, and came to his master, who said to him: 'What said Elisha to thee?' And he answered: 'He told me that thou wouldest surely recover.'
8.15 טו  וַיְהִי מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיִּקַּח הַמַּכְבֵּר וַיִּטְבֹּל בַּמַּיִם, וַיִּפְרֹשׂ עַל-פָּנָיו, וַיָּמֹת; וַיִּמְלֹךְ חֲזָהאֵל, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    15 And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took the coverlet, and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died; and Hazael reigned in his stead. {P}
8.16 טז  וּבִשְׁנַת חָמֵשׁ, לְיוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וִיהוֹשָׁפָט, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--מָלַךְ יְהוֹרָם בֶּן-יְהוֹשָׁפָט, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    16 And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being the king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
8.17 יז  בֶּן-שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׁמֹנֶה שנה (שָׁנִים), מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    17 Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
8.18 יח  וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּדֶרֶךְ מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ בֵּית אַחְאָב--כִּי בַּת-אַחְאָב, הָיְתָה-לּוֹ לְאִשָּׁה; וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.    18 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab; for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife; and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.
8.19 יט  וְלֹא-אָבָה יְהוָה לְהַשְׁחִית אֶת-יְהוּדָה, לְמַעַן דָּוִד עַבְדּוֹ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר אָמַר-לוֹ, לָתֵת לוֹ נִיר לְבָנָיו--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.    19 Howbeit the LORD would not destroy Judah, for David His servant's sake, as He promised him to give unto him a lamp and to his children alway.
8.20 כ  בְּיָמָיו פָּשַׁע אֱדוֹם, מִתַּחַת יַד-יְהוּדָה; וַיַּמְלִכוּ עֲלֵיהֶם, מֶלֶךְ.    20 In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.
8.21 כא  וַיַּעֲבֹר יוֹרָם צָעִירָה, וְכָל-הָרֶכֶב עִמּוֹ; וַיְהִי-הוּא קָם לַיְלָה, וַיַּכֶּה אֶת-אֱדוֹם הַסֹּבֵיב אֵלָיו וְאֵת שָׂרֵי הָרֶכֶב, וַיָּנָס הָעָם, לְאֹהָלָיו.    21 Then Joram passed over to Zair, and all his chariots with him; and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites that compassed him about, and the captains of the chariots; and the people fled to their tents.
8.22 כב  וַיִּפְשַׁע אֱדוֹם, מִתַּחַת יַד-יְהוּדָה, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; אָז תִּפְשַׁע לִבְנָה, בָּעֵת הַהִיא.    22 Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, unto this day. Then did Libnah revolt at the same time.
8.23 כג  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יוֹרָם, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    23 And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
8.24 כד  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יוֹרָם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו בְּעִיר דָּוִד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲחַזְיָהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    24 And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
8.25 כה  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לְיוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָלַךְ אֲחַזְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹרָם, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    25 In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.
8.26 כו  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, אֲחַזְיָהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ, וְשָׁנָה אַחַת, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ עֲתַלְיָהוּ, בַּת-עָמְרִי מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    26 Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of Israel.
8.27 כז  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ בֵּית אַחְאָב, וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּבֵית אַחְאָב:  כִּי חֲתַן בֵּית-אַחְאָב, הוּא.    27 And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did the house of Ahab; for he was the son-in-law of the house of Ahab.
8.28 כח  וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶת-יוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב, לַמִּלְחָמָה עִם-חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם--בְּרָמֹת גִּלְעָד; וַיַּכּוּ אֲרַמִּים, אֶת-יוֹרָם.    28 And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to war against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead; and the Arameans wounded Joram.
8.29 כט  וַיָּשָׁב יוֹרָם הַמֶּלֶךְ לְהִתְרַפֵּא בְיִזְרְעֶאל, מִן-הַמַּכִּים אֲשֶׁר יַכֻּהוּ אֲרַמִּים בָּרָמָה, בְּהִלָּחֲמוֹ, אֶת-חֲזָהאֵל מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם; וַאֲחַזְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹרָם מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, יָרַד לִרְאוֹת אֶת-יוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב בְּיִזְרְעֶאל--כִּי-חֹלֶה הוּא.  {פ}    29 And king Joram returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Arameans had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick. {P}
9.1 א  וֶאֱלִישָׁע, הַנָּבִיא, קָרָא, לְאַחַד מִבְּנֵי הַנְּבִיאִים; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ חֲגֹר מָתְנֶיךָ, וְקַח פַּךְ הַשֶּׁמֶן הַזֶּה בְּיָדֶךָ, וְלֵךְ, רָמֹת גִּלְעָד.    1 And Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets, and said unto him: 'Gird up thy loins, and take this vial of oil in thy hand, and go to Ramoth-gilead.
9.2 ב  וּבָאתָ-שָּׁמָּה; וּרְאֵה-שָׁם יֵהוּא בֶן-יְהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-נִמְשִׁי, וּבָאתָ וַהֲקֵמֹתוֹ מִתּוֹךְ אֶחָיו, וְהֵבֵיאתָ אֹתוֹ, חֶדֶר בְּחָדֶר.    2 And when thou comest thither, look out there Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in, and make him arise up from among his brethren, and carry him to an inner chamber.
9.3 ג  וְלָקַחְתָּ פַךְ-הַשֶּׁמֶן, וְיָצַקְתָּ עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְאָמַרְתָּ כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, מְשַׁחְתִּיךָ לְמֶלֶךְ אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּפָתַחְתָּ הַדֶּלֶת וְנַסְתָּה, וְלֹא תְחַכֶּה.    3 Then take the vial of oil, and pour it on his head, and say: Thus saith the LORD: I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the door, and flee, and tarry not.'
9.4 ד  וַיֵּלֶךְ הַנַּעַר הַנַּעַר הַנָּבִיא, רָמֹת גִּלְעָד.    4 So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead.
9.5 ה  וַיָּבֹא, וְהִנֵּה שָׂרֵי הַחַיִל יֹשְׁבִים, וַיֹּאמֶר, דָּבָר לִי אֵלֶיךָ הַשָּׂר; וַיֹּאמֶר יֵהוּא אֶל-מִי מִכֻּלָּנוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיךָ הַשָּׂר.    5 And when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting; and he said: 'I have an errand to thee, O captain.' And Jehu said: 'Unto which of us all?' And he said: 'To thee, O captain.'
9.6 ו  וַיָּקָם וַיָּבֹא הַבַּיְתָה, וַיִּצֹק הַשֶּׁמֶן אֶל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מְשַׁחְתִּיךָ לְמֶלֶךְ אֶל-עַם יְהוָה, אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    6 And he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on his head, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I have anointed thee king over the people of the LORD, even over Israel.
9.7 ז  וְהִכִּיתָה--אֶת-בֵּית אַחְאָב, אֲדֹנֶיךָ; וְנִקַּמְתִּי דְּמֵי עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִיאִים, וּדְמֵי כָּל-עַבְדֵי יְהוָה--מִיַּד אִיזָבֶל.    7 And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of My servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the LORD, at the hand of Jezebel.
9.8 ח  וְאָבַד, כָּל-בֵּית אַחְאָב; וְהִכְרַתִּי לְאַחְאָב מַשְׁתִּין בְּקִיר, וְעָצוּר וְעָזוּב בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    8 For the whole house of Ahab shall perish; and I will cut off from Ahab every man-child, and him that is shut up and him that is left at large in Israel.
9.9 ט  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-בֵּית אַחְאָב, כְּבֵית יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, וּכְבֵית, בַּעְשָׁא בֶן-אֲחִיָּה.    9 And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasa the son of Ahijah.
9.10 י  וְאֶת-אִיזֶבֶל יֹאכְלוּ הַכְּלָבִים, בְּחֵלֶק יִזְרְעֶאל--וְאֵין קֹבֵר; וַיִּפְתַּח הַדֶּלֶת, וַיָּנֹס.    10 And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be none to bury her.' And he opened the door, and fled.
9.11 יא  וְיֵהוּא, יָצָא אֶל-עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הֲשָׁלוֹם, מַדּוּעַ בָּא-הַמְשֻׁגָּע הַזֶּה אֵלֶיךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, אַתֶּם יְדַעְתֶּם אֶת-הָאִישׁ וְאֶת-שִׂיחוֹ.    11 Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord; and one said unto him: 'Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee?' And he said unto them: 'Ye know the man and what his talk was.'
9.12 יב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ שֶׁקֶר, הַגֶּד-נָא לָנוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר, כָּזֹאת וְכָזֹאת אָמַר אֵלַי לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, מְשַׁחְתִּיךָ לְמֶלֶךְ אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    12 And they said: 'It is false; tell us now.' And he said: 'Thus and thus spoke he to me, saying: Thus saith the LORD: I have anointed thee king over Israel.'
9.13 יג  וַיְמַהֲרוּ, וַיִּקְחוּ אִישׁ בִּגְדוֹ, וַיָּשִׂימוּ תַחְתָּיו, אֶל-גֶּרֶם הַמַּעֲלוֹת; וַיִּתְקְעוּ, בַּשּׁוֹפָר, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מָלַךְ יֵהוּא.    13 Then they hastened, and took every man his garment, and put it under him on the top of the stairs, and blew the horn, saying: 'Jehu is king.'
9.14 יד  וַיִּתְקַשֵּׁר, יֵהוּא בֶּן-יְהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-נִמְשִׁי--אֶל-יוֹרָם; וְיוֹרָם הָיָה שֹׁמֵר בְּרָמֹת גִּלְעָד, הוּא וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִפְּנֵי, חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם.    14 So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against Joram.--Now Joram had been guarding Ramoth-gilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Aram;
9.15 טו  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹרָם הַמֶּלֶךְ לְהִתְרַפֵּא בְיִזְרְעֶאל, מִן-הַמַּכִּים אֲשֶׁר יַכֻּהוּ אֲרַמִּים, בְּהִלָּחֲמוֹ, אֶת-חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם; וַיֹּאמֶר יֵהוּא, אִם-יֵשׁ נַפְשְׁכֶם--אַל-יֵצֵא פָלִיט מִן-הָעִיר, לָלֶכֶת לגיד (לְהַגִּיד) בְּיִזְרְעֶאל.    15 but king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Arameans had given him, when he fought with Hazael king of Aram.--And Jehu said: 'If this be your mind, then let none escape and go forth out of the city, to go to tell it in Jezreel.'
9.16 טז  וַיִּרְכַּב יֵהוּא וַיֵּלֶךְ יִזְרְעֶאלָה, כִּי יוֹרָם שֹׁכֵב שָׁמָּה; וַאֲחַזְיָה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, יָרַד לִרְאוֹת אֶת-יוֹרָם.    16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay there. And Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.
9.17 יז  וְהַצֹּפֶה עֹמֵד עַל-הַמִּגְדָּל בְּיִזְרְעֶאל, וַיַּרְא אֶת-שִׁפְעַת יֵהוּא בְּבֹאוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁפְעַת אֲנִי רֹאֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹרָם, קַח רַכָּב וּשְׁלַח לִקְרָאתָם--וְיֹאמַר הֲשָׁלוֹם.    17 Now the watchman stood on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied the company of Jehu as he came, and said: 'I see a company.' And Joram said: 'Take a horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say: Is it peace?'
9.18 יח  וַיֵּלֶךְ רֹכֵב הַסּוּס לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ הֲשָׁלוֹם, וַיֹּאמֶר יֵהוּא מַה-לְּךָ וּלְשָׁלוֹם, סֹב אֶל-אַחֲרָי; וַיַּגֵּד הַצֹּפֶה לֵאמֹר, בָּא-הַמַּלְאָךְ עַד-הֵם וְלֹא-שָׁב.    18 So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said: 'Thus saith the king: Is it peace?' And Jehu said: 'What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.' And the watchman told, saying: 'The messenger came to them, but he cometh not back.'
9.19 יט  וַיִּשְׁלַח, רֹכֵב סוּס שֵׁנִי, וַיָּבֹא אֲלֵהֶם, וַיֹּאמֶר כֹּה-אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ שָׁלוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר יֵהוּא מַה-לְּךָ וּלְשָׁלוֹם, סֹב אֶל-אַחֲרָי.    19 Then he sent out a second on horseback, who came to them, and said: 'Thus saith the king: Is it peace?' And Jehu answered: 'What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.'
9.20 כ  וַיַגֵּד הַצֹּפֶה לֵאמֹר, בָּא עַד-אֲלֵיהֶם וְלֹא-שָׁב; וְהַמִּנְהָג, כְּמִנְהַג יֵהוּא בֶן-נִמְשִׁי--כִּי בְשִׁגָּעוֹן, יִנְהָג.    20 And the watchman told, saying: 'He came even unto them, and cometh not back; and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.'
9.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹרָם אֱסֹר, וַיֶּאְסֹר רִכְבּוֹ; וַיֵּצֵא יְהוֹרָם מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַאֲחַזְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה אִישׁ בְּרִכְבּוֹ, וַיֵּצְאוּ לִקְרַאת יֵהוּא, וַיִּמְצָאֻהוּ, בְּחֶלְקַת נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי.    21 And Joram said: 'Make ready.' And they made ready his chariot. And Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot, and they went out to meet Jehu, and found him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.
9.22 כב  וַיְהִי, כִּרְאוֹת יְהוֹרָם אֶת-יֵהוּא, וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲשָׁלוֹם יֵהוּא; וַיֹּאמֶר, מָה הַשָּׁלוֹם--עַד-זְנוּנֵי אִיזֶבֶל אִמְּךָ וּכְשָׁפֶיהָ, הָרַבִּים.    22 And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said: 'Is it peace, Jehu?' And he answered: 'What peace, so long as the harlotries of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?'
9.23 כג  וַיַּהֲפֹךְ יְהוֹרָם יָדָיו, וַיָּנֹס; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-אֲחַזְיָהוּ, מִרְמָה אֲחַזְיָה.    23 And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah: 'There is treachery, O Ahaziah.'
9.24 כד  וְיֵהוּא מִלֵּא יָדוֹ בַקֶּשֶׁת, וַיַּךְ אֶת-יְהוֹרָם בֵּין זְרֹעָיו, וַיֵּצֵא הַחֵצִי, מִלִּבּוֹ; וַיִּכְרַע, בְּרִכְבּוֹ.    24 And Jehu drew his bow with his full strength, and smote Joram between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his chariot.
9.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-בִּדְקַר שָׁלִשֹׁה, שָׂא הַשְׁלִכֵהוּ, בְּחֶלְקַת שְׂדֵה נָבוֹת הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִי:  כִּי-זְכֹר אֲנִי וָאַתָּה, אֵת רֹכְבִים צְמָדִים אַחֲרֵי אַחְאָב אָבִיו, וַיהוָה נָשָׂא עָלָיו, אֶת-הַמַּשָּׂא הַזֶּה.    25 Then said [Jehu] to Bidkar his captain: 'Take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite; for remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the LORD pronounced this burden against him:
9.26 כו  אִם-לֹא אֶת-דְּמֵי נָבוֹת וְאֶת-דְּמֵי בָנָיו רָאִיתִי אֶמֶשׁ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְשִׁלַּמְתִּי לְךָ בַּחֶלְקָה הַזֹּאת, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְעַתָּה, שָׂא הַשְׁלִכֵהוּ בַּחֶלְקָה--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה.    26 Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the LORD; and I will requite thee in this plot, saith the LORD. Now therefore take and cast him into the plot of ground, according to the word of the LORD.'
9.27 כז  וַאֲחַזְיָה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, רָאָה, וַיָּנָס, דֶּרֶךְ בֵּית הַגָּן; וַיִּרְדֹּף אַחֲרָיו יֵהוּא, וַיֹּאמֶר גַּם-אֹתוֹ הַכֻּהוּ אֶל-הַמֶּרְכָּבָה בְּמַעֲלֵה-גוּר אֲשֶׁר אֶת-יִבְלְעָם, וַיָּנָס מְגִדּוֹ, וַיָּמָת שָׁם.    27 But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden-house. And Jehu followed after him, and said: 'Smite him also in the chariot'; [and they smote him] at the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.
9.28 כח  וַיַּרְכִּבוּ אֹתוֹ עֲבָדָיו, יְרוּשָׁלְָמָה; וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ בִקְבֻרָתוֹ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר דָּוִד.  {פ}    28 And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David. {P}
9.29 כט  וּבִשְׁנַת אַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לְיוֹרָם בֶּן-אַחְאָב, מָלַךְ אֲחַזְיָה, עַל-יְהוּדָה.    29 And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began Ahaziah to reign over Judah.
9.30 ל  וַיָּבוֹא יֵהוּא, יִזְרְעֶאלָה; וְאִיזֶבֶל שָׁמְעָה, וַתָּשֶׂם בַּפּוּךְ עֵינֶיהָ וַתֵּיטֶב אֶת-רֹאשָׁהּ, וַתַּשְׁקֵף, בְּעַד הַחַלּוֹן.    30 And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted her eyes, and attired her head, and looked out at the window.
9.31 לא  וְיֵהוּא, בָּא בַשָּׁעַר; וַתֹּאמֶר הֲשָׁלוֹם, זִמְרִי הֹרֵג אֲדֹנָיו.    31 And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said: 'Is it peace, thou Zimri, thy master's murderer?'
9.32 לב  וַיִּשָּׂא פָנָיו, אֶל-הַחַלּוֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי אִתִּי מִי; וַיַּשְׁקִיפוּ אֵלָיו, שְׁנַיִם שְׁלֹשָׁה סָרִיסִים.    32 And he lifted up his face to the window, and said: 'Who is on my side? who?' And there looked out to him two or three officers.
9.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר שמטהו (שִׁמְטוּהָ), וַיִּשְׁמְטוּהָ; וַיִּז מִדָּמָהּ אֶל-הַקִּיר וְאֶל-הַסּוּסִים, וַיִּרְמְסֶנָּה.    33 And he said: 'Throw her down.' So they threw her down; and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses; and she was trodden under foot.
9.34 לד  וַיָּבֹא, וַיֹּאכַל וַיֵּשְׁתְּ; וַיֹּאמֶר, פִּקְדוּ-נָא אֶת-הָאֲרוּרָה הַזֹּאת וְקִבְרוּהָ--כִּי בַת-מֶלֶךְ, הִיא.    34 And when he was come in, he did eat and drink; and he said: 'Look now after this cursed woman, and bury her; for she is a king's daughter.'
9.35 לה  וַיֵּלְכוּ, לְקָבְרָהּ; וְלֹא-מָצְאוּ בָהּ, כִּי אִם-הַגֻּלְגֹּלֶת וְהָרַגְלַיִם--וְכַפּוֹת הַיָּדָיִם.    35 And they went to bury her; but they found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.
9.36 לו  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, וַיַּגִּידוּ לוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר דְּבַר-יְהוָה הוּא, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּיַד-עַבְדּוֹ אֵלִיָּהוּ הַתִּשְׁבִּי לֵאמֹר:  בְּחֵלֶק יִזְרְעֶאל, יֹאכְלוּ הַכְּלָבִים אֶת-בְּשַׂר אִיזָבֶל.    36 Wherefore they came back, and told him. And he said: 'This is the word of the LORD, which He spoke by His servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying: In the portion of Jezreel shall the dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel;
9.37 לז  והית (וְהָיְתָה) נִבְלַת אִיזֶבֶל, כְּדֹמֶן עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה--בְּחֵלֶק יִזְרְעֶאל:  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֹאמְרוּ, זֹאת אִיזָבֶל.  {ס}    37 and the carcass of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say: This is Jezebel.' {S}
10.1 א  וּלְאַחְאָב שִׁבְעִים בָּנִים, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; וַיִּכְתֹּב יֵהוּא סְפָרִים וַיִּשְׁלַח שֹׁמְרוֹן, אֶל-שָׂרֵי יִזְרְעֶאל הַזְּקֵנִים, וְאֶל-הָאֹמְנִים אַחְאָב, לֵאמֹר.    1 Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel, even the elders, and unto them that brought up [the sons of] Ahab, saying:
10.2 ב  וְעַתָּה, כְּבֹא הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה אֲלֵיכֶם, וְאִתְּכֶם, בְּנֵי אֲדֹנֵיכֶם; וְאִתְּכֶם הָרֶכֶב וְהַסּוּסִים, וְעִיר מִבְצָר וְהַנָּשֶׁק.    2 'And now as soon as this letter cometh to you, seeing your master's sons are with you, and there are with you chariots and horses, fortified cities also, and armour;
10.3 ג  וּרְאִיתֶם הַטּוֹב וְהַיָּשָׁר, מִבְּנֵי אֲדֹנֵיכֶם, וְשַׂמְתֶּם, עַל-כִּסֵּא אָבִיו; וְהִלָּחֲמוּ, עַל-בֵּית אֲדֹנֵיכֶם.    3 look ye out the best and meetest of your master's sons, and set him on his father's throne, and fight for your master's house.'
10.4 ד  וַיִּרְאוּ, מְאֹד מְאֹד, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, הִנֵּה שְׁנֵי הַמְּלָכִים לֹא עָמְדוּ לְפָנָיו; וְאֵיךְ, נַעֲמֹד אֲנָחְנוּ.    4 But they were exceedingly afraid, and said: 'Behold, the two kings stood not before him; how then shall we stand?'
10.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַבַּיִת וַאֲשֶׁר עַל-הָעִיר וְהַזְּקֵנִים וְהָאֹמְנִים אֶל-יֵהוּא לֵאמֹר, עֲבָדֶיךָ אֲנַחְנוּ, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תֹּאמַר אֵלֵינוּ, נַעֲשֶׂה:  לֹא-נַמְלִךְ אִישׁ, הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ עֲשֵׂה.    5 And he that was over the household, and he that was over the city, the elders also, and they that brought up the children, sent to Jehu, saying: 'We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any man king; do thou that which is good in thine eyes.'
10.6 ו  וַיִּכְתֹּב אֲלֵיהֶם סֵפֶר שֵׁנִית לֵאמֹר, אִם-לִי אַתֶּם וּלְקֹלִי אַתֶּם שֹׁמְעִים קְחוּ אֶת-רָאשֵׁי אַנְשֵׁי בְנֵי-אֲדֹנֵיכֶם, וּבֹאוּ אֵלַי כָּעֵת מָחָר, יִזְרְעֶאלָה; וּבְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ, אֶת-גְּדֹלֵי הָעִיר מְגַדְּלִים אוֹתָם.    6 Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying: 'If ye be on my side, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the men your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to-morrow this time.' Now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city, who brought them up.
10.7 ז  וַיְהִי, כְּבֹא הַסֵּפֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ; וַיָּשִׂימוּ אֶת-רָאשֵׁיהֶם בַּדּוּדִים, וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ אֵלָיו יִזְרְעֶאלָה.    7 And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the king's sons, and slew them, even seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent them unto him to Jezreel.
10.8 ח  וַיָּבֹא הַמַּלְאָךְ וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ לֵאמֹר, הֵבִיאוּ רָאשֵׁי בְנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׂימוּ אֹתָם שְׁנֵי צִבֻּרִים פֶּתַח הַשַּׁעַר--עַד-הַבֹּקֶר.    8 And there came a messenger, and told him, saying: 'They have brought the heads of the king's sons.' And he said: 'Lay ye them in two heaps at the entrance of the gate until the morning.'
10.9 ט  וַיְהִי בַבֹּקֶר, וַיֵּצֵא וַיַּעֲמֹד, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, צַדִּקִים אַתֶּם; הִנֵּה אֲנִי קָשַׁרְתִּי עַל-אֲדֹנִי, וָאֶהְרְגֵהוּ, וּמִי הִכָּה, אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה.    9 And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and said to all the people: 'Ye are righteous; behold, I conspired against my master, and slew him; but who smote all these?
10.10 י  דְּעוּ אֵפוֹא, כִּי לֹא יִפֹּל מִדְּבַר יְהוָה אַרְצָה, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, עַל-בֵּית אַחְאָב; וַיהוָה עָשָׂה--אֵת אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד עַבְדּוֹ אֵלִיָּהוּ.    10 Know now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the LORD, which the LORD spoke concerning the house of Ahab; for the LORD hath done that which He spoke by His servant Elijah.'
10.11 יא  וַיַּךְ יֵהוּא, אֵת כָּל-הַנִּשְׁאָרִים לְבֵית-אַחְאָב בְּיִזְרְעֶאל, וְכָל-גְּדֹלָיו, וּמְיֻדָּעָיו וְכֹהֲנָיו--עַד-בִּלְתִּי הִשְׁאִיר-לוֹ, שָׂרִיד.    11 So Jehu smote all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his familiar friends, and his priests, until there was left him none remaining.
10.12 יב  וַיָּקָם, וַיָּבֹא, וַיֵּלֶךְ, שֹׁמְרוֹן--הוּא בֵּית-עֵקֶד הָרֹעִים, בַּדָּרֶךְ.    12 And he arose and departed, and went to Samaria. And as he was at the shearing-house of the shepherds in the way,
10.13 יג  וְיֵהוּא, מָצָא אֶת-אֲחֵי אֲחַזְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי אַתֶּם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֲחֵי אֲחַזְיָהוּ אֲנַחְנוּ, וַנֵּרֶד לִשְׁלוֹם בְּנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּבְנֵי הַגְּבִירָה.    13 Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah, and said: 'Who are ye?' And they answered: 'We are the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go down to salute the children of the king and the children of the queen.'
10.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר תִּפְשׂוּם חַיִּים, וַיִּתְפְּשׂוּם חַיִּים; וַיִּשְׁחָטוּם אֶל-בּוֹר בֵּית-עֵקֶד, אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנַיִם אִישׁ, וְלֹא-הִשְׁאִיר אִישׁ, מֵהֶם.  {ס}    14 And he said: 'Take them alive.' And they took them alive, and slew them at the pit of the shearing-house, even two and forty men; neither left he any of them. {S}
10.15 טו  וַיֵּלֶךְ מִשָּׁם וַיִּמְצָא אֶת-יְהוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב לִקְרָאתוֹ וַיְבָרְכֵהוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הֲיֵשׁ אֶת-לְבָבְךָ יָשָׁר כַּאֲשֶׁר לְבָבִי עִם-לְבָבֶךָ, וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹנָדָב יֵשׁ וָיֵשׁ, תְּנָה אֶת-יָדֶךָ; וַיִּתֵּן יָדוֹ, וַיַּעֲלֵהוּ אֵלָיו אֶל-הַמֶּרְכָּבָה.    15 And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him; and he saluted him, and said to him: 'Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?' And Jehonadab answered: 'It is.' 'If it be, [said Jehu,] give me thy hand.' And he gave him his hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.
10.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר לְכָה אִתִּי, וּרְאֵה בְּקִנְאָתִי לַיהוָה; וַיַּרְכִּבוּ אֹתוֹ, בְּרִכְבּוֹ.    16 And he said: 'Come with me, and see my zeal for the LORD.' So they made him ride in his chariot.
10.17 יז  וַיָּבֹא, שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיַּךְ אֶת-כָּל-הַנִּשְׁאָרִים לְאַחְאָב בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, עַד-הִשְׁמִדוֹ--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֶל-אֵלִיָּהוּ.  {פ}    17 And when he came to Samaria, he smote all that remained unto Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke to Elijah. {P}
10.18 יח  וַיִּקְבֹּץ יֵהוּא, אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, אַחְאָב עָבַד אֶת-הַבַּעַל מְעָט; יֵהוּא, יַעַבְדֶנּוּ הַרְבֵּה.    18 And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them: 'Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu will serve him much.
10.19 יט  וְעַתָּה כָל-נְבִיאֵי הַבַּעַל כָּל-עֹבְדָיו וְכָל-כֹּהֲנָיו קִרְאוּ אֵלַי אִישׁ אַל-יִפָּקֵד, כִּי זֶבַח גָּדוֹל לִי לַבַּעַל--כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יִפָּקֵד, לֹא יִחְיֶה; וְיֵהוּא עָשָׂה בְעָקְבָּה, לְמַעַן הַאֲבִיד אֶת-עֹבְדֵי הַבָּעַל.    19 Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshippers, and all his priests, let none be wanting; for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live.' But Jehu did it in subtlety, to the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.
10.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר יֵהוּא, קַדְּשׁוּ עֲצָרָה לַבַּעַל--וַיִּקְרָאוּ.    20 And Jehu said: 'Sanctify a solemn assembly for Baal.' And they proclaimed it.
10.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח יֵהוּא, בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-עֹבְדֵי הַבַּעַל, וְלֹא-נִשְׁאַר אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר לֹא-בָא; וַיָּבֹאוּ בֵּית הַבַּעַל, וַיִּמָּלֵא בֵית-הַבַּעַל פֶּה לָפֶה.    21 And Jehu sent through all Israel; and all the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came not. And they came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was filled from one end to another.
10.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר, לַאֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמֶּלְתָּחָה, הוֹצֵא לְבוּשׁ, לְכֹל עֹבְדֵי הַבָּעַל; וַיֹּצֵא לָהֶם, הַמַּלְבּוּשׁ.    22 And he said unto him that was over the vestry: 'Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal.' And he brought them forth vestments.
10.23 כג  וַיָּבֹא יֵהוּא וִיהוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב, בֵּית הַבָּעַל; וַיֹּאמֶר לְעֹבְדֵי הַבַּעַל, חַפְּשׂוּ וּרְאוּ פֶּן-יֶשׁ-פֹּה עִמָּכֶם מֵעַבְדֵי יְהוָה--כִּי אִם-עֹבְדֵי הַבַּעַל, לְבַדָּם.    23 And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of Baal; and he said unto the worshippers of Baal: 'Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants of the LORD, but the worshippers of Baal only.'
10.24 כד  וַיָּבֹאוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת זְבָחִים וְעֹלוֹת; וְיֵהוּא שָׂם-לוֹ בַחוּץ, שְׁמֹנִים אִישׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִמָּלֵט מִן-הָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מֵבִיא עַל-יְדֵיכֶם, נַפְשׁוֹ תַּחַת נַפְשׁוֹ.    24 And they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt-offerings. Now Jehu had appointed him fourscore men without, and said: 'If any of the men whom I bring into your hands escape, his life shall be for the life of him.'
10.25 כה  וַיְהִי כְּכַלֹּתוֹ לַעֲשׂוֹת הָעֹלָה, וַיֹּאמֶר יֵהוּא לָרָצִים וְלַשָּׁלִשִׁים בֹּאוּ הַכּוּם אִישׁ אַל-יֵצֵא, וַיַּכּוּם, לְפִי-חָרֶב; וַיַּשְׁלִכוּ, הָרָצִים וְהַשָּׁלִשִׁים, וַיֵּלְכוּ, עַד-עִיר בֵּית-הַבָּעַל.    25 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt-offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains: 'Go in, and slay them; let none come forth.' And they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal.
10.26 כו  וַיֹּצִאוּ אֶת-מַצְּבוֹת בֵּית-הַבַּעַל, וַיִּשְׂרְפוּהָ.    26 And they brought forth the pillars that were in the house of Baal, and burned them.
10.27 כז  וַיִּתְּצוּ, אֵת מַצְּבַת הַבָּעַל; וַיִּתְּצוּ אֶת-בֵּית הַבַּעַל, וַיְשִׂמֻהוּ למחראות (לְמוֹצָאוֹת) עַד-הַיּוֹם.    27 And they broke down the pillar of Baal, and broke down the house of Baal, and made it a draught-house, unto this day.
10.28 כח  וַיַּשְׁמֵד יֵהוּא אֶת-הַבַּעַל, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל.    28 Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
10.29 כט  רַק חֲטָאֵי יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לֹא-סָר יֵהוּא, מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם:  עֶגְלֵי, הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר בֵּית-אֵל, וַאֲשֶׁר בְּדָן.  {פ}    29 Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from after them, the golden calves that were in Beth-el, and that were in Dan. {P}
10.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יֵהוּא, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר-הֱטִיבֹתָ לַעֲשׂוֹת הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינַי--כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר בִּלְבָבִי, עָשִׂיתָ לְבֵית אַחְאָב:  בְּנֵי רְבִעִים, יֵשְׁבוּ לְךָ עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל.    30 And the LORD said unto Jehu: 'Because thou hast done well in executing that which is right in Mine eyes, and hast done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in My heart, thy sons of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.'
10.31 לא  וְיֵהוּא, לֹא שָׁמַר לָלֶכֶת בְּתוֹרַת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּכָל-לְבָבוֹ:  לֹא סָר, מֵעַל חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    31 But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the LORD, the God of Israel, with all his heart; he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
10.32 לב  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם--הֵחֵל יְהוָה, לְקַצּוֹת בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּכֵּם חֲזָאֵל, בְּכָל-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל.    32 In those days the LORD began to cut Israel short; and Hazael smote them in all the borders of Israel:
10.33 לג  מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן, מִזְרַח הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, אֵת כָּל-אֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד, הַגָּדִי וְהָראוּבֵנִי וְהַמְנַשִּׁי--מֵעֲרֹעֵר אֲשֶׁר עַל-נַחַל אַרְנֹן, וְהַגִּלְעָד וְהַבָּשָׁן.    33 from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the valley of Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan.
10.34 לד  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יֵהוּא וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וְכָל-גְּבוּרָתוֹ:  הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
10.35 לה  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יֵהוּא עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹאָחָז בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    35 And Jehu slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.
10.36 לו  וְהַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ יֵהוּא עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--עֶשְׂרִים-וּשְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנָה, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.  {פ}    36 And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty and eight years. {P}
11.1 א  וַעֲתַלְיָה אֵם אֲחַזְיָהוּ, וראתה (רָאֲתָה) כִּי מֵת בְּנָהּ; וַתָּקָם, וַתְּאַבֵּד, אֵת, כָּל-זֶרַע הַמַּמְלָכָה.    1 Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal.
11.2 ב  וַתִּקַּח יְהוֹשֶׁבַע בַּת-הַמֶּלֶךְ-יוֹרָם אֲחוֹת אֲחַזְיָהוּ אֶת-יוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-אֲחַזְיָה, וַתִּגְנֹב אֹתוֹ מִתּוֹךְ בְּנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ הממותתים (הַמּוּמָתִים)--אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-מֵינִקְתּוֹ, בַּחֲדַר הַמִּטּוֹת; וַיַּסְתִּרוּ אֹתוֹ מִפְּנֵי עֲתַלְיָהוּ, וְלֹא הוּמָת.    2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him away from among the king's sons that were slain, even him and his nurse, and put them in the bed-chamber; and they hid him from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.
11.3 ג  וַיְהִי אִתָּהּ בֵּית יְהוָה, מִתְחַבֵּא שֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים; וַעֲתַלְיָה, מֹלֶכֶת עַל-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}    3 And he was with her hid in the house of the LORD six years; and Athaliah reigned over the land. {P}
11.4 ד  וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִיעִית שָׁלַח יְהוֹיָדָע וַיִּקַּח אֶת-שָׂרֵי המאיות (הַמֵּאוֹת), לַכָּרִי וְלָרָצִים, וַיָּבֵא אֹתָם אֵלָיו, בֵּית יְהוָה; וַיִּכְרֹת לָהֶם בְּרִית וַיַּשְׁבַּע אֹתָם, בְּבֵית יְהוָה, וַיַּרְא אֹתָם, אֶת-בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ.    4 And in the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the captains over hundreds, of the Carites and of the guard, and brought them to him into the house of the LORD; and he made a covenant with them, and took an oath of them in the house of the LORD, and showed them the king's son.
11.5 ה  וַיְצַוֵּם לֵאמֹר, זֶה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשׂוּן:  הַשְּׁלִשִׁית מִכֶּם, בָּאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת, וְשֹׁמְרֵי, מִשְׁמֶרֶת בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ.    5 And he commanded them, saying: 'This is the thing that ye shall do: a third part of you, that come in on the sabbath, and that keep the watch of the king's house--
11.6 ו  וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית בְּשַׁעַר סוּר, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית בַּשַּׁעַר אַחַר הָרָצִים; וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַבַּיִת, מַסָּח.    6 now another third part was at the gate Sur, and another third part at the gate behind the guard--shall keep the watch of the house, and be a barrier.
11.7 ז  וּשְׁתֵּי הַיָּדוֹת בָּכֶם, כֹּל יֹצְאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת, וְשָׁמְרוּ אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת בֵּית-יְהוָה, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.    7 And the other two parts of you, even all that go forth on the sabbath, shall keep the watch of the house of the LORD about the king.
11.8 ח  וְהִקַּפְתֶּם עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ סָבִיב, אִישׁ וְכֵלָיו בְּיָדוֹ, וְהַבָּא אֶל-הַשְּׂדֵרוֹת, יוּמָת; וִהְיוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּצֵאתוֹ וּבְבֹאוֹ.    8 And ye shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and he that cometh within the ranks, let him be slain; and be ye with the king when he goeth out, and when he cometh in.'
11.9 ט  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ שָׂרֵי המאיות (הַמֵּאוֹת), כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, וַיִּקְחוּ אִישׁ אֶת-אֲנָשָׁיו, בָּאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת עִם יֹצְאֵי הַשַּׁבָּת; וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן.    9 And the captains over hundreds did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded; and they took every man his men, those that were to come in on the sabbath, with those that were to go out on the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.
11.10 י  וַיִּתֵּן הַכֹּהֵן לְשָׂרֵי המאיות (הַמֵּאוֹת), אֶת-הַחֲנִית וְאֶת-הַשְּׁלָטִים, אֲשֶׁר, לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד--אֲשֶׁר, בְּבֵית יְהוָה.    10 And the priest delivered to the captains over hundreds the spear and shields that had been king David's, which were in the house of the LORD.
11.11 יא  וַיַּעַמְדוּ הָרָצִים אִישׁ וְכֵלָיו בְּיָדוֹ, מִכֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת הַיְמָנִית עַד-כֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת הַשְּׂמָאלִית, לַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְלַבָּיִת--עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, סָבִיב.    11 And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, by the king round about.
11.12 יב  וַיּוֹצִא אֶת-בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּתֵּן עָלָיו אֶת-הַנֵּזֶר וְאֶת-הָעֵדוּת, וַיַּמְלִכוּ אֹתוֹ, וַיִּמְשָׁחֻהוּ; וַיַּכּוּ-כָף--וַיֹּאמְרוּ, יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    12 Then he brought out the king's son, and put upon him the crown and the insignia; and they made him king, and anointed him; and they clapped their hands, and said: 'Long live the king.' {S}
11.13 יג  וַתִּשְׁמַע עֲתַלְיָה, אֶת-קוֹל הָרָצִין הָעָם; וַתָּבֹא אֶל-הָעָם, בֵּית יְהוָה.    13 And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she came to the people into the house of the LORD.
11.14 יד  וַתֵּרֶא וְהִנֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ עֹמֵד עַל-הָעַמּוּד כַּמִּשְׁפָּט, וְהַשָּׂרִים וְהַחֲצֹצְרוֹת אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-עַם הָאָרֶץ שָׂמֵחַ, וְתֹקֵעַ בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת; וַתִּקְרַע עֲתַלְיָה אֶת-בְּגָדֶיהָ, וַתִּקְרָא קֶשֶׁר קָשֶׁר.    14 And she looked, and, behold, the king stood on the platform, as the manner was, and the captains and the trumpets by the king; and all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and cried: 'Treason, treason.'
11.15 טו  וַיְצַו יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-שָׂרֵי המאיות (הַמֵּאוֹת) פְּקֻדֵי הַחַיִל, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם הוֹצִיאוּ אֹתָהּ אֶל-מִבֵּית לַשְּׂדֵרֹת, וְהַבָּא אַחֲרֶיהָ, הָמֵת בֶּחָרֶב:  כִּי אָמַר הַכֹּהֵן, אַל-תּוּמַת בֵּית יְהוָה.    15 And Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of hundreds, the officers of the host, and said unto them: 'Have her forth between the ranks; and him that followeth her slay with the sword'; for the priest said: 'Let her not be slain in the house of the LORD.'
11.16 טז  וַיָּשִׂמוּ לָהּ יָדַיִם, וַתָּבוֹא דֶּרֶךְ-מְבוֹא הַסּוּסִים בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַתּוּמַת, שָׁם.  {ס}    16 So they made way for her; and she went by the way of the horses' entry to the king's house; and there was she slain. {S}
11.17 יז  וַיִּכְרֹת יְהוֹיָדָע אֶת-הַבְּרִית, בֵּין יְהוָה וּבֵין הַמֶּלֶךְ וּבֵין הָעָם, לִהְיוֹת לְעָם, לַיהוָה; וּבֵין הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּבֵין הָעָם.    17 And Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and the people, that they should be the LORD'S people; between the king also and the people.
11.18 יח  וַיָּבֹאוּ כָל-עַם הָאָרֶץ בֵּית-הַבַּעַל וַיִּתְּצֻהוּ, אֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתָו וְאֶת-צְלָמָיו שִׁבְּרוּ הֵיטֵב, וְאֵת מַתָּן כֹּהֵן הַבַּעַל, הָרְגוּ לִפְנֵי הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת; וַיָּשֶׂם הַכֹּהֵן פְּקֻדֹּת, עַל-בֵּית יְהוָה.    18 And all the people of the land went to the house of Baal, and broke it down; his altars and his images broke they in pieces thoroughly, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of the LORD.
11.19 יט  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת וְאֶת-הַכָּרִי וְאֶת-הָרָצִים וְאֵת כָּל-עַם הָאָרֶץ, וַיֹּרִידוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ מִבֵּית יְהוָה, וַיָּבוֹאוּ דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר הָרָצִים, בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֵּשֶׁב, עַל-כִּסֵּא הַמְּלָכִים.    19 And he took the captains over hundreds, and the Carites, and the guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king from the house of the LORD, and came by the way of the gate of the guard unto the king's house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.
11.20 כ  וַיִּשְׂמַח כָּל-עַם-הָאָרֶץ, וְהָעִיר שָׁקָטָה; וְאֶת-עֲתַלְיָהוּ הֵמִיתוּ בַחֶרֶב, בֵּית מלך (הַמֶּלֶךְ).  {ס}    20 So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet; and they slew Athaliah with the sword at the king's house. {S}
11.1 א  בֶּן-שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, יְהוֹאָשׁ בְּמָלְכוֹ.  {פ}    1 Jehoash was seven years old when he began to reign. {P}
12.2 ב  בִּשְׁנַת-שֶׁבַע לְיֵהוּא, מָלַךְ יְהוֹאָשׁ, וְאַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, צִבְיָה מִבְּאֵר שָׁבַע.    2 In the seventh year of Jehu began Jehoash to reign; and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba.
12.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוֹאָשׁ הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כָּל-יָמָיו, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרָהוּ, יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן.    3 And Jehoash did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD all his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.
12.4 ד  רַק הַבָּמוֹת, לֹא-סָרוּ:  עוֹד הָעָם מְזַבְּחִים וּמְקַטְּרִים, בַּבָּמוֹת.    4 Howbeit the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places.
12.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹאָשׁ אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים, כֹּל כֶּסֶף הַקֳּדָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-יוּבָא בֵית-יְהוָה כֶּסֶף עוֹבֵר--אִישׁ, כֶּסֶף נַפְשׁוֹת עֶרְכּוֹ:  כָּל-כֶּסֶף, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲלֶה עַל לֶב-אִישׁ, לְהָבִיא, בֵּית יְהוָה.    5 And Jehoash said to the priests: 'All the money of the hallowed things that is brought into the house of the LORD, in current money, the money of the persons for whom each man is rated, all the money that cometh into any man's heart to bring into the house of the LORD,
12.6 ו  יִקְחוּ לָהֶם הַכֹּהֲנִים, אִישׁ מֵאֵת מַכָּרוֹ; וְהֵם, יְחַזְּקוּ אֶת-בֶּדֶק הַבַּיִת, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִמָּצֵא שָׁם, בָּדֶק.  {פ}    6 let the priests take it to them, every man from him that bestoweth it upon him; and they shall repair the breaches of the house, wheresoever any breach shall be found.' {P}
12.7 ז  וַיְהִי, בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וְשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנָה--לַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹאָשׁ:  לֹא-חִזְּקוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶת-בֶּדֶק הַבָּיִת.    7 But it was so, that in the three and twentieth year of king Jehoash the priests had not repaired the breaches of the house.
12.8 ח  וַיִּקְרָא הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹאָשׁ לִיהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, וְלַכֹּהֲנִים, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, מַדּוּעַ אֵינְכֶם מְחַזְּקִים אֶת-בֶּדֶק הַבָּיִת; וְעַתָּה, אַל-תִּקְחוּ-כֶסֶף מֵאֵת מַכָּרֵיכֶם, כִּי-לְבֶדֶק הַבַּיִת, תִּתְּנֻהוּ.    8 Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and for the other priests, and said unto them: 'Why repair ye not the breaches of the house? now therefore take no longer money from them that bestow it upon you, but deliver it for the breaches of the house.'
12.9 ט  וַיֵּאֹתוּ, הַכֹּהֲנִים, לְבִלְתִּי קְחַת-כֶּסֶף מֵאֵת הָעָם, וּלְבִלְתִּי חַזֵּק אֶת-בֶּדֶק הַבָּיִת.    9 And the priests consented that they should take no longer money from the people, neither repair the breaches of the house.
12.10 י  וַיִּקַּח יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, אֲרוֹן אֶחָד, וַיִּקֹּב חֹר, בְּדַלְתּוֹ; וַיִּתֵּן אֹתוֹ אֵצֶל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ בימין (מִיָּמִין), בְּבוֹא-אִישׁ בֵּית יְהוָה, וְנָתְנוּ-שָׁמָּה הַכֹּהֲנִים שֹׁמְרֵי הַסַּף, אֶת-כָּל-הַכֶּסֶף הַמּוּבָא בֵית-יְהוָה.    10 And Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh into the house of the LORD; and the priests that kept the threshold put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.
12.11 יא  וַיְהִי, כִּרְאוֹתָם, כִּי-רַב הַכֶּסֶף, בָּאָרוֹן; וַיַּעַל סֹפֵר הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְהַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל, וַיָּצֻרוּ וַיִּמְנוּ, אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף הַנִּמְצָא בֵית-יְהוָה.    11 And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest, that the king's scribe and the high priest came up, and they put up in bags and counted the money that was found in the house of the LORD.
12.12 יב  וְנָתְנוּ, אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף הַמְתֻכָּן, עַל-יד (יְדֵי) עֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, הפקדים (הַמֻּפְקָדִים) בֵּית יְהוָה; וַיּוֹצִיאֻהוּ לְחָרָשֵׁי הָעֵץ, וְלַבֹּנִים, הָעֹשִׂים, בֵּית יְהוָה.    12 And they gave the money that was weighed out into the hands of them that did the work, that had the oversight of the house of the LORD; and they paid it out to the carpenters and the builders, that wrought upon the house of the LORD,
12.13 יג  וְלַגֹּדְרִים, וּלְחֹצְבֵי הָאֶבֶן, וְלִקְנוֹת עֵצִים וְאַבְנֵי מַחְצֵב, לְחַזֵּק אֶת-בֶּדֶק בֵּית-יְהוָה; וּלְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא עַל-הַבַּיִת, לְחָזְקָה.    13 and to the masons and the hewers of stone, and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the breaches of the house of the LORD, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.
12.14 יד  אַךְ לֹא יֵעָשֶׂה בֵּית יְהוָה, סִפּוֹת כֶּסֶף מְזַמְּרוֹת מִזְרָקוֹת חֲצֹצְרוֹת, כָּל-כְּלִי זָהָב, וּכְלִי-כָסֶף--מִן-הַכֶּסֶף, הַמּוּבָא בֵית-יְהוָה.    14 But there were not made for the house of the LORD cups of silver, snuffers, basins, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of silver, of the money that was brought into the house of the LORD;
12.15 טו  כִּי-לְעֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, יִתְּנֻהוּ; וְחִזְּקוּ-בוֹ, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה.    15 for they gave that to them that did the work, and repaired therewith the house of the LORD.
12.16 טז  וְלֹא יְחַשְּׁבוּ אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר יִתְּנוּ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף עַל-יָדָם, לָתֵת, לְעֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה:  כִּי בֶאֱמֻנָה, הֵם עֹשִׂים.    16 Moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they delivered the money to give to them that did the work; for they dealt faithfully.
12.17 יז  כֶּסֶף אָשָׁם וְכֶסֶף חַטָּאוֹת, לֹא יוּבָא בֵּית יְהוָה:  לַכֹּהֲנִים, יִהְיוּ.  {פ}    17 The forfeit money, and the sin money, was not brought into the house of the LORD; it was the priests'. {P}
12.18 יח  אָז יַעֲלֶה, חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, וַיִּלָּחֶם עַל-גַּת, וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ; וַיָּשֶׂם חֲזָאֵל פָּנָיו, לַעֲלוֹת עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    18 Then Hazael king of Aram went up, and fought against Gath, and took it; and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.
12.19 יט  וַיִּקַּח יְהוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, אֵת כָּל-הַקֳּדָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-הִקְדִּישׁוּ יְהוֹשָׁפָט וִיהוֹרָם וַאֲחַזְיָהוּ אֲבֹתָיו מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-קֳדָשָׁיו, וְאֵת כָּל-הַזָּהָב הַנִּמְצָא בְּאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה, וּבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּשְׁלַח, לַחֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, וַיַּעַל, מֵעַל יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    19 And Jehoash king Judah took all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and of the king's house, and sent it to Hazael king of Aram; and he went away from Jerusalem.
12.20 כ  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יוֹאָשׁ, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    20 Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
12.21 כא  וַיָּקֻמוּ עֲבָדָיו, וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ-קָשֶׁר; וַיַּכּוּ, אֶת-יוֹאָשׁ, בֵּית מִלֹּא, הַיֹּרֵד סִלָּא.    21 And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and smote Joash at Beth-millo, on the way that goeth down to Silla.
12.22 כב  וְיוֹזָכָר בֶּן-שִׁמְעָת וִיהוֹזָבָד בֶּן-שֹׁמֵר עֲבָדָיו, הִכֻּהוּ וַיָּמֹת, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר דָּוִד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֲמַצְיָה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    22 For Jozacar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David; and Amaziah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
13.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וְשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנָה, לְיוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-אֲחַזְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--מָלַךְ יְהוֹאָחָז בֶּן-יֵהוּא עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, שְׁבַע עֶשְׂרֵה, שָׁנָה.    1 In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned seventeen years.
13.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ אַחַר חַטֹּאת יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לֹא-סָר מִמֶּנָּה.    2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.
13.3 ג  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּיַד חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, וּבְיַד בֶּן-הֲדַד בֶּן-חֲזָאֵל--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.    3 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Aram, and into the hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael, continually.
13.4 ד  וַיְחַל יְהוֹאָחָז, אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּשְׁמַע אֵלָיו, יְהוָה, כִּי רָאָה אֶת-לַחַץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי-לָחַץ אֹתָם מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם.    4 And Jehoahaz besought the LORD, and the LORD hearkened unto him; for He saw the oppression of Israel, how that the king of Aram oppressed them.--
13.5 ה  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, מוֹשִׁיעַ, וַיֵּצְאוּ, מִתַּחַת יַד-אֲרָם; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּאָהֳלֵיהֶם, כִּתְמוֹל שִׁלְשׁוֹם.    5 And the LORD gave Israel a deliverer, so that they went out from under the hand of the Arameans; and the children of Israel dwelt in their tents, as beforetime.
13.6 ו  אַךְ לֹא-סָרוּ מֵחַטֹּאת בֵּית-יָרָבְעָם, אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱטִי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בָּהּ הָלָךְ; וְגַם, הָאֲשֵׁרָה, עָמְדָה, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.    6 Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, wherewith he made Israel to sin, but walked therein; and there remained the Asherah also in Samaria.--
13.7 ז  כִּי לֹא הִשְׁאִיר לִיהוֹאָחָז עָם, כִּי אִם-חֲמִשִּׁים פָּרָשִׁים וַעֲשָׂרָה רֶכֶב, וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים, רַגְלִי:  כִּי אִבְּדָם מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, וַיְשִׂמֵם כֶּעָפָר לָדֻשׁ.    7 For there was not left to Jehoahaz of the people save fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for the king of Aram destroyed them, and made them like the dust in threshing.
13.8 ח  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹאָחָז וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ:  הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
13.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יְהוֹאָחָז עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יוֹאָשׁ בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    9 And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria; and Joash his son reigned in his stead. {P}
13.10 י  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וָשֶׁבַע שָׁנָה, לְיוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--מָלַךְ יְהוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, שֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה, שָׁנָה.    10 In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned sixteen years.
13.11 יא  וַיַּעֲשֶׂה הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  לֹא סָר מִכָּל-חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בָּהּ הָלָךְ.    11 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin; but he walked therein.
13.12 יב  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יוֹאָשׁ, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר נִלְחַם עִם אֲמַצְיָה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    12 Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
13.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יוֹאָשׁ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וְיָרָבְעָם יָשַׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ; וַיִּקָּבֵר יוֹאָשׁ בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, עִם מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    13 And Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne; and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. {P}
13.14 יד  וֶאֱלִישָׁע חָלָה אֶת-חָלְיוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יָמוּת בּוֹ; וַיֵּרֶד אֵלָיו יוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֵּבְךְּ עַל-פָּנָיו וַיֹּאמַר, אָבִי אָבִי, רֶכֶב יִשְׂרָאֵל וּפָרָשָׁיו.    14 Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he was to die; and Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over him, and said: 'My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof!'
13.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אֱלִישָׁע, קַח קֶשֶׁת וְחִצִּים; וַיִּקַּח אֵלָיו, קֶשֶׁת וְחִצִּים.    15 And Elisha said unto him: 'Take bow and arrows'; and he took unto him bow and arrows.
13.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר לְמֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַרְכֵּב יָדְךָ עַל-הַקֶּשֶׁת, וַיַּרְכֵּב, יָדוֹ; וַיָּשֶׂם אֱלִישָׁע יָדָיו, עַל-יְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    16 And he said to the king of Israel: 'Put thy hand upon the bow'; and he put his hand upon it. And Elisha laid his hands upon the king's hands.
13.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר, פְּתַח הַחַלּוֹן קֵדְמָה--וַיִּפְתָּח; וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלִישָׁע יְרֵה, וַיּוֹר, וַיֹּאמֶר חֵץ-תְּשׁוּעָה לַיהוָה וְחֵץ תְּשׁוּעָה בַאֲרָם, וְהִכִּיתָ אֶת-אֲרָם בַּאֲפֵק עַד-כַּלֵּה.    17 And he said: 'Open the window eastward'; and he opened it. Then Elisha said: 'Shoot'; and he shot. And he said: 'The LORD'S arrow of victory, even the arrow of victory against Aram; for thou shalt smite the Arameans in Aphek, till thou have consumed them.'
13.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר קַח הַחִצִּים, וַיִּקָּח; וַיֹּאמֶר לְמֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַךְ-אַרְצָה, וַיַּךְ שָׁלֹשׁ-פְּעָמִים וַיַּעֲמֹד.    18 And he said: 'Take the arrows'; and he took them. And he said unto the king of Israel: 'Smite upon the ground'; and he smote thrice, and stayed.
13.19 יט  וַיִּקְצֹף עָלָיו אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמֶר לְהַכּוֹת חָמֵשׁ אוֹ-שֵׁשׁ פְּעָמִים, אָז הִכִּיתָ אֶת-אֲרָם, עַד-כַּלֵּה; וְעַתָּה, שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים תַּכֶּה אֶת-אֲרָם.  {פ}    19 And the man of God was wroth with him, and said: 'Thou shouldest have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Aram till thou hadst consumed it; whereas now thou shalt smite Aram but thrice.' {P}
13.20 כ  וַיָּמָת אֱלִישָׁע, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ; וּגְדוּדֵי מוֹאָב יָבֹאוּ בָאָרֶץ, בָּא שָׁנָה.    20 And Elisha died, and they buried him. Now the bands of the Moabites used to invade the land at the coming in of the year.
13.21 כא  וַיְהִי הֵם קֹבְרִים אִישׁ, וְהִנֵּה רָאוּ אֶת-הַגְּדוּד, וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּ אֶת-הָאִישׁ, בְּקֶבֶר אֱלִישָׁע; וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיִּגַּע הָאִישׁ, בְּעַצְמוֹת אֱלִישָׁע, וַיְחִי, וַיָּקָם עַל-רַגְלָיו.  {פ}    21 And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied a band; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha; and as soon as the man touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet. {P}
13.22 כב  וַחֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם, לָחַץ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּל, יְמֵי יְהוֹאָחָז.    22 And Hazael king of Aram oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.
13.23 כג  וַיָּחָן יְהוָה אֹתָם וַיְרַחֲמֵם, וַיִּפֶן אֲלֵיהֶם, לְמַעַן בְּרִיתוֹ, אֶת-אַבְרָהָם יִצְחָק וְיַעֲקֹב; וְלֹא אָבָה הַשְׁחִיתָם, וְלֹא-הִשְׁלִיכָם מֵעַל-פָּנָיו עַד-עָתָּה.    23 But the LORD was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and had respect unto them, because of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither hath He cast them from His presence until now.
13.24 כד  וַיָּמָת, חֲזָאֵל מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם; וַיִּמְלֹךְ בֶּן-הֲדַד בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    24 And Hazael king of Aram died; and Ben-hadad his son reigned in his stead.
13.25 כה  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הֶעָרִים מִיַּד בֶּן-הֲדַד בֶּן-חֲזָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר לָקַח מִיַּד יְהוֹאָחָז אָבִיו, בַּמִּלְחָמָה:  שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים הִכָּהוּ יוֹאָשׁ, וַיָּשֶׁב אֶת-עָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    25 And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael the cities which he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did Joash smite him, and recovered the cities of Israel. {P}
14.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁתַּיִם, לְיוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יוֹאָחָז מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָלַךְ אֲמַצְיָהוּ בֶן-יוֹאָשׁ, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    1 In the second year of Joash son of Joahaz king of Israel began Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah to reign.
14.2 ב  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים וָתֵשַׁע שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יהועדין (יְהוֹעַדָּן) מִן-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    2 He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.
14.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--רַק, לֹא כְּדָוִד אָבִיו:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה יוֹאָשׁ אָבִיו, עָשָׂה.    3 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, yet not like David his father; he did according to all that Joash his father had done.
14.4 ד  רַק הַבָּמוֹת, לֹא-סָרוּ:  עוֹד הָעָם מְזַבְּחִים וּמְקַטְּרִים, בַּבָּמוֹת.    4 Howbeit the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places.
14.5 ה  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר חָזְקָה הַמַּמְלָכָה בְּיָדוֹ; וַיַּךְ, אֶת-עֲבָדָיו, הַמַּכִּים, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ אָבִיו.    5 And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was established in his hand, that he slew his servants who had slain the king his father;
14.6 ו  וְאֶת-בְּנֵי הַמַּכִּים, לֹא הֵמִית:  כַּכָּתוּב בְּסֵפֶר תּוֹרַת-מֹשֶׁה אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יוּמְתוּ אָבוֹת עַל-בָּנִים וּבָנִים לֹא-יוּמְתוּ עַל-אָבוֹת--כִּי אִם-אִישׁ בְּחֶטְאוֹ, ימות (יוּמָת).    6 but the children of the murderers he put not to death; according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, as the LORD commanded saying: 'The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.'
14.7 ז  הוּא-הִכָּה אֶת-אֱדוֹם בְּגֵי-המלח (מֶלַח), עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים, וְתָפַשׂ אֶת-הַסֶּלַע, בַּמִּלְחָמָה; וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמָהּ יָקְתְאֵל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    7 He slew of Edom in the Valley of Salt ten thousand, and took Sela by war, and called the name of it Joktheel, unto this day. {P}
14.8 ח  אָז שָׁלַח אֲמַצְיָה מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-יְהוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז בֶּן-יֵהוּא מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  לְכָה, נִתְרָאֶה פָנִים.    8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying: 'Come, let us look one another in the face.'
14.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, הַחוֹחַ אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן שָׁלַח אֶל-הָאֶרֶז אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן לֵאמֹר, תְּנָה-אֶת-בִּתְּךָ לִבְנִי לְאִשָּׁה; וַתַּעֲבֹר חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, אֲשֶׁר בַּלְּבָנוֹן, וַתִּרְמֹס, אֶת-הַחוֹחַ.    9 And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying: 'The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying: Give thy daughter to my son to wife; and there passed by the wild beasts that were in Lebanon, and trod down the thistle.
14.10 י  הַכֵּה הִכִּיתָ אֶת-אֱדוֹם, וּנְשָׂאֲךָ לִבֶּךָ; הִכָּבֵד, וְשֵׁב בְּבֵיתֶךָ, וְלָמָּה תִתְגָּרֶה בְּרָעָה, וְנָפַלְתָּה אַתָּה וִיהוּדָה עִמָּךְ.    10 Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and will thy heart lift thee up? glory therein, and remain at home; for why shouldest thou meddle with evil, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?
14.11 יא  וְלֹא-שָׁמַע אֲמַצְיָהוּ--וַיַּעַל יְהוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיִּתְרָאוּ פָנִים, הוּא וַאֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה:  בְּבֵית שֶׁמֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה.    11 But Amaziah would not hear. So Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth-shemesh, which belongeth to Judah.
14.12 יב  וַיִּנָּגֶף יְהוּדָה, לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּנֻסוּ, אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָו.    12 And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every man to his tent.
14.13 יג  וְאֵת אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה בֶּן-יְהוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-אֲחַזְיָהוּ, תָּפַשׂ יְהוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּבֵית שָׁמֶשׁ; ויבאו (וַיָּבֹא), יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּפְרֹץ בְּחוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם בְּשַׁעַר אֶפְרַיִם עַד-שַׁעַר הַפִּנָּה, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אַמָּה.    13 And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and came to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
14.14 יד  וְלָקַח אֶת-כָּל-הַזָּהָב-וְהַכֶּסֶף וְאֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הַנִּמְצְאִים בֵּית-יְהוָה, וּבְאֹצְרוֹת בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֵת, בְּנֵי הַתַּעֲרֻבוֹת; וַיָּשָׁב, שֹׁמְרוֹנָה.    14 And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.
14.15 טו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹאָשׁ אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ, וַאֲשֶׁר נִלְחַם, עִם אֲמַצְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    15 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
14.16 טז  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יְהוֹאָשׁ, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, עִם מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יָרָבְעָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    16 And Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead. {P}
14.17 יז  וַיְחִי אֲמַצְיָהוּ בֶן-יוֹאָשׁ, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת, יְהוֹאָשׁ בֶּן-יְהוֹאָחָז מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל--חֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה, שָׁנָה.    17 And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.
14.18 יח  וְיֶתֶר, דִּבְרֵי אֲמַצְיָהוּ:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתֻבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    18 Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
14.19 יט  וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ עָלָיו קֶשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיָּנָס לָכִישָׁה; וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ אַחֲרָיו לָכִישָׁה, וַיְמִתֻהוּ שָׁם.    19 And they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish; but they sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.
14.20 כ  וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֹתוֹ, עַל-הַסּוּסִים; וַיִּקָּבֵר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר דָּוִד.    20 And they brought him upon horses; and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David.
14.21 כא  וַיִּקְחוּ כָּל-עַם יְהוּדָה, אֶת-עֲזַרְיָה, וְהוּא, בֶּן-שֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה; וַיַּמְלִכוּ אֹתוֹ, תַּחַת אָבִיו אֲמַצְיָהוּ.    21 And all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.
14.22 כב  הוּא בָּנָה אֶת-אֵילַת, וַיְשִׁבֶהָ לִיהוּדָה, אַחֲרֵי שְׁכַב-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו.  {פ}    22 He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers. {P}
14.23 כג  בִּשְׁנַת חֲמֵשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַאֲמַצְיָהוּ בֶן-יוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--מָלַךְ יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן, אַרְבָּעִים וְאַחַת, שָׁנָה.    23 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria, and reigned forty and one years.
14.24 כד  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  לֹא סָר, מִכָּל-חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
14.25 כה  הוּא, הֵשִׁיב אֶת-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִלְּבוֹא חֲמָת, עַד-יָם הָעֲרָבָה--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בְּיַד-עַבְדּוֹ יוֹנָה בֶן-אֲמִתַּי הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר מִגַּת הַחֵפֶר.    25 He restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath unto the sea of the Arabah, according to the word of the LORD, the God of Israel, which He spoke by the hand of His servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was of Gath-hepher.
14.26 כו  כִּי-רָאָה יְהוָה אֶת-עֳנִי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֹרֶה מְאֹד; וְאֶפֶס עָצוּר וְאֶפֶס עָזוּב, וְאֵין עֹזֵר לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.    26 For the LORD saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter; for there was none shut up nor left at large, neither was there any helper for Israel.
14.27 כז  וְלֹא-דִבֶּר יְהוָה--לִמְחוֹת אֶת-שֵׁם יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִתַּחַת הַשָּׁמָיִם; וַיּוֹשִׁיעֵם, בְּיַד יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ.    27 And the LORD said not that He would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven; but He saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.
14.28 כח  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יָרָבְעָם וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וּגְבוּרָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-נִלְחָם, וַאֲשֶׁר הֵשִׁיב אֶת-דַּמֶּשֶׂק וְאֶת-חֲמָת לִיהוּדָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    28 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath, for Judah in Israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
14.29 כט  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יָרָבְעָם עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, עִם מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּמְלֹךְ זְכַרְיָה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    29 And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel; and Zechariah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
15.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וָשֶׁבַע שָׁנָה, לְיָרָבְעָם מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָלַךְ עֲזַרְיָה בֶן-אֲמַצְיָה, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    1 In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.
15.2 ב  בֶּן-שֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ, וַחֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יְכָלְיָהוּ מִירוּשָׁלִָם.    2 Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
15.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, אֲמַצְיָהוּ אָבִיו.    3 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
15.4 ד  רַק הַבָּמוֹת, לֹא-סָרוּ:  עוֹד הָעָם מְזַבְּחִים וּמְקַטְּרִים, בַּבָּמוֹת.    4 Howbeit the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places.
15.5 ה  וַיְנַגַּע יְהוָה אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיְהִי מְצֹרָע עַד-יוֹם מֹתוֹ, וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּבֵית הַחָפְשִׁית; וְיוֹתָם בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-הַבַּיִת, שֹׁפֵט אֶת-עַם הָאָרֶץ.    5 And the LORD smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a house set apart. And Jotham the king's son was over the household, judging the people of the land.
15.6 ו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי עֲזַרְיָהוּ, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    6 Now the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
15.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁכַּב עֲזַרְיָה עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ עִם-אֲבֹתָיו בְּעִיר דָּוִד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יוֹתָם בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    7 And Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David; and Jotham his son reigned in his stead. {P}
15.8 ח  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנָה, לַעֲזַרְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  מָלַךְ זְכַרְיָהוּ בֶן-יָרָבְעָם עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן--שִׁשָּׁה חֳדָשִׁים.    8 In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.
15.9 ט  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֲבֹתָיו:  לֹא סָר, מֵחַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as his fathers had done; he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
15.10 י  וַיִּקְשֹׁר עָלָיו שַׁלֻּם בֶּן-יָבֵשׁ, וַיַּכֵּהוּ קָבָל-עָם וַיְמִיתֵהוּ; וַיִּמְלֹךְ, תַּחְתָּיו.    10 And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.
15.11 יא  וְיֶתֶר, דִּבְרֵי זְכַרְיָה:  הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    11 Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
15.12 יב  הוּא דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֶל-יֵהוּא לֵאמֹר, בְּנֵי רְבִיעִים, יֵשְׁבוּ לְךָ עַל-כִּסֵּא יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְהִי-כֵן.  {פ}    12 This was the word of the LORD which He spoke unto Jehu, saying: 'Thy sons to the fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of Israel.' And so it came to pass. {P}
15.13 יג  שַׁלּוּם בֶּן-יָבֵישׁ, מָלַךְ, בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וָתֵשַׁע שָׁנָה, לְעֻזִּיָּה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יֶרַח-יָמִים, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.    13 Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned the space of a month in Samaria.
15.14 יד  וַיַּעַל מְנַחֵם בֶּן-גָּדִי מִתִּרְצָה, וַיָּבֹא שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיַּךְ אֶת-שַׁלּוּם בֶּן-יָבֵישׁ, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן; וַיְמִיתֵהוּ, וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו.    14 And Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.
15.15 טו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי שַׁלּוּם, וְקִשְׁרוֹ אֲשֶׁר קָשָׁר:  הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    15 Now the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. {S}
15.16 טז  אָז יַכֶּה-מְנַחֵם אֶת-תִּפְסַח וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ וְאֶת-גְּבוּלֶיהָ, מִתִּרְצָה--כִּי לֹא פָתַח, וַיַּךְ; אֵת כָּל-הֶהָרוֹתֶיהָ, בִּקֵּעַ.  {פ}    16 Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the borders thereof, from Tirzah; because they opened not to him, therefore he smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped up. {P}
15.17 יז  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וָתֵשַׁע שָׁנָה, לַעֲזַרְיָה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  מָלַךְ מְנַחֵם בֶּן-גָּדִי עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֶשֶׂר שָׁנִים--בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן.    17 In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in Samaria.
15.18 יח  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  לֹא סָר מֵעַל חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--כָּל-יָמָיו.    18 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
15.19 יט  בָּא פוּל מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, עַל-הָאָרֶץ, וַיִּתֵּן מְנַחֵם לְפוּל, אֶלֶף כִּכַּר-כָּסֶף--לִהְיוֹת יָדָיו אִתּוֹ, לְהַחֲזִיק הַמַּמְלָכָה בְּיָדוֹ.    19 There came against the land Pul the king of Assyria; and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.
15.20 כ  וַיֹּצֵא מְנַחֵם אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל כָּל-גִּבּוֹרֵי הַחַיִל, לָתֵת לְמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, חֲמִשִּׁים שְׁקָלִים כֶּסֶף לְאִישׁ אֶחָד; וַיָּשָׁב מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וְלֹא-עָמַד שָׁם בָּאָרֶץ.    20 And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not there in the land.
15.21 כא  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי מְנַחֵם, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלוֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    21 Now the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
15.22 כב  וַיִּשְׁכַּב מְנַחֵם, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ פְּקַחְיָה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    22 And Menahem slept with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
15.23 כג  בִּשְׁנַת חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה, לַעֲזַרְיָה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  מָלַךְ פְּקַחְיָה בֶן-מְנַחֵם עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן--שְׁנָתָיִם.    23 In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two years.
15.24 כד  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  לֹא סָר, מֵחַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    24 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
15.25 כה  וַיִּקְשֹׁר עָלָיו פֶּקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ שָׁלִישׁוֹ, וַיַּכֵּהוּ בְשֹׁמְרוֹן בְּאַרְמוֹן בֵּית-מלך (הַמֶּלֶךְ) אֶת-אַרְגֹּב וְאֶת-הָאַרְיֵה, וְעִמּוֹ חֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ, מִבְּנֵי גִלְעָדִים; וַיְמִתֵהוּ, וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו.    25 And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the castle of the king's house, by Argob and by Arieh; and with him were fifty men of the Gileadites; and he slew him, and reigned in his stead.
15.26 כו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי פְקַחְיָה, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    26 Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. {P}
15.27 כז  בִּשְׁנַת חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, לַעֲזַרְיָה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  מָלַךְ פֶּקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשֹׁמְרוֹן--עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה.    27 In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years.
15.28 כח  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  לֹא סָר, מִן-חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט, אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    28 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, wherewith he made Israel to sin.
15.29 כט  בִּימֵי פֶּקַח מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּא תִּגְלַת פִּלְאֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-עִיּוֹן וְאֶת-אָבֵל בֵּית-מַעֲכָה וְאֶת-יָנוֹחַ וְאֶת-קֶדֶשׁ וְאֶת-חָצוֹר וְאֶת-הַגִּלְעָד וְאֶת-הַגָּלִילָה, כֹּל אֶרֶץ נַפְתָּלִי; וַיַּגְלֵם, אַשּׁוּרָה.    29 In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abel-beth-maacah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and he carried them captive to Assyria.
15.30 ל  וַיִּקְשָׁר-קֶשֶׁר הוֹשֵׁעַ בֶּן-אֵלָה, עַל-פֶּקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ, וַיַּכֵּהוּ וַיְמִיתֵהוּ, וַיִּמְלֹךְ תַּחְתָּיו--בִּשְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים, לְיוֹתָם בֶּן-עֻזִּיָּה.    30 And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.
15.31 לא  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי-פֶקַח, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הִנָּם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    31 Now the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. {P}
15.32 לב  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁתַּיִם, לְפֶקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָלַךְ יוֹתָם בֶּן-עֻזִּיָּהוּ, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    32 In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign.
15.33 לג  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ, וְשֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יְרוּשָׁא בַּת-צָדוֹק.    33 Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
15.34 לד  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה עֻזִּיָּהוּ אָבִיו, עָשָׂה.    34 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD; he did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.
15.35 לה  רַק הַבָּמוֹת, לֹא סָרוּ--עוֹד הָעָם מְזַבְּחִים וּמְקַטְּרִים, בַּבָּמוֹת; הוּא, בָּנָה אֶת-שַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה--הָעֶלְיוֹן.    35 Howbeit the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and offered in the high places. He built the upper gate of the house of the LORD.
15.36 לו  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יוֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    36 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
15.37 לז  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם--הֵחֵל יְהוָה לְהַשְׁלִיחַ בִּיהוּדָה, רְצִין מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם; וְאֵת, פֶּקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ.    37 In those days the LORD began to send against Judah Rezin the king of Aram, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.
15.38 לח  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יוֹתָם, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, בְּעִיר דָּוִד אָבִיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אָחָז בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    38 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead. {P}
16.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁבַע-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לְפֶקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ, מָלַךְ אָחָז בֶּן-יוֹתָם, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    1 In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.
16.2 ב  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, אָחָז בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְשֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְלֹא-עָשָׂה הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו--כְּדָוִד אָבִיו.    2 Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and he did not that which was right in the eyes of the LORD his God, like David his father.
16.3 ג  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְגַם אֶת-בְּנוֹ, הֶעֱבִיר בָּאֵשׁ, כְּתֹעֲבוֹת הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה אֹתָם מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    3 But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, yea, and made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD cast out from before the children of Israel.
16.4 ד  וַיְזַבֵּחַ וַיְקַטֵּר בַּבָּמוֹת, וְעַל-הַגְּבָעוֹת, וְתַחַת, כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן.    4 And he sacrificed and offered in the high places, and on the hills, and under every leafy tree.
16.5 ה  אָז יַעֲלֶה רְצִין מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם וּפֶקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, יְרוּשָׁלִַם--לַמִּלְחָמָה; וַיָּצֻרוּ, עַל-אָחָז, וְלֹא יָכְלוּ, לְהִלָּחֵם.    5 Then Rezin king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to war; and they besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him.
16.6 ו  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, הֵשִׁיב רְצִין מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם אֶת-אֵילַת לַאֲרָם, וַיְנַשֵּׁל אֶת-הַיְּהוּדִים, מֵאֵילוֹת; וארמים (וַאֲדֹמִים), בָּאוּ אֵילַת, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׁם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    6 At that time Rezin king of Aram recovered Elath to Aram, and drove the Jews from Elath; and the Edomites came to Elath, and dwelt there, unto this day. {P}
16.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁלַח אָחָז מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-תִּגְלַת פְּלֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר לֵאמֹר, עַבְדְּךָ וּבִנְךָ, אָנִי; עֲלֵה וְהוֹשִׁעֵנִי מִכַּף מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם, וּמִכַּף מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַקּוֹמִים, עָלָי.    7 So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying: 'I am thy servant and thy son; come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Aram, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, who rise up against me.'
16.8 ח  וַיִּקַּח אָחָז אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב, הַנִּמְצָא בֵּית יְהוָה, וּבְאֹצְרוֹת, בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּשְׁלַח לְמֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, שֹׁחַד.    8 And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.
16.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁמַע אֵלָיו, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וַיַּעַל מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר אֶל-דַּמֶּשֶׂק וַיִּתְפְּשֶׂהָ, וַיַּגְלֶהָ קִירָה; וְאֶת-רְצִין, הֵמִית.    9 And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him; and the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.
16.10 י  וַיֵּלֶךְ הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז לִקְרַאת תִּגְלַת פִּלְאֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, דּוּמֶּשֶׂק, וַיַּרְא אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אֲשֶׁר בְּדַמָּשֶׂק; וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז אֶל-אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-דְּמוּת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ וְאֶת-תַּבְנִיתוֹ--לְכָל-מַעֲשֵׂהוּ.    10 And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and saw the altar that was at Damascus; and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it, according to all the workmanship thereof.
16.11 יא  וַיִּבֶן אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז מִדַּמֶּשֶׂק, כֵּן עָשָׂה אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן, עַד-בּוֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ-אָחָז, מִדַּמָּשֶׂק.    11 And Urijah the priest built an altar; according to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus, so did Urijah the priest make it against the coming of king Ahaz from Damascus.
16.12 יב  וַיָּבֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ מִדַּמֶּשֶׂק, וַיַּרְא הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וַיִּקְרַב הַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וַיַּעַל עָלָיו.    12 And when the king was come from Damascus, the king saw the altar; and the king drew near unto the altar, and offered thereon.
16.13 יג  וַיַּקְטֵר אֶת-עֹלָתוֹ וְאֶת-מִנְחָתוֹ, וַיַּסֵּךְ אֶת-נִסְכּוֹ; וַיִּזְרֹק אֶת-דַּם-הַשְּׁלָמִים אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    13 And he offered his burnt-offering and his meal-offering, and poured his drink-offering, and dashed the blood of his peace-offerings against the altar.
16.14 יד  וְאֵת הַמִּזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיַּקְרֵב מֵאֵת פְּנֵי הַבַּיִת, מִבֵּין הַמִּזְבֵּחַ וּמִבֵּין בֵּית יְהוָה; וַיִּתֵּן אֹתוֹ עַל-יֶרֶךְ הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, צָפוֹנָה.    14 And the brazen altar, which was before the LORD, he brought from the forefront of the house, from between his altar and the house of the LORD, and put it on the north side of his altar.
16.15 טו  ויצוהו (וַיְצַוֶּה) הַמֶּלֶךְ-אָחָז אֶת-אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן לֵאמֹר, עַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ הַגָּדוֹל הַקְטֵר אֶת-עֹלַת-הַבֹּקֶר וְאֶת-מִנְחַת הָעֶרֶב וְאֶת-עֹלַת הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-מִנְחָתוֹ וְאֵת עֹלַת כָּל-עַם הָאָרֶץ וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם, וְכָל-דַּם עֹלָה וְכָל-דַּם-זֶבַח, עָלָיו תִּזְרֹק; וּמִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת יִהְיֶה-לִּי, לְבַקֵּר.    15 And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying: 'Upon the great altar offer the morning burnt-offering, and the evening meal-offering, and the king's burnt-offering, and his meal-offering, with the burnt-offering of all the people of the land, and their meal-offering, and their drink-offerings; and dash against it all the blood of the burnt-offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice; but the brazen altar shall be for me to look to.'
16.16 טז  וַיַּעַשׂ, אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה, הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז.    16 Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz commanded.
16.17 יז  וַיְקַצֵּץ הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז אֶת-הַמִּסְגְּרוֹת הַמְּכוֹנֹת, וַיָּסַר מֵעֲלֵיהֶם ואת- (אֶת-) הַכִּיֹּר, וְאֶת-הַיָּם הוֹרִד, מֵעַל הַבָּקָר הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר תַּחְתֶּיהָ; וַיִּתֵּן אֹתוֹ, עַל מַרְצֶפֶת אֲבָנִים.    17 And king Ahaz cut off the borders of the bases, and removed the laver from off them; and took down the sea from off the brazen oxen that were under it, and put it upon a pavement of stone.
16.18 יח  וְאֶת-מיסך (מוּסַךְ) הַשַּׁבָּת אֲשֶׁר-בָּנוּ בַבַּיִת, וְאֶת-מְבוֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ הַחִיצוֹנָה--הֵסֵב, בֵּית יְהוָה:  מִפְּנֵי, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.    18 And the covered place for the sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king's entry without, turned he unto the house of the LORD, because of the king of Assyria.
16.19 יט  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אָחָז, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    19 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
16.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אָחָז עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר עִם-אֲבֹתָיו בְּעִיר דָּוִד; וַיִּמְלֹךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    20 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David; and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
17.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה, לְאָחָז מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  מָלַךְ הוֹשֵׁעַ בֶּן-אֵלָה בְשֹׁמְרוֹן, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--תֵּשַׁע שָׁנִים.    1 In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son of Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel, and reigned nine years.
17.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה:  רַק, לֹא כְּמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ, לְפָנָיו.    2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, yet not as the kings of Israel that were before him.
17.3 ג  עָלָיו עָלָה, שַׁלְמַנְאֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וַיְהִי-לוֹ הוֹשֵׁעַ עֶבֶד, וַיָּשֶׁב לוֹ מִנְחָה.    3 Against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea became his servant, and brought him presents.
17.4 ד  וַיִּמְצָא מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר בְּהוֹשֵׁעַ קֶשֶׁר, אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אֶל-סוֹא מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, וְלֹא-הֶעֱלָה מִנְחָה לְמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, כְּשָׁנָה בְשָׁנָה; וַיַּעַצְרֵהוּ מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וַיַּאַסְרֵהוּ בֵּית כֶּלֶא.    4 And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea; for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and offered no present to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year; therefore the king of Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.
17.5 ה  וַיַּעַל מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ; וַיַּעַל, שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיָּצַר עָלֶיהָ, שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים.    5 Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years.
17.6 ו  בִּשְׁנַת הַתְּשִׁעִית לְהוֹשֵׁעַ, לָכַד מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֶת-שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיֶּגֶל אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַשּׁוּרָה; וַיֹּשֶׁב אוֹתָם בַּחְלַח וּבְחָבוֹר, נְהַר גּוֹזָן--וְעָרֵי מָדָי.  {פ}    6 In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away unto Assyria, and placed them in Halah, and in Habor, on the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes. {P}
17.7 ז  וַיְהִי, כִּי-חָטְאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, הַמַּעֲלֶה אֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מִתַּחַת יַד פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרָיִם; וַיִּירְאוּ, אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.    7 And it was so, because the children of Israel had sinned against the LORD their God, who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods,
17.8 ח  וַיֵּלְכוּ, בְּחֻקּוֹת הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּמַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ.    8 and walked in the statutes of the nations, whom the LORD cast out from before the children of Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which they practised;
17.9 ט  וַיְחַפְּאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, דְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר לֹא-כֵן, עַל-יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וַיִּבְנוּ לָהֶם בָּמוֹת בְּכָל-עָרֵיהֶם, מִמִּגְדַּל נוֹצְרִים עַד-עִיר מִבְצָר.    9 and the children of Israel did impute things that were not right unto the LORD their God, and they built them high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city;
17.10 י  וַיַּצִּבוּ לָהֶם מַצֵּבוֹת, וַאֲשֵׁרִים, עַל כָּל-גִּבְעָה גְבֹהָה, וְתַחַת כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן.    10 and they set them up pillars and Asherim upon every high hill, and under every leafy tree;
17.11 יא  וַיְקַטְּרוּ-שָׁם, בְּכָל-בָּמוֹת, כַּגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-הֶגְלָה יְהוָה מִפְּנֵיהֶם; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ דְּבָרִים רָעִים, לְהַכְעִיס אֶת-יְהוָה.    11 and there they offered in all the high places, as did the nations whom the LORD carried away before them; and wrought wicked things to provoke the LORD;
17.12 יב  וַיַּעַבְדוּ, הַגִּלֻּלִים, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה לָהֶם, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    12 and they served idols, whereof the LORD had said unto them: 'Ye shall not do this thing';
17.13 יג  וַיָּעַד יְהוָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל וּבִיהוּדָה בְּיַד כָּל-נביאו (נְבִיאֵי) כָל-חֹזֶה לֵאמֹר, שֻׁבוּ מִדַּרְכֵיכֶם הָרָעִים וְשִׁמְרוּ מִצְוֺתַי חֻקּוֹתַי, כְּכָל-הַתּוֹרָה, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי אֶת-אֲבֹתֵיכֶם--וַאֲשֶׁר שָׁלַחְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם, בְּיַד עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִיאִים.    13 yet the LORD forewarned Israel, and Judah, by the hand of every prophet, and of every seer, saying: 'Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep My commandments and My statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by the hand of My servants the prophets';
17.14 יד  וְלֹא, שָׁמֵעוּ; וַיַּקְשׁוּ אֶת-עָרְפָּם, כְּעֹרֶף אֲבוֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא הֶאֱמִינוּ, בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.    14 notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their neck, like to the neck of their fathers, who believed not in the LORD their God;
17.15 טו  וַיִּמְאֲסוּ אֶת-חֻקָּיו, וְאֶת-בְּרִיתוֹ אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת אֶת-אֲבוֹתָם, וְאֵת עֵדְוֺתָיו, אֲשֶׁר הֵעִיד בָּם; וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי הַהֶבֶל, וַיֶּהְבָּלוּ, וְאַחֲרֵי הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֹתָם לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת כָּהֶם.    15 and they rejected His statutes, and His covenant that He made with their fathers, and His testimonies wherewith He testified against them; and they went after things of nought, and became nought, and after the nations that were round about them, concerning whom the LORD had charged them that they should not do like them;
17.16 טז  וַיַּעַזְבוּ, אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ לָהֶם מַסֵּכָה, שנים (שְׁנֵי) עֲגָלִים; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֲשֵׁירָה, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַיַּעַבְדוּ, אֶת-הַבָּעַל.    16 and they forsook all the commandments of the LORD their God, and made them molten images, even two calves, and made an Asherah, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served Baal;
17.17 יז  וַיַּעֲבִירוּ אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיהֶם, בָּאֵשׁ, וַיִּקְסְמוּ קְסָמִים, וַיְנַחֵשׁוּ; וַיִּתְמַכְּרוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--לְהַכְעִיסוֹ.    17 and they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and gave themselves over to do that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke Him;
17.18 יח  וַיִּתְאַנַּף יְהוָה מְאֹד בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְסִרֵם מֵעַל פָּנָיו:  לֹא נִשְׁאַר, רַק שֵׁבֶט יְהוּדָה לְבַדּוֹ.    18 that the LORD was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of His sight; there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.
17.19 יט  גַּם-יְהוּדָה--לֹא שָׁמַר, אֶת-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וַיֵּלְכוּ, בְּחֻקּוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ.    19 Also Judah kept not the commandments of the LORD their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they practised.
17.20 כ  וַיִּמְאַס יְהוָה בְּכָל-זֶרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְעַנֵּם, וַיִּתְּנֵם, בְּיַד-שֹׁסִים--עַד אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁלִיכָם, מִפָּנָיו.    20 And the LORD rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until He had cast them out of His sight.
17.21 כא  כִּי-קָרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעַל בֵּית דָּוִד, וַיַּמְלִיכוּ, אֶת-יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט; וידא (וַיַּדַּח) יָרָבְעָם אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה, וְהֶחֱטִיאָם חֲטָאָה גְדוֹלָה.    21 For He rent Israel from the house of David; and they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king; and Jeroboam drew Israel away from following the LORD, and made them sin a great sin.
17.22 כב  וַיֵּלְכוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּכָל-חַטֹּאות יָרָבְעָם אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  לֹא-סָרוּ, מִמֶּנָּה.    22 And the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did; they departed not from them;
17.23 כג  עַד אֲשֶׁר-הֵסִיר יְהוָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעַל פָּנָיו, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד כָּל-עֲבָדָיו הַנְּבִיאִים; וַיִּגֶל יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵעַל אַדְמָתוֹ, אַשּׁוּרָה, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    23 until the LORD removed Israel out of His sight, as He spoke by the hand of all His servants the prophets. So Israel was carried away out of their own land to Assyria, unto this day. {P}
17.24 כד  וַיָּבֵא מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר מִבָּבֶל וּמִכּוּתָה וּמֵעַוָּא וּמֵחֲמָת, וּסְפַרְוַיִם, וַיֹּשֶׁב בְּעָרֵי שֹׁמְרוֹן, תַּחַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּרְשׁוּ, אֶת-שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, בְּעָרֶיהָ.    24 And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Avva, and from Hamath and Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel; and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.
17.25 כה  וַיְהִי, בִּתְחִלַּת שִׁבְתָּם שָׁם, לֹא יָרְאוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיְשַׁלַּח יְהוָה בָּהֶם אֶת-הָאֲרָיוֹת, וַיִּהְיוּ הֹרְגִים בָּהֶם.    25 And so it was, at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not the LORD; therefore the LORD sent lions among them, which killed some of them.
17.26 כו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לְמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר לֵאמֹר, הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר הִגְלִיתָ וַתּוֹשֶׁב בְּעָרֵי שֹׁמְרוֹן, לֹא יָדְעוּ, אֶת-מִשְׁפַּט אֱלֹהֵי הָאָרֶץ; וַיְשַׁלַּח-בָּם אֶת-הָאֲרָיוֹת, וְהִנָּם מְמִיתִים אוֹתָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר אֵינָם יֹדְעִים, אֶת-מִשְׁפַּט אֱלֹהֵי הָאָרֶץ.    26 Wherefore they spoke to the king of Assyria, saying: 'The nations which thou hast carried away, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the land; therefore He hath sent lions among them, and, behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of the God of the land.'
17.27 כז  וַיְצַו מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר לֵאמֹר, הֹלִיכוּ שָׁמָּה אֶחָד מֵהַכֹּהֲנִים אֲשֶׁר הִגְלִיתֶם מִשָּׁם, וְיֵלְכוּ, וְיֵשְׁבוּ שָׁם; וְיֹרֵם, אֶת-מִשְׁפַּט אֱלֹהֵי הָאָרֶץ.    27 Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying: 'Carry thither one of the priests whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell there, and let him teach them the manner of the God of the land.'
17.28 כח  וַיָּבֹא אֶחָד מֵהַכֹּהֲנִים, אֲשֶׁר הִגְלוּ מִשֹּׁמְרוֹן, וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּבֵית-אֵל; וַיְהִי מוֹרֶה אֹתָם, אֵיךְ יִירְאוּ אֶת-יְהוָה.    28 So one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in Beth-el, and taught them how they should fear the LORD.
17.29 כט  וַיִּהְיוּ עֹשִׂים, גּוֹי גּוֹי אֱלֹהָיו; וַיַּנִּיחוּ בְּבֵית הַבָּמוֹת, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ הַשֹּׁמְרֹנִים, גּוֹי גּוֹי בְּעָרֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר הֵם יֹשְׁבִים שָׁם.    29 Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt.
17.30 ל  וְאַנְשֵׁי בָבֶל, עָשׂוּ אֶת-סֻכּוֹת בְּנוֹת, וְאַנְשֵׁי-כוּת, עָשׂוּ אֶת-נֵרְגַל; וְאַנְשֵׁי חֲמָת, עָשׂוּ אֶת-אֲשִׁימָא.    30 And the men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,
17.31 לא  וְהָעַוִּים עָשׂוּ נִבְחַז, וְאֶת-תַּרְתָּק; וְהַסְפַרְוִים, שֹׂרְפִים אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם בָּאֵשׁ, לְאַדְרַמֶּלֶךְ וַעֲנַמֶּלֶךְ, אלה ספרים (אֱלֹהֵי סְפַרְוָיִם).    31 and the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
17.32 לב  וַיִּהְיוּ יְרֵאִים, אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ לָהֶם מִקְצוֹתָם כֹּהֲנֵי בָמוֹת, וַיִּהְיוּ עֹשִׂים לָהֶם בְּבֵית הַבָּמוֹת.    32 So they feared the LORD, and made unto them from among themselves priests of the high places, who sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places.
17.33 לג  אֶת-יְהוָה, הָיוּ יְרֵאִים; וְאֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, הָיוּ עֹבְדִים, כְּמִשְׁפַּט הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-הִגְלוּ אֹתָם מִשָּׁם.    33 They feared the LORD, and served their own gods, after the manner of the nations from among whom they had been carried away.
17.34 לד  עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה הֵם עֹשִׂים, כַּמִּשְׁפָּטִים הָרִאשֹׁנִים:  אֵינָם יְרֵאִים, אֶת-יְהוָה, וְאֵינָם עֹשִׂים כְּחֻקֹּתָם וּכְמִשְׁפָּטָם, וְכַתּוֹרָה וְכַמִּצְוָה אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יַעֲקֹב אֲשֶׁר-שָׂם שְׁמוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    34 Unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not the LORD, neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances, or after the law or after the commandment which the LORD commanded the children of Jacob, whom He named Israel;
17.35 לה  וַיִּכְרֹת יְהוָה אִתָּם, בְּרִית, וַיְצַוֵּם לֵאמֹר, לֹא תִירְאוּ אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים; וְלֹא-תִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם--וְלֹא תַעַבְדוּם, וְלֹא תִזְבְּחוּ לָהֶם.    35 with whom the LORD had made a covenant, and charged them, saying: 'Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow down to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them;
17.36 לו  כִּי אִם-אֶת-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָה אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם בְּכֹחַ גָּדוֹל וּבִזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה--אֹתוֹ תִירָאוּ; וְלוֹ תִשְׁתַּחֲווּ, וְלוֹ תִזְבָּחוּ.    36 but the LORD, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and with an outstretched arm, Him shall ye fear, and Him shall ye worship, and to Him shall ye sacrifice;
17.37 לז  וְאֶת-הַחֻקִּים וְאֶת-הַמִּשְׁפָּטִים וְהַתּוֹרָה וְהַמִּצְוָה, אֲשֶׁר כָּתַב לָכֶם--תִּשְׁמְרוּן לַעֲשׂוֹת, כָּל-הַיָּמִים; וְלֹא תִירְאוּ, אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.    37 and the statutes and the ordinances, and the law and the commandment, which He wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods;
17.38 לח  וְהַבְּרִית אֲשֶׁר-כָּרַתִּי אִתְּכֶם, לֹא תִשְׁכָּחוּ; וְלֹא תִירְאוּ, אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.    38 and the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget; neither shall ye fear other gods;
17.39 לט  כִּי אִם-אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, תִּירָאוּ--וְהוּא יַצִּיל אֶתְכֶם, מִיַּד כָּל-אֹיְבֵיכֶם.    39 but the LORD your God shall ye fear; and He will deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.'
17.40 מ  וְלֹא, שָׁמֵעוּ:  כִּי אִם-כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם הָרִאשׁוֹן, הֵם עֹשִׂים.    40 Howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former manner.
17.41 מא  וַיִּהְיוּ הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, יְרֵאִים אֶת-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-פְּסִילֵיהֶם, הָיוּ עֹבְדִים; גַּם-בְּנֵיהֶם וּבְנֵי בְנֵיהֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֲבֹתָם הֵם עֹשִׂים, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    41 So these nations feared the LORD, and served their graven images; their children likewise, and their children's children, as did their fathers, so do they unto this day. {P}
18.1 א  וַיְהִי בִּשְׁנַת שָׁלֹשׁ, לְהוֹשֵׁעַ בֶּן-אֵלָה מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָלַךְ חִזְקִיָּה בֶן-אָחָז, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    1 Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.
18.2 ב  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, הָיָה בְמָלְכוֹ, וְעֶשְׂרִים וָתֵשַׁע שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, אֲבִי בַּת-זְכַרְיָה.    2 Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Abi the daughter of Zechariah.
18.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, דָּוִד אָבִיו.    3 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.
18.4 ד  הוּא הֵסִיר אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת, וְשִׁבַּר אֶת-הַמַּצֵּבֹת, וְכָרַת, אֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרָה; וְכִתַּת נְחַשׁ הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה מֹשֶׁה, כִּי עַד-הַיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה הָיוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מְקַטְּרִים לוֹ, וַיִּקְרָא-לוֹ, נְחֻשְׁתָּן.    4 He removed the high places, and broke the pillars, and cut down the Asherah; and he broke in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made; for unto those days the children of Israel did offer to it; and it was called Nehushtan.
18.5 ה  בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּטָח; וְאַחֲרָיו לֹא-הָיָה כָמֹהוּ, בְּכֹל מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וַאֲשֶׁר הָיוּ, לְפָנָיו.    5 He trusted in the LORD, the God of Israel; so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor among them that were before him.
18.6 ו  וַיִּדְבַּק, בַּיהוָה, לֹא-סָר, מֵאַחֲרָיו; וַיִּשְׁמֹר, מִצְוֺתָיו, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    6 For he cleaved to the LORD, he departed not from following Him, but kept His commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses.
18.7 ז  וְהָיָה יְהוָה עִמּוֹ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא יַשְׂכִּיל; וַיִּמְרֹד בְּמֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, וְלֹא עֲבָדוֹ.    7 And the LORD was with him: whithersoever he went forth he prospered; and he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not.
18.8 ח  הוּא-הִכָּה אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים עַד-עַזָּה, וְאֶת-גְּבוּלֶיהָ, מִמִּגְדַּל נוֹצְרִים, עַד-עִיר מִבְצָר.  {פ}    8 He smote the Philistines unto Gaza and the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city. {P}
18.9 ט  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הָרְבִיעִית, לַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ--הִיא הַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִיעִית, לְהוֹשֵׁעַ בֶּן-אֵלָה מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל; עָלָה שַׁלְמַנְאֶסֶר מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, עַל-שֹׁמְרוֹן--וַיָּצַר עָלֶיהָ.    9 And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it.
18.10 י  וַיִּלְכְּדֻהָ, מִקְצֵה שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים, בִּשְׁנַת-שֵׁשׁ, לְחִזְקִיָּה:  הִיא שְׁנַת-תֵּשַׁע, לְהוֹשֵׁעַ מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, נִלְכְּדָה, שֹׁמְרוֹן.    10 And at the end of three years they took it; even in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was taken.
18.11 יא  וַיֶּגֶל מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַשּׁוּרָה; וַיַּנְחֵם בַּחְלַח וּבְחָבוֹר, נְהַר גּוֹזָן--וְעָרֵי מָדָי.    11 And the king of Assyria carried Israel away unto Assyria, and put them in Halah, and in Habor, on the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes;
18.12 יב  עַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וַיַּעַבְרוּ אֶת-בְּרִיתוֹ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה; וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, וְלֹא עָשׂוּ.  {פ}    12 because they hearkened not to the voice of the LORD their God, but transgressed His covenant, even all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded, and would not hear it, nor do it. {P}
18.13 יג  וּבְאַרְבַּע עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה לַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּה, עָלָה סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר עַל כָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה הַבְּצֻרוֹת--וַיִּתְפְּשֵׂם.    13 Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.
18.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִזְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה אֶל-מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר לָכִישָׁה לֵאמֹר חָטָאתִי, שׁוּב מֵעָלַי--אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תִּתֵּן עָלַי, אֶשָּׂא; וַיָּשֶׂם מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר עַל-חִזְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת כִּכַּר-כֶּסֶף, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים, כִּכַּר זָהָב.    14 And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying: 'I have offended; return from me; that which thou puttest on me will I bear.' And the king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
18.15 טו  וַיִּתֵּן, חִזְקִיָּה, אֶת-כָּל-הַכֶּסֶף, הַנִּמְצָא בֵית-יְהוָה; וּבְאֹצְרוֹת, בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ.    15 And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the LORD, and in the treasures of the king's house.
18.16 טז  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, קִצַּץ חִזְקִיָּה אֶת-דַּלְתוֹת הֵיכַל יְהוָה וְאֶת-הָאֹמְנוֹת, אֲשֶׁר צִפָּה, חִזְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּתְּנֵם, לְמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.  {פ}    16 At that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple of the LORD, and from the door-posts which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria. {P}
18.17 יז  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֶת-תַּרְתָּן וְאֶת-רַב-סָרִיס וְאֶת-רַבְשָׁקֵה מִן-לָכִישׁ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, בְּחֵיל כָּבֵד--יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַיַּעֲלוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּעֲלוּ וַיָּבֹאוּ וַיַּעַמְדוּ בִּתְעָלַת הַבְּרֵכָה הָעֶלְיוֹנָה, אֲשֶׁר בִּמְסִלַּת שְׂדֵה כֹבֵס.    17 And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rab-saris and Rab-shakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great army unto Jerusalem. And they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they were come up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the highway of the fullers' field.
18.18 יח  וַיִּקְרְאוּ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֵּצֵא אֲלֵהֶם אֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּהוּ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַבָּיִת; וְשֶׁבְנָה, הַסֹּפֵר, וְיוֹאָח בֶּן-אָסָף, הַמַּזְכִּיר.    18 And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebnah the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.
18.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם רַבְשָׁקֵה, אִמְרוּ-נָא אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  כֹּה-אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ הַגָּדוֹל, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, מָה הַבִּטָּחוֹן הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר בָּטָחְתָּ.    19 And Rab-shakeh said unto them: 'Say ye now to Hezekiah: Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria: What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?
18.20 כ  אָמַרְתָּ, אַךְ-דְּבַר-שְׂפָתַיִם--עֵצָה וּגְבוּרָה, לַמִּלְחָמָה; עַתָּה עַל-מִי בָטַחְתָּ, כִּי מָרַדְתָּ בִּי.    20 Sayest thou that a mere word of the lips is counsel and strength for the war? Now on whom dost thou trust, that thou hast rebelled against me?
18.21 כא  עַתָּה הִנֵּה בָטַחְתָּ לְּךָ עַל-מִשְׁעֶנֶת הַקָּנֶה הָרָצוּץ הַזֶּה, עַל-מִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר יִסָּמֵךְ אִישׁ עָלָיו, וּבָא בְכַפּוֹ וּנְקָבָהּ; כֵּן פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, לְכָל-הַבֹּטְחִים עָלָיו.    21 Now, behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it; so is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all that trust on him.
18.22 כב  וְכִי-תֹאמְרוּן אֵלַי, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ בָּטָחְנוּ:  הֲלוֹא-הוּא, אֲשֶׁר הֵסִיר חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-בָּמֹתָיו וְאֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לִיהוּדָה וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם, לִפְנֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ הַזֶּה תִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    22 But if ye say unto me: We trust in the LORD our God; is not that He, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and hath said to Judah and to Jerusalem: Ye shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem?
18.23 כג  וְעַתָּה הִתְעָרֶב נָא, אֶת-אֲדֹנִי אֶת-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וְאֶתְּנָה לְךָ, אַלְפַּיִם סוּסִים, אִם-תּוּכַל, לָתֶת לְךָ רֹכְבִים עֲלֵיהֶם.    23 Now therefore, I pray thee, make a wager with my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
18.24 כד  וְאֵיךְ תָּשִׁיב, אֵת פְּנֵי פַחַת אַחַד עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנִי--הַקְּטַנִּים; וַתִּבְטַח לְךָ עַל-מִצְרַיִם, לְרֶכֶב וּלְפָרָשִׁים.    24 How then canst thou turn away the face of one captain, even of the least of my masters servants? and yet thou puttest thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen!
18.25 כה  עַתָּה הֲמִבַּלְעֲדֵי יְהוָה, עָלִיתִי עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה לְהַשְׁחִתוֹ; יְהוָה אָמַר אֵלַי, עֲלֵה עַל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת וְהַשְׁחִיתָהּ.    25 Am I now come up without the LORD against this place to destroy it? The LORD said unto me: Go up against this land, destroy it.'
18.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּהוּ וְשֶׁבְנָה וְיוֹאָח אֶל-רַבְשָׁקֵה, דַּבֶּר-נָא אֶל-עֲבָדֶיךָ אֲרָמִית--כִּי שֹׁמְעִים, אֲנָחְנוּ; וְאַל-תְּדַבֵּר עִמָּנוּ, יְהוּדִית, בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַחֹמָה.    26 Then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebnah, and Joah, unto Rab-shakeh: 'Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Aramean language; for we understand it; and speak not with us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall.'
18.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם רַבְשָׁקֵה, הַעַל אֲדֹנֶיךָ וְאֵלֶיךָ שְׁלָחַנִי אֲדֹנִי, לְדַבֵּר, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; הֲלֹא עַל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַיֹּשְׁבִים עַל-הַחֹמָה, לֶאֱכֹל אֶת-חריהם (צוֹאָתָם) וְלִשְׁתּוֹת אֶת-שניהם (מֵימֵי רַגְלֵיהֶם), עִמָּכֶם.    27 But Rab-shakeh said unto them: 'Hath my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit on the wall, to eat their own dung, and to drink their own water with you?'
18.28 כח  וַיַּעֲמֹד, רַבְשָׁקֵה, וַיִּקְרָא בְקוֹל-גָּדוֹל, יְהוּדִית; וַיְדַבֵּר וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-הַמֶּלֶךְ הַגָּדוֹל מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.    28 Then Rab-shakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and spoke, saying: 'Hear ye the word of the great king, the king of Assyria.
18.29 כט  כֹּה אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַל-יַשִּׁא לָכֶם חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  כִּי-לֹא יוּכַל, לְהַצִּיל אֶתְכֶם מִיָּדוֹ.    29 Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah beguile you; for he will not be able to deliver you out of his hand;
18.30 ל  וְאַל-יַבְטַח אֶתְכֶם חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, הַצֵּל יַצִּילֵנוּ יְהוָה; וְלֹא תִנָּתֵן אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.    30 neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying: The LORD will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
18.31 לא  אַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  כִּי כֹה אָמַר מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, עֲשׂוּ-אִתִּי בְרָכָה וּצְאוּ אֵלַי, וְאִכְלוּ אִישׁ-גַּפְנוֹ וְאִישׁ תְּאֵנָתוֹ, וּשְׁתוּ אִישׁ מֵי-בֹרוֹ.    31 Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king of Assyria: Make your peace with me, and come out to me; and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig-tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;
18.32 לב  עַד-בֹּאִי וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּאַרְצְכֶם, אֶרֶץ דָּגָן וְתִירוֹשׁ אֶרֶץ לֶחֶם וּכְרָמִים אֶרֶץ זֵית יִצְהָר וּדְבַשׁ, וִחְיוּ, וְלֹא תָמֻתוּ; וְאַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ, כִּי-יַסִּית אֶתְכֶם לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה יַצִּילֵנוּ.    32 until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive-trees and of honey, that ye may live, and not die; and hearken not unto Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying: The LORD will deliver us.
18.33 לג  הַהַצֵּל הִצִּילוּ אֱלֹהֵי הַגּוֹיִם, אִישׁ אֶת-אַרְצוֹ, מִיַּד, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.    33 Hath any of the gods of the nations ever delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
18.34 לד  אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֵי חֲמָת וְאַרְפָּד, אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֵי סְפַרְוַיִם--הֵנַע וְעִוָּה:  כִּי-הִצִּילוּ אֶת-שֹׁמְרוֹן, מִיָּדִי.    34 Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah? have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
18.35 לה  מִי בְּכָל-אֱלֹהֵי הָאֲרָצוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-הִצִּילוּ אֶת-אַרְצָם מִיָּדִי:  כִּי-יַצִּיל יְהוָה אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מִיָּדִי.    35 Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of my hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'
18.36 לו  וְהֶחֱרִישׁוּ הָעָם, וְלֹא-עָנוּ אֹתוֹ דָּבָר:  כִּי-מִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ הִיא לֵאמֹר, לֹא תַעֲנֻהוּ.    36 But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word; for the king's commandment was, saying: 'Answer him not.'
18.37 לז  וַיָּבֹא אֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּה אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַבַּיִת וְשֶׁבְנָא הַסֹּפֵר וְיוֹאָח בֶּן-אָסָף הַמַּזְכִּיר, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ--קְרוּעֵי בְגָדִים; וַיַּגִּדוּ לוֹ, דִּבְרֵי רַבְשָׁקֵה.    37 Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rab-shakeh.
19.1 א  וַיְהִי, כִּשְׁמֹעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, וַיִּקְרַע, אֶת-בְּגָדָיו; וַיִּתְכַּס בַּשָּׂק, וַיָּבֹא בֵּית יְהוָה.    1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD.
19.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶת-אֶלְיָקִים אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַבַּיִת וְשֶׁבְנָא הַסֹּפֵר, וְאֵת זִקְנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, מִתְכַּסִּים, בַּשַּׂקִּים--אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, בֶּן-אָמוֹץ.    2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
19.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, יוֹם-צָרָה וְתוֹכֵחָה וּנְאָצָה, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי בָאוּ בָנִים עַד-מַשְׁבֵּר, וְכֹחַ אַיִן לְלֵדָה.    3 And they said unto him: 'Thus saith Hezekiah: This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of contumely; for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.
19.4 ד  אוּלַי יִשְׁמַע יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי רַבְשָׁקֵה, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֲדֹנָיו לְחָרֵף אֱלֹהִים חַי, וְהוֹכִיחַ בַּדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַע יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ; וְנָשָׂאתָ תְפִלָּה, בְּעַד הַשְּׁאֵרִית הַנִּמְצָאָה.    4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear all the words of Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to taunt the living God, and will rebuke the words which the LORD thy God hath heard; wherefore make prayer for the remnant that is left.'
19.5 ה  וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ--אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ.    5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
19.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, כֹּה תֹאמְרוּן אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיכֶם:  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אַל-תִּירָא מִפְּנֵי הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתָּ, אֲשֶׁר גִּדְּפוּ נַעֲרֵי מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, אֹתִי.    6 And Isaiah said unto them: 'Thus shall ye say to your master: Thus saith the LORD: Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed Me.
19.7 ז  הִנְנִי נֹתֵן בּוֹ רוּחַ, וְשָׁמַע שְׁמוּעָה וְשָׁב לְאַרְצוֹ; וְהִפַּלְתִּיו בַּחֶרֶב, בְּאַרְצוֹ.    7 Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.'
19.8 ח  וַיָּשָׁב, רַבְשָׁקֵה, וַיִּמְצָא אֶת-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, נִלְחָם עַל-לִבְנָה:  כִּי שָׁמַע, כִּי נָסַע מִלָּכִישׁ.    8 So Rab-shakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah; for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
19.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁמַע, אֶל-תִּרְהָקָה מֶלֶךְ-כּוּשׁ לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה יָצָא, לְהִלָּחֵם אִתָּךְ; וַיָּשָׁב וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ לֵאמֹר.    9 And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia: 'Behold, he is come out to fight against thee'; he sent messengers again unto Hezekiah, saying:
19.10 י  כֹּה תֹאמְרוּן, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, אַל-יַשִּׁאֲךָ אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה בֹּטֵחַ בּוֹ לֵאמֹר:  לֹא תִנָּתֵן יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.    10 'Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying: Let not thy God in whom thou trustest beguile thee, saying: Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
19.11 יא  הִנֵּה אַתָּה שָׁמַעְתָּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר לְכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת--לְהַחֲרִימָם; וְאַתָּה, תִּנָּצֵל.    11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
19.12 יב  הַהִצִּילוּ אֹתָם אֱלֹהֵי הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר שִׁחֲתוּ אֲבוֹתַי, אֶת-גּוֹזָן, וְאֶת-חָרָן; וְרֶצֶף וּבְנֵי-עֶדֶן, אֲשֶׁר בִּתְלַאשָּׂר.    12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden that were in Telassar?
19.13 יג  אַיּוֹ מֶלֶךְ-חֲמָת וּמֶלֶךְ אַרְפָּד, וּמֶלֶךְ לָעִיר סְפַרְוָיִם, הֵנַע, וְעִוָּה.    13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?'
19.14 יד  וַיִּקַּח חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-הַסְּפָרִים מִיַּד הַמַּלְאָכִים, וַיִּקְרָאֵם; וַיַּעַל בֵּית יְהוָה, וַיִּפְרְשֵׂהוּ חִזְקִיָּהוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.  {פ}    14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it; and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD. {P}
19.15 טו  וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל חִזְקִיָּהוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל יֹשֵׁב הַכְּרֻבִים, אַתָּה-הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים לְבַדְּךָ לְכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ; אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ, אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ.    15 And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD, and said: 'O LORD, the God of Israel, that sittest upon the cherubim, Thou art the God, even Thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; Thou hast made heaven and earth.
19.16 טז  הַטֵּה יְהוָה אָזְנְךָ וּשְׁמָע, פְּקַח יְהוָה עֵינֶיךָ וּרְאֵה; וּשְׁמַע, אֵת דִּבְרֵי סַנְחֵרִיב, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ, לְחָרֵף אֱלֹהִים חָי.    16 Incline Thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open Thine eyes, O LORD, and see; and hear the words of Sennacherib, wherewith he hath sent him to taunt the living God.
19.17 יז  אָמְנָם, יְהוָה:  הֶחֱרִיבוּ מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר, אֶת-הַגּוֹיִם--וְאֶת-אַרְצָם.    17 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste the nations and their lands,
19.18 יח  וְנָתְנוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, בָּאֵשׁ:  כִּי לֹא אֱלֹהִים הֵמָּה, כִּי אִם-מַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵי-אָדָם עֵץ וָאֶבֶן--וַיְאַבְּדוּם.    18 and have cast their gods into the fire; for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them.
19.19 יט  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ נָא מִיָּדוֹ; וְיֵדְעוּ כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, כִּי אַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים לְבַדֶּךָ.  {ס}    19 Now therefore, O LORD our God, save Thou us, I beseech Thee, out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that Thou art the LORD God, even Thou only.' {S}
19.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הִתְפַּלַּלְתָּ אֵלַי אֶל-סַנְחֵרִב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר שָׁמָעְתִּי.    20 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Whereas thou hast prayed to Me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, I have heard thee.
19.21 כא  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה עָלָיו:  בָּזָה לְךָ לָעֲגָה לְךָ, בְּתוּלַת בַּת-צִיּוֹן--אַחֲרֶיךָ רֹאשׁ הֵנִיעָה, בַּת יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    21 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.
19.22 כב  אֶת-מִי חֵרַפְתָּ וְגִדַּפְתָּ, וְעַל-מִי הֲרִימוֹתָ קּוֹל; וַתִּשָּׂא מָרוֹם עֵינֶיךָ, עַל-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    22 Whom hast thou taunted and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice? Yea, thou hast lifted up thine eyes on high, even against the Holy One of Israel!
19.23 כג  בְּיַד מַלְאָכֶיךָ, חֵרַפְתָּ אֲדֹנָי, וַתֹּאמֶר ברכב (בְּרֹב) רִכְבִּי אֲנִי עָלִיתִי מְרוֹם הָרִים, יַרְכְּתֵי לְבָנוֹן; וְאֶכְרֹת קוֹמַת אֲרָזָיו, מִבְחוֹר בְּרֹשָׁיו, וְאָבוֹאָה מְלוֹן קִצֹּה, יַעַר כַּרְמִלּוֹ.    23 By the messengers thou hast taunted the Lord, and hast said: With the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon; and I have cut down the tall cedars thereof, and the choice cypresses thereof; and I have entered into his farthest lodge, the forest of his fruitful field.
19.24 כד  אֲנִי קַרְתִּי, וְשָׁתִיתִי מַיִם זָרִים; וְאַחְרִב, בְּכַף-פְּעָמַי, כֹּל, יְאֹרֵי מָצוֹר.    24 I have digged and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of Egypt.
19.25 כה  הֲלֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ לְמֵרָחוֹק אֹתָהּ עָשִׂיתִי, לְמִימֵי קֶדֶם וִיצַרְתִּיהָ; עַתָּה הֲבֵיאתִיהָ--וּתְהִי לַהְשׁוֹת גַּלִּים נִצִּים, עָרִים בְּצֻרוֹת.    25 Hast thou not heard? long ago I made it, in ancient times I fashioned it; now have I brought it to pass, yea, it is done; that fortified cities should be laid waste into ruinous heaps.
19.26 כו  וְיֹשְׁבֵיהֶן, קִצְרֵי-יָד--חַתּוּ, וַיֵּבֹשׁוּ; הָיוּ עֵשֶׂב שָׂדֶה, וִירַק דֶּשֶׁא, חֲצִיר גַּגּוֹת, וּשְׁדֵפָה לִפְנֵי קָמָה.    26 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it is grown up.
19.27 כז  וְשִׁבְתְּךָ וְצֵאתְךָ וּבֹאֲךָ, יָדָעְתִּי; וְאֵת, הִתְרַגֶּזְךָ אֵלָי.    27 But I know thy sitting down, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against Me.
19.28 כח  יַעַן הִתְרַגֶּזְךָ אֵלַי, וְשַׁאֲנַנְךָ עָלָה בְאָזְנָי--וְשַׂמְתִּי חַחִי בְּאַפֶּךָ, וּמִתְגִּי בִּשְׂפָתֶיךָ, וַהֲשִׁבֹתִיךָ, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתָ בָּהּ.    28 Because of thy raging against Me, and for that thy tumult is come up into Mine ears, therefore will I put My hook in thy nose, and My bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.
19.29 כט  וְזֶה-לְּךָ הָאוֹת--אָכוֹל הַשָּׁנָה סָפִיחַ, וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית סָחִישׁ; וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁלִישִׁית, זִרְעוּ וְקִצְרוּ וְנִטְעוּ כְרָמִים--וְאִכְלוּ פִרְיָם.    29 And this shall be the sign unto thee: ye shall eat this year that which groweth of itself, and in the second year that which springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.
19.30 ל  וְיָסְפָה פְּלֵיטַת בֵּית-יְהוּדָה, הַנִּשְׁאָרָה--שֹׁרֶשׁ לְמָטָּה; וְעָשָׂה פְרִי, לְמָעְלָה.    30 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
19.31 לא  כִּי מִירוּשָׁלִַם תֵּצֵא שְׁאֵרִית, וּפְלֵיטָה מֵהַר צִיּוֹן; קִנְאַת יְהוָה       (צְבָאוֹת), תַּעֲשֶׂה-זֹּאת.  {ס}    31 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and out of mount Zion they that shall escape; the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall perform this. {S}
19.32 לב  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, לֹא יָבֹא אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְלֹא-יוֹרֶה שָׁם חֵץ; וְלֹא-יְקַדְּמֶנָּה מָגֵן, וְלֹא-יִשְׁפֹּךְ עָלֶיהָ סֹלְלָה.    32 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: He shall not come unto this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither shall he come before it with shield, nor cast a mound against it.
19.33 לג  בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-יָבֹא, בָּהּ יָשׁוּב; וְאֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת לֹא יָבֹא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.    33 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and he shall not come unto this city, saith the LORD.
19.34 לד  וְגַנּוֹתִי אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, לְהוֹשִׁיעָהּ--לְמַעֲנִי, וּלְמַעַן דָּוִד עַבְדִּי.    34 For I will defend this city to save it, for Mine own sake, and for My servant David's sake.'
19.35 לה  וַיְהִי, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, וַיֵּצֵא מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה וַיַּךְ בְּמַחֲנֵה אַשּׁוּר, מֵאָה שְׁמוֹנִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה אָלֶף; וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ בַבֹּקֶר, וְהִנֵּה כֻלָּם פְּגָרִים מֵתִים.    35 And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred fourscore and five thousand; and when men arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.
19.36 לו  וַיִּסַּע וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיָּשָׁב סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר; וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּנִינְוֵה.    36 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.
19.37 לז  וַיְהִי הוּא מִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה בֵּית נִסְרֹךְ אֱלֹהָיו, וְאַדְרַמֶּלֶךְ וְשַׂרְאֶצֶר      (בָּנָיו) הִכֻּהוּ בַחֶרֶב, וְהֵמָּה נִמְלְטוּ, אֶרֶץ אֲרָרָט; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֵסַר-חַדֹּן בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    37 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sarezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. {P}
20.1 א  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, חָלָה חִזְקִיָּהוּ לָמוּת; וַיָּבֹא אֵלָיו יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ הַנָּבִיא, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צַו לְבֵיתֶךָ--כִּי מֵת אַתָּה, וְלֹא תִחְיֶה.    1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD: Set thy house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.'
20.2 ב  וַיַּסֵּב אֶת-פָּנָיו, אֶל-הַקִּיר; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל--אֶל-יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר.    2 Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the LORD, saying:
20.3 ג  אָנָּה יְהוָה, זְכָר-נָא אֵת אֲשֶׁר הִתְהַלַּכְתִּי לְפָנֶיךָ בֶּאֱמֶת וּבְלֵבָב שָׁלֵם, וְהַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ, עָשִׂיתִי; וַיֵּבְךְּ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, בְּכִי גָדוֹל.  {ס}    3 'Remember now, O LORD, I beseech Thee, how I have walked before Thee in truth and with a whole heart, and have done that which is good in Thy sight.' And Hezekiah wept sore. {S}
20.4 ד  וַיְהִי יְשַׁעְיָהוּ--לֹא יָצָא, העיר (חָצֵר) הַתִּיכֹנָה; וּדְבַר-יְהוָה--הָיָה אֵלָיו, לֵאמֹר.    4 And it came to pass, before Isaiah was gone out of the inner court of the city, that the word of the LORD came to him, saying:
20.5 ה  שׁוּב וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ נְגִיד-עַמִּי, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי דָּוִד אָבִיךָ, שָׁמַעְתִּי אֶת-תְּפִלָּתֶךָ, רָאִיתִי אֶת-דִּמְעָתֶךָ; הִנְנִי, רֹפֶא לָךְ--בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, תַּעֲלֶה בֵּית יְהוָה.    5 'Return, and say to Hezekiah the prince of My people: Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears; behold, I will heal thee; on the third day thou shalt go up unto the house of the LORD.
20.6 ו  וְהֹסַפְתִּי עַל-יָמֶיךָ, חֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, וּמִכַּף מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אַצִּילְךָ, וְאֵת הָעִיר הַזֹּאת; וְגַנּוֹתִי, עַל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת--לְמַעֲנִי, וּלְמַעַן דָּוִד עַבְדִּי.    6 And I will add unto thy days fifteen years; and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city for Mine own sake, and for My servant David's sake.'
20.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, קְחוּ דְּבֶלֶת תְּאֵנִים; וַיִּקְחוּ וַיָּשִׂימוּ עַל-הַשְּׁחִין, וַיֶּחִי.    7 And Isaiah said: 'Take a cake of figs.' And they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.
20.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, מָה אוֹת, כִּי-יִרְפָּא יְהוָה לִי; וְעָלִיתִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, בֵּית יְהוָה.    8 And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah: 'What shall be the sign that the LORD will heal me, and that I shall go up unto the house of the LORD the third day?'
20.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, זֶה-לְּךָ הָאוֹת מֵאֵת יְהוָה, כִּי יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה, אֶת-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר:  הָלַךְ הַצֵּל עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת, אִם-יָשׁוּב עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת.    9 And Isaiah said: 'This shall be the sign unto thee from the LORD, that the LORD will do the thing that He hath spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees?
20.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, נָקֵל לַצֵּל, לִנְטוֹת עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת; לֹא כִי, יָשׁוּב הַצֵּל אֲחֹרַנִּית עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת.    10 And Hezekiah answered: 'It is a light thing for the shadow to decline ten degrees; nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.'
20.11 יא  וַיִּקְרָא יְשַׁעְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-יְהוָה; וַיָּשֶׁב אֶת-הַצֵּל, בַּמַּעֲלוֹת אֲשֶׁר יָרְדָה בְּמַעֲלוֹת אָחָז אֲחֹרַנִּית--עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת.  {פ}    11 And Isaiah the prophet cried unto the LORD; and he brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down on the dial of Ahaz. {P}
20.12 יב  בָּעֵת הַהִיא שָׁלַח בְּרֹאדַךְ בַּלְאֲדָן בֶּן-בַּלְאֲדָן מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, סְפָרִים וּמִנְחָה--אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  כִּי שָׁמַע, כִּי חָלָה חִזְקִיָּהוּ.    12 At that time Berodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present unto Hezekiah; for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
20.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁמַע עֲלֵיהֶם, חִזְקִיָּהוּ, וַיַּרְאֵם אֶת-כָּל-בֵּית נְכֹתֹה אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב וְאֶת-הַבְּשָׂמִים וְאֵת שֶׁמֶן הַטּוֹב וְאֵת בֵּית כֵּלָיו, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר נִמְצָא בְּאוֹצְרֹתָיו:  לֹא-הָיָה דָבָר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הֶרְאָם חִזְקִיָּהוּ בְּבֵיתוֹ--וּבְכָל-מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ.    13 And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and showed them all his treasure-house, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious oil, and the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures; there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah showed them not.
20.14 יד  וַיָּבֹא יְשַׁעְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו מָה אָמְרוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, וּמֵאַיִן יָבֹאוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, מֵאֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה בָּאוּ מִבָּבֶל.    14 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him: 'What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee?' And Hezekiah said: 'They are come from a far country, even from Babylon.'
20.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, מָה רָאוּ בְּבֵיתֶךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵיתִי רָאוּ--לֹא-הָיָה דָבָר אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הִרְאִיתִם, בְּאֹצְרֹתָי.    15 And he said: 'What have they seen in thy house?' And Hezekiah answered: 'All that is in my house have they seen; there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.'
20.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  שְׁמַע, דְּבַר-יְהוָה.    16 And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah: 'Hear the word of the LORD.
20.17 יז  הִנֵּה, יָמִים בָּאִים, וְנִשָּׂא כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵיתֶךָ וַאֲשֶׁר אָצְרוּ אֲבֹתֶיךָ עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, בָּבֶלָה:  לֹא-יִוָּתֵר דָּבָר, אָמַר יְהוָה.    17 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thy house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.
20.18 יח  וּמִבָּנֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר יֵצְאוּ מִמְּךָ, אֲשֶׁר תּוֹלִיד--יקח (יִקָּחוּ); וְהָיוּ, סָרִיסִים, בְּהֵיכַל, מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.    18 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be officers in the palace of the king of Babylon.'
20.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, טוֹב דְּבַר-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ; וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲלוֹא אִם-שָׁלוֹם וֶאֱמֶת יִהְיֶה בְיָמָי.    19 Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah: 'Good is the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken.' He said moreover: 'Is it not so, if peace and truth shall be in my days?'
20.20 כ  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי חִזְקִיָּהוּ, וְכָל-גְּבוּרָתוֹ, וַאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֶת-הַבְּרֵכָה וְאֶת-הַתְּעָלָה, וַיָּבֵא אֶת-הַמַּיִם הָעִירָה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    20 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made the pool, and the conduit, and brought water into the city, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
20.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁכַּב חִזְקִיָּהוּ, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ מְנַשֶּׁה בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    21 And Hezekiah slept with his fathers; and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead. {P}
21.1 א  בֶּן-שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מְנַשֶּׁה בְמָלְכוֹ, וַחֲמִשִּׁים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, חֶפְצִי-בָהּ.    1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign; and he reigned five and fifty years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Hephzi-bah.
21.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--כְּתוֹעֲבֹת, הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, after the abominations of the nations, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
21.3 ג  וַיָּשָׁב, וַיִּבֶן אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת, אֲשֶׁר אִבַּד, חִזְקִיָּהוּ אָבִיו; וַיָּקֶם מִזְבְּחֹת לַבַּעַל, וַיַּעַשׂ אֲשֵׁרָה כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אַחְאָב מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַיַּעֲבֹד אֹתָם.    3 For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made an Asherah, as did Ahab king of Israel, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.
21.4 ד  וּבָנָה מִזְבְּחֹת, בְּבֵית יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם אָשִׂים אֶת-שְׁמִי.    4 And he built altars in the house of the LORD, whereof the LORD said: 'In Jerusalem will I put My name.'
21.5 ה  וַיִּבֶן מִזְבְּחוֹת, לְכָל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמָיִם, בִּשְׁתֵּי, חַצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה.    5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.
21.6 ו  וְהֶעֱבִיר אֶת-בְּנוֹ, בָּאֵשׁ, וְעוֹנֵן וְנִחֵשׁ, וְעָשָׂה אוֹב וְיִדְּעֹנִים:  הִרְבָּה, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--לְהַכְעִיס.    6 And he made his son to pass through the fire, and practised soothsaying, and used enchantments, and appointed them that divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit: he wrought much evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke Him.
21.7 ז  וַיָּשֶׂם, אֶת-פֶּסֶל הָאֲשֵׁרָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה--בַּבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה אֶל-דָּוִד וְאֶל-שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ, בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתִּי מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָשִׂים אֶת-שְׁמִי לְעוֹלָם.    7 And he set the graven image of Asherah, that he had made, in the house of which the LORD said to David and to Solomon his son: 'In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will I put My name for ever;
21.8 ח  וְלֹא אֹסִיף, לְהָנִיד רֶגֶל יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִן-הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לַאֲבוֹתָם:  רַק אִם-יִשְׁמְרוּ לַעֲשׂוֹת, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִים, וּלְכָל-הַתּוֹרָה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה אֹתָם עַבְדִּי מֹשֶׁה.    8 neither will I cause the feet of Israel to wander any more out of the land which I gave their fathers; if only they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that My servant Moses commanded them.'
21.9 ט  וְלֹא, שָׁמֵעוּ; וַיַּתְעֵם מְנַשֶּׁה, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-הָרָע, מִן-הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁמִיד יְהוָה מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    9 But they hearkened not; and Manasseh seduced them to do that which is evil more than did the nations, whom the LORD destroyed before the children of Israel.
21.10 י  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה בְּיַד-עֲבָדָיו הַנְּבִיאִים, לֵאמֹר.    10 And the LORD spoke by His servants the prophets, saying:
21.11 יא  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה מְנַשֶּׁה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, הַתֹּעֵבוֹת הָאֵלֶּה--הֵרַע, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ הָאֱמֹרִי אֲשֶׁר לְפָנָיו; וַיַּחֲטִא גַם-אֶת-יְהוּדָה, בְּגִלּוּלָיו.  {ס}    11 'Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations, and hath done wickedly above all that the Amorites did, that were before him, and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols; {S}
21.12 יב  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא רָעָה, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם וִיהוּדָה:  אֲשֶׁר, כָּל-שמעיו (שֹׁמְעָהּ)--תִּצַּלְנָה, שְׁתֵּי אָזְנָיו.    12 therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Behold, I bring such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle.
21.13 יג  וְנָטִיתִי עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֵת קָו שֹׁמְרוֹן, וְאֶת-מִשְׁקֹלֶת, בֵּית אַחְאָב; וּמָחִיתִי אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם כַּאֲשֶׁר-יִמְחֶה אֶת-הַצַּלַּחַת, מָחָה, וְהָפַךְ, עַל-פָּנֶיהָ.    13 And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab; and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.
21.14 יד  וְנָטַשְׁתִּי, אֵת שְׁאֵרִית נַחֲלָתִי, וּנְתַתִּים, בְּיַד אֹיְבֵיהֶם; וְהָיוּ לְבַז וְלִמְשִׁסָּה, לְכָל-אֹיְבֵיהֶם.    14 And I will cast off the remnant of Mine inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies;
21.15 טו  יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֶת-הָרַע בְּעֵינַי, וַיִּהְיוּ מַכְעִסִים, אֹתִי--מִן-הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יָצְאוּ אֲבוֹתָם מִמִּצְרַיִם, וְעַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    15 because they have done that which is evil in My sight, and have provoked Me, since the day their fathers came forth out of Egypt, even unto this day.'
21.16 טז  וְגַם דָּם נָקִי שָׁפַךְ מְנַשֶּׁה, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד, עַד אֲשֶׁר-מִלֵּא אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, פֶּה לָפֶה--לְבַד מֵחַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יְהוּדָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.    16 Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.
21.17 יז  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי מְנַשֶּׁה וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וְחַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    17 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
21.18 יח  וַיִּשְׁכַּב מְנַשֶּׁה עִם-אֲבֹתָיו, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּגַן-בֵּיתוֹ בְּגַן-עֻזָּא; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אָמוֹן בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    18 And Manasseh slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza; and Amon his son reigned in his stead. {P}
21.19 יט  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנָה, אָמוֹן בְּמָלְכוֹ, וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנִים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, מְשֻׁלֶּמֶת בַּת-חָרוּץ מִן-יָטְבָה.    19 Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
21.20 כ  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, מְנַשֶּׁה אָבִיו.    20 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did Manasseh his father.
21.21 כא  וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּכָל-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-הָלַךְ אָבִיו; וַיַּעֲבֹד, אֶת-הַגִּלֻּלִים אֲשֶׁר עָבַד אָבִיו, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ, לָהֶם.    21 And he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them.
21.22 כב  וַיַּעֲזֹב, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתָיו; וְלֹא הָלַךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ יְהוָה.    22 And he forsook the LORD, the God of his fathers, and walked not in the way of the LORD.
21.23 כג  וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ עַבְדֵי-אָמוֹן, עָלָיו; וַיָּמִיתוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּבֵיתוֹ.    23 And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and put the king to death in his own house.
21.24 כד  וַיַּךְ, עַם-הָאָרֶץ, אֵת כָּל-הַקֹּשְׁרִים, עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אָמוֹן; וַיַּמְלִיכוּ עַם-הָאָרֶץ אֶת-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    24 But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.
21.25 כה  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי אָמוֹן, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    25 Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
21.26 כו  וַיִּקְבֹּר אֹתוֹ בִּקְבֻרָתוֹ, בְּגַן-עֻזָּא; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בְנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {פ}    26 And he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza; and Josiah his son reigned in his stead. {P}
22.1 א  בֶּן-שְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנָה, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, יְדִידָה בַת-עֲדָיָה מִבָּצְקַת.    1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign; and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath.
22.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, בְּכָל-דֶּרֶךְ דָּוִד אָבִיו, וְלֹא-סָר, יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול.  {פ}    2 And he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, and walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left. {P}
22.3 ג  וַיְהִי, בִּשְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַמֶּלֶךְ, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ; שָׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-שָׁפָן בֶּן-אֲצַלְיָהוּ בֶן-מְשֻׁלָּם, הַסֹּפֵר, בֵּית יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר.    3 And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the LORD, saying.
22.4 ד  עֲלֵה, אֶל-חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל, וְיַתֵּם אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף, הַמּוּבָא בֵּית יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר אָסְפוּ שֹׁמְרֵי הַסַּף, מֵאֵת הָעָם.    4 'Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may sum the money which is brought into the house of the LORD, which the keepers of the door have gathered of the people;
22.5 ה  ויתנה (וְיִתְּנוּהוּ), עַל-יַד עֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, הַמֻּפְקָדִים, בבית (בֵּית) יְהוָה; וְיִתְּנוּ אֹתוֹ, לְעֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית יְהוָה, לְחַזֵּק, בֶּדֶק הַבָּיִת.    5 and let them deliver it into the hand of the workmen that have the oversight of the house of the LORD; and let them give it to the workmen that are in the house of the LORD, to repair the breaches of the house;
22.6 ו  לֶחָרָשִׁים, וְלַבֹּנִים וְלַגֹּדְרִים; וְלִקְנוֹת עֵצִים וְאַבְנֵי מַחְצֵב, לְחַזֵּק אֶת-הַבָּיִת.    6 unto the carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons; and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the house.'--
22.7 ז  אַךְ לֹא-יֵחָשֵׁב אִתָּם, הַכֶּסֶף הַנִּתָּן עַל-יָדָם:  כִּי בֶאֱמוּנָה, הֵם עֹשִׂים.    7 Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hand; for they dealt faithfully.
22.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל, עַל-שָׁפָן הַסֹּפֵר, סֵפֶר הַתּוֹרָה מָצָאתִי, בְּבֵית יְהוָה; וַיִּתֵּן חִלְקִיָּה אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר אֶל-שָׁפָן, וַיִּקְרָאֵהוּ.    8 And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe: 'I have found the book of the Law in the house of the LORD.' And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan, and he read it.
22.9 ט  וַיָּבֹא שָׁפָן הַסֹּפֵר, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיָּשֶׁב אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, דָּבָר; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִתִּיכוּ עֲבָדֶיךָ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף הַנִּמְצָא בַבַּיִת, וַיִּתְּנֻהוּ עַל-יַד עֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, הַמֻּפְקָדִים בֵּית יְהוָה.    9 And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought back word unto the king, and said: 'Thy servants have poured out the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of the workmen that have the oversight of the house of the LORD.'
22.10 י  וַיַּגֵּד שָׁפָן הַסֹּפֵר, לַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, סֵפֶר נָתַן לִי, חִלְקִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן; וַיִּקְרָאֵהוּ שָׁפָן, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    10 And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying: 'Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a book.' And Shaphan read it before the king.
22.11 יא  וַיְהִי כִּשְׁמֹעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי סֵפֶר הַתּוֹרָה; וַיִּקְרַע, אֶת-בְּגָדָיו.    11 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the Law, that he rent his clothes.
22.12 יב  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-חִלְקִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן וְאֶת-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן וְאֶת-עַכְבּוֹר בֶּן-מִיכָיָה וְאֵת שָׁפָן הַסֹּפֵר, וְאֵת עֲשָׂיָה עֶבֶד-הַמֶּלֶךְ--לֵאמֹר.    12 And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Micaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's servant, saying:
22.13 יג  לְכוּ דִרְשׁוּ אֶת-יְהוָה בַּעֲדִי וּבְעַד-הָעָם, וּבְעַד כָּל-יְהוּדָה, עַל-דִּבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר הַנִּמְצָא, הַזֶּה:  כִּי-גְדוֹלָה חֲמַת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-הִיא נִצְּתָה בָנוּ, עַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ אֲבֹתֵינוּ עַל-דִּבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה, לַעֲשׂוֹת כְּכָל-הַכָּתוּב עָלֵינוּ.    13 'Go ye, inquire of the LORD for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found; for great is the wrath of the LORD that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is written concerning us.'
22.14 יד  וַיֵּלֶךְ חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן וַאֲחִיקָם וְעַכְבּוֹר וְשָׁפָן וַעֲשָׂיָה, אֶל-חֻלְדָּה הַנְּבִיאָה אֵשֶׁת שַׁלֻּם בֶּן-תִּקְוָה בֶּן-חַרְחַס שֹׁמֵר הַבְּגָדִים, וְהִיא יֹשֶׁבֶת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, בַּמִּשְׁנֶה; וַיְדַבְּרוּ, אֵלֶיהָ.    14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asaiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe--now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter--and they spoke with her.
22.15 טו  וַתֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אִמְרוּ לָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח אֶתְכֶם אֵלָי.    15 And she said unto them: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Tell ye the man that sent you unto me:
22.16 טז  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא רָעָה אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה וְעַל-יֹשְׁבָיו--אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר, אֲשֶׁר קָרָא מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.    16 Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read;
22.17 יז  תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר עֲזָבוּנִי, וַיְקַטְּרוּ לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, לְמַעַן הַכְעִיסֵנִי, בְּכֹל מַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיהֶם; וְנִצְּתָה חֲמָתִי בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וְלֹא תִכְבֶּה.    17 because they have forsaken Me, and have offered unto other gods, that they might provoke Me with all the work of their hands; therefore My wrath shall be kindled against this place, and it shall not be quenched.
22.18 יח  וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, הַשֹּׁלֵחַ אֶתְכֶם לִדְרֹשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה, כֹּה תֹאמְרוּ, אֵלָיו:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁמָעְתָּ.    18 But unto the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD, thus shall ye say to him: Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: As touching the words which thou hast heard,
22.19 יט  יַעַן רַךְ-לְבָבְךָ וַתִּכָּנַע מִפְּנֵי יְהוָה, בְּשָׁמְעֲךָ אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה וְעַל-יֹשְׁבָיו לִהְיוֹת לְשַׁמָּה וְלִקְלָלָה, וַתִּקְרַע אֶת-בְּגָדֶיךָ, וַתִּבְכֶּה לְפָנָי; וְגַם אָנֹכִי שָׁמַעְתִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.    19 because thy heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before the LORD, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become an astonishment and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before Me, I also have heard thee, saith the LORD.
22.20 כ  לָכֵן הִנְנִי אֹסִפְךָ עַל-אֲבֹתֶיךָ, וְנֶאֱסַפְתָּ אֶל-קִבְרֹתֶיךָ בְּשָׁלוֹם, וְלֹא-תִרְאֶינָה עֵינֶיךָ, בְּכֹל הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי מֵבִיא עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה; וַיָּשִׁבוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, דָּבָר.    20 Therefore, behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.' And they brought back word unto the king.
23.1 א  וַיִּשְׁלַח, הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיַּאַסְפוּ אֵלָיו, כָּל-זִקְנֵי יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם.    1 And the king sent, and they gathered unto him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem.
23.2 ב  וַיַּעַל הַמֶּלֶךְ בֵּית-יְהוָה וְכָל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה וְכָל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם אִתּוֹ, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַנְּבִיאִים, וְכָל-הָעָם, לְמִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל; וַיִּקְרָא בְאָזְנֵיהֶם, אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי סֵפֶר הַבְּרִית, הַנִּמְצָא, בְּבֵית יְהוָה.    2 And the king went up to the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in the house of the LORD.
23.3 ג  וַיַּעֲמֹד הַמֶּלֶךְ עַל-הָעַמּוּד וַיִּכְרֹת אֶת-הַבְּרִית לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לָלֶכֶת אַחַר יְהוָה וְלִשְׁמֹר מִצְוֺתָיו וְאֶת-עֵדְוֺתָיו וְאֶת-חֻקֹּתָיו בְּכָל-לֵב וּבְכָל-נֶפֶשׁ, לְהָקִים אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית הַזֹּאת, הַכְּתֻבִים עַל-הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה; וַיַּעֲמֹד כָּל-הָעָם, בַּבְּרִית.    3 And the king stood on the platform, and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep His commandments, and His testimonies, and His statutes, with all his heart, and all his soul, to confirm the words of this covenant that were written in this book; and all the people stood to the covenant.
23.4 ד  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל וְאֶת-כֹּהֲנֵי הַמִּשְׁנֶה, וְאֶת-שֹׁמְרֵי הַסַּף, לְהוֹצִיא מֵהֵיכַל יְהוָה, אֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הָעֲשׂוּיִם לַבַּעַל וְלָאֲשֵׁרָה וּלְכֹל צְבָא הַשָּׁמָיִם; וַיִּשְׂרְפֵם מִחוּץ לִירוּשָׁלִַם, בְּשַׁדְמוֹת קִדְרוֹן, וְנָשָׂא אֶת-עֲפָרָם, בֵּית-אֵל.    4 And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out of the temple of the LORD all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the Asherah, and for all the host of heaven; and he burned them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes of them unto Beth-el.
23.5 ה  וְהִשְׁבִּית אֶת-הַכְּמָרִים, אֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיְקַטֵּר בַּבָּמוֹת בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וּמְסִבֵּי יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְאֶת-הַמְקַטְּרִים לַבַּעַל, לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ וְלַיָּרֵחַ וְלַמַּזָּלוֹת, וּלְכֹל, צְבָא הַשָּׁמָיִם.    5 And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to offer in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that offered unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the constellations, and to all the host of heaven.
23.6 ו  וַיֹּצֵא אֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרָה מִבֵּית יְהוָה מִחוּץ לִירוּשָׁלִַם, אֶל-נַחַל קִדְרוֹן, וַיִּשְׂרֹף אֹתָהּ בְּנַחַל קִדְרוֹן, וַיָּדֶק לְעָפָר; וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ, אֶת-עֲפָרָהּ, עַל-קֶבֶר, בְּנֵי הָעָם.    6 And he brought out the Asherah from the house of the LORD, without Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the graves of the common people.
23.7 ז  וַיִּתֹּץ אֶת-בָּתֵּי הַקְּדֵשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית יְהוָה:  אֲשֶׁר הַנָּשִׁים, אֹרְגוֹת שָׁם בָּתִּים--לָאֲשֵׁרָה.    7 And he broke down the houses of the sodomites, that were in the house of the LORD, where the women wove coverings for the Asherah.
23.8 ח  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-כָּל-הַכֹּהֲנִים, מֵעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיְטַמֵּא אֶת-הַבָּמוֹת אֲשֶׁר קִטְּרוּ-שָׁמָּה הַכֹּהֲנִים, מִגֶּבַע עַד-בְּאֵר שָׁבַע; וְנָתַץ אֶת-בָּמוֹת הַשְּׁעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר-פֶּתַח שַׁעַר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ שַׂר-הָעִיר, אֲשֶׁר-עַל-שְׂמֹאול אִישׁ, בְּשַׁעַר הָעִיר.    8 And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had made offerings, from Geba to Beer-sheba; and he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man's left hand as he entered the gate of the city.
23.9 ט  אַךְ, לֹא יַעֲלוּ כֹּהֲנֵי הַבָּמוֹת, אֶל-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי אִם-אָכְלוּ מַצּוֹת, בְּתוֹךְ אֲחֵיהֶם.    9 Nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they did eat unleavened bread among their brethren.
23.10 י  וְטִמֵּא אֶת-הַתֹּפֶת, אֲשֶׁר בְּגֵי בני- (בֶן-) הִנֹּם:  לְבִלְתִּי, לְהַעֲבִיר אִישׁ אֶת-בְּנוֹ וְאֶת-בִּתּוֹ בָּאֵשׁ--לַמֹּלֶךְ.    10 And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.
23.11 יא  וַיַּשְׁבֵּת אֶת-הַסּוּסִים, אֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ מִבֹּא בֵית-יְהוָה, אֶל-לִשְׁכַּת נְתַן-מֶלֶךְ הַסָּרִיס, אֲשֶׁר בַּפַּרְוָרִים; וְאֶת-מַרְכְּבוֹת הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ.    11 And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entrance of the house of the LORD, by the chamber of Nethan-melech the officer, which was in the precincts; and he burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
23.12 יב  וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַגָּג עֲלִיַּת אָחָז אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה מְנַשֶּׁה בִּשְׁתֵּי חַצְרוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה--נָתַץ הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיָּרָץ מִשָּׁם, וְהִשְׁלִיךְ אֶת-עֲפָרָם אֶל-נַחַל קִדְרוֹן.    12 And the altars that were on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD, did the king break down, and beat them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron.
23.13 יג  וְאֶת-הַבָּמוֹת אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֲשֶׁר מִימִין לְהַר-הַמַּשְׁחִית, אֲשֶׁר בָּנָה שְׁלֹמֹה מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְעַשְׁתֹּרֶת שִׁקֻּץ צִידֹנִים וְלִכְמוֹשׁ שִׁקֻּץ מוֹאָב, וּלְמִלְכֹּם תּוֹעֲבַת בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן--טִמֵּא, הַמֶּלֶךְ.    13 And the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded for Ashtoreth the detestation of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the detestation of Moab, and for Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon, did the king defile.
23.14 יד  וְשִׁבַּר, אֶת-הַמַּצֵּבוֹת, וַיִּכְרֹת, אֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרִים; וַיְמַלֵּא אֶת-מְקוֹמָם, עַצְמוֹת אָדָם.    14 And he broke in pieces the pillars, and cut down the Asherim, and filled their places with the bones of men.
23.15 טו  וְגַם אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית-אֵל, הַבָּמָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-נְבָט אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱטִיא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--גַּם אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ הַהוּא וְאֶת-הַבָּמָה, נָתָץ; וַיִּשְׂרֹף אֶת-הַבָּמָה הֵדַק לְעָפָר, וְשָׂרַף אֲשֵׁרָה.    15 Moreover the altar that was at Beth-el, and the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he broke down; and he burned the high place and stamped it small to powder, and burned the Asherah.
23.16 טז  וַיִּפֶן יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, וַיַּרְא אֶת-הַקְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם בָּהָר, וַיִּשְׁלַח וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הָעֲצָמוֹת מִן-הַקְּבָרִים, וַיִּשְׂרֹף עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ וַיְטַמְּאֵהוּ--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר קָרָא אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר קָרָא, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.    16 And as Josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were there in the mount; and he sent, and took the bones out of the sepulchres, and burned them upon the altar, and defiled it, according to the word of the LORD which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these things.
23.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר--מָה הַצִּיּוּן הַלָּז, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי רֹאֶה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, הַקֶּבֶר אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר-בָּא מִיהוּדָה, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ, עַל הַמִּזְבַּח בֵּית-אֵל.    17 Then he said: 'What monument is that which I see?' And the men of the city told him: 'It is the sepulchre of the man of God, who came from Judah, and proclaimed these things that thou hast done against the altar of Beth-el.'
23.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר הַנִּיחוּ לוֹ, אִישׁ אַל-יָנַע עַצְמוֹתָיו; וַיְמַלְּטוּ, עַצְמוֹתָיו--אֵת עַצְמוֹת הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא מִשֹּׁמְרוֹן.    18 And he said: 'Let him be; let no man move his bones.' So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came out of Samaria.
23.19 יט  וְגַם אֶת-כָּל-בָּתֵּי הַבָּמוֹת אֲשֶׁר בְּעָרֵי שֹׁמְרוֹן, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לְהַכְעִיס--הֵסִיר, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ; וַיַּעַשׂ לָהֶם--כְּכָל-הַמַּעֲשִׂים, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה בְּבֵית-אֵל.    19 And all the houses also of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke [the LORD], Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Beth-el.
23.20 כ  וַיִּזְבַּח אֶת-כָּל-כֹּהֲנֵי הַבָּמוֹת אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם, עַל-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת, וַיִּשְׂרֹף אֶת-עַצְמוֹת אָדָם, עֲלֵיהֶם; וַיָּשָׁב, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    20 And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there, upon the altars, and burned men's bones upon them; and he returned to Jerusalem.
23.21 כא  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, עֲשׂוּ פֶסַח, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--כַּכָּתוּב, עַל סֵפֶר הַבְּרִית הַזֶּה.    21 And the king commanded all the people, saying: 'Keep the passover unto the LORD your God, as it is written in this book of the covenant.'
23.22 כב  כִּי לֹא נַעֲשָׂה, כַּפֶּסַח הַזֶּה, מִימֵי הַשֹּׁפְטִים, אֲשֶׁר שָׁפְטוּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכֹל, יְמֵי מַלְכֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--וּמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    22 For there was not kept such a passover from the days of the judges that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah;
23.23 כג  כִּי, אִם-בִּשְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַמֶּלֶךְ, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ:  נַעֲשָׂה הַפֶּסַח הַזֶּה, לַיהוָה--בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    23 but in the eighteenth year of king Josiah was this passover kept to the LORD in Jerusalem.
23.24 כד  וְגַם אֶת-הָאֹבוֹת וְאֶת-הַיִּדְּעֹנִים וְאֶת-הַתְּרָפִים וְאֶת-הַגִּלֻּלִים וְאֵת כָּל-הַשִּׁקֻּצִים, אֲשֶׁר נִרְאוּ בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם--בִּעֵר, יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ:  לְמַעַן הָקִים אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַתּוֹרָה, הַכְּתֻבִים עַל-הַסֵּפֶר, אֲשֶׁר מָצָא חִלְקִיָּהוּ הַכֹּהֵן, בֵּית יְהוָה.    24 Moreover them that divined by a ghost or a familiar spirit, and the teraphim, and the idols, and all the detestable things that were spied in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might confirm the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the LORD.
23.25 כה  וְכָמֹהוּ לֹא-הָיָה לְפָנָיו מֶלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁב אֶל-יְהוָה בְּכָל-לְבָבוֹ וּבְכָל-נַפְשׁוֹ וּבְכָל-מְאֹדוֹ--כְּכֹל, תּוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה; וְאַחֲרָיו, לֹא-קָם כָּמֹהוּ.    25 And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the LORD with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him.
23.26 כו  אַךְ לֹא-שָׁב יְהוָה, מֵחֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ הַגָּדוֹל, אֲשֶׁר-חָרָה אַפּוֹ, בִּיהוּדָה--עַל, כָּל-הַכְּעָסִים, אֲשֶׁר הִכְעִיסוֹ, מְנַשֶּׁה.    26 Notwithstanding the LORD turned not from the fierceness of His great wrath, wherewith His anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations wherewith Manasseh had provoked Him.
23.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, גַּם אֶת-יְהוּדָה אָסִיר מֵעַל פָּנַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הֲסִרֹתִי, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּמָאַסְתִּי אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת אֲשֶׁר-בָּחַרְתִּי, אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְאֶת-הַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתִּי יִהְיֶה שְׁמִי שָׁם.    27 And the LORD said: 'I will remove Judah also out of My sight, as I have removed Israel, and I will cast off this city which I have chosen, even Jerusalem, and the house of which I said: My name shall be there.'
23.28 כח  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    28 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
23.29 כט  בְּיָמָיו עָלָה פַרְעֹה נְכֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, עַל-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר--עַל-נְהַר-פְּרָת; וַיֵּלֶךְ הַמֶּלֶךְ יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַיְמִיתֵהוּ בִּמְגִדּוֹ, כִּרְאֹתוֹ אֹתוֹ.    29 In his days Pharaoh-necoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates; and king Josiah went against him; and he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him.
23.30 ל  וַיַּרְכִּבֻהוּ עֲבָדָיו מֵת, מִמְּגִדּוֹ, וַיְבִאֻהוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בִּקְבֻרָתוֹ; וַיִּקַּח עַם-הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-יְהוֹאָחָז בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, וַיִּמְשְׁחוּ אֹתוֹ וַיַּמְלִיכוּ אֹתוֹ, תַּחַת אָבִיו.  {פ}    30 And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him king in his father's stead. {P}
23.31 לא  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנָה, יְהוֹאָחָז בְּמָלְכוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, חֲמוּטַל בַּת-יִרְמְיָהוּ מִלִּבְנָה.    31 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
23.32 לב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ, אֲבֹתָיו.    32 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done.
23.33 לג  וַיַּאַסְרֵהוּ פַרְעֹה נְכֹה בְרִבְלָה בְּאֶרֶץ חֲמָת, במלך (מִמְּלֹךְ) בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וַיִּתֶּן-עֹנֶשׁ, עַל-הָאָרֶץ, מֵאָה כִכַּר-כֶּסֶף, וְכִכַּר זָהָב.    33 And Pharaoh-necoh put him in bands at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to a fine of a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
23.34 לד  וַיַּמְלֵךְ פַּרְעֹה נְכֹה אֶת-אֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, תַּחַת יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ אָבִיו, וַיַּסֵּב אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, יְהוֹיָקִים; וְאֶת-יְהוֹאָחָז לָקַח, וַיָּבֹא מִצְרַיִם וַיָּמָת שָׁם.    34 And Pharaoh-necoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room of Josiah his father, and changed his name to Jehoiakim; but he took Jehoahaz away; and he came to Egypt, and died there.
23.35 לה  וְהַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב, נָתַן יְהוֹיָקִים לְפַרְעֹה--אַךְ הֶעֱרִיךְ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, לָתֵת אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף עַל-פִּי פַרְעֹה:  אִישׁ כְּעֶרְכּוֹ, נָגַשׂ אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב אֶת-עַם הָאָרֶץ, לָתֵת, לְפַרְעֹה נְכֹה.  {ס}    35 And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh; he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaoh-necoh. {S}
23.36 לו  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, יְהוֹיָקִים בְּמָלְכוֹ, וְאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, זבידה (זְבוּדָּה) בַת-פְּדָיָה מִן-רוּמָה.    36 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Zebudah the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
23.37 לז  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ, אֲבֹתָיו.    37 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done.
24.1 א  בְּיָמָיו עָלָה, נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל; וַיְהִי-לוֹ יְהוֹיָקִים עֶבֶד שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים, וַיָּשָׁב וַיִּמְרָד-בּוֹ.    1 In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years; then he turned and rebelled against him.
24.2 ב  וַיְשַׁלַּח יְהוָה בּוֹ אֶת-גְּדוּדֵי כַשְׂדִּים וְאֶת-גְּדוּדֵי אֲרָם וְאֵת גְּדוּדֵי מוֹאָב, וְאֵת גְּדוּדֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן, וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם בִּיהוּדָה, לְהַאֲבִידוֹ:  כִּדְבַר יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד עֲבָדָיו הַנְּבִיאִים.    2 And the LORD sent against him bands of the Chaldeans, and bands of the Arameans, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the LORD, which He spoke by the hand of His servants the prophets.
24.3 ג  אַךְ עַל-פִּי יְהוָה, הָיְתָה בִּיהוּדָה, לְהָסִיר, מֵעַל פָּנָיו--בְּחַטֹּאת מְנַשֶּׁה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה.    3 Surely at the commandment of the LORD came this upon Judah, to remove them out of His sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did;
24.4 ד  וְגַם דַּם-הַנָּקִי אֲשֶׁר שָׁפָךְ, וַיְמַלֵּא אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם דָּם נָקִי; וְלֹא-אָבָה יְהוָה, לִסְלֹחַ.    4 and also for the innocent blood that he shed; for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; and the LORD would not pardon.
24.5 ה  וְיֶתֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹיָקִים, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה:  הֲלֹא-הֵם כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.    5 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
24.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁכַּב יְהוֹיָקִים, עִם-אֲבֹתָיו; וַיִּמְלֹךְ יְהוֹיָכִין בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    6 So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers; and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
24.7 ז  וְלֹא-הֹסִיף עוֹד מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, לָצֵאת מֵאַרְצוֹ:  כִּי-לָקַח מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, מִנַּחַל מִצְרַיִם עַד-נְהַר-פְּרָת, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה, לְמֶלֶךְ מִצְרָיִם.  {פ}    7 And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land; for the king of Babylon had taken, from the Brook of Egypt unto the river Euphrates, all that pertained to the king of Egypt. {P}
24.8 ח  בֶּן-שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, יְהוֹיָכִין בְּמָלְכוֹ, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, נְחֻשְׁתָּא בַת-אֶלְנָתָן מִירוּשָׁלִָם.    8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign; and he reigned in Jerusalem three months; and his mother's name was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
24.9 ט  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, אָבִיו.    9 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father had done.
24.10 י  בָּעֵת הַהִיא--עלה (עָלוּ) עַבְדֵי נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַתָּבֹא הָעִיר, בַּמָּצוֹר.    10 At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.
24.11 יא  וַיָּבֹא נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, עַל-הָעִיר; וַעֲבָדָיו, צָרִים עָלֶיהָ.    11 And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came unto the city, while his servants were besieging it.
24.12 יב  וַיֵּצֵא יְהוֹיָכִין מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, עַל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, הוּא וְאִמּוֹ, וַעֲבָדָיו וְשָׂרָיו וְסָרִיסָיו; וַיִּקַּח אֹתוֹ מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, בִּשְׁנַת שְׁמֹנֶה לְמָלְכוֹ.    12 And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officers; and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.
24.13 יג  וַיּוֹצֵא מִשָּׁם, אֶת-כָּל-אוֹצְרוֹת בֵּית יְהוָה, וְאוֹצְרוֹת, בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיְקַצֵּץ אֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּהֵיכַל יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.    13 And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the LORD, as the LORD had said.
24.14 יד  וְהִגְלָה אֶת-כָּל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְאֶת-כָּל-הַשָּׂרִים וְאֵת כָּל-גִּבּוֹרֵי הַחַיִל, עשרה (עֲשֶׂרֶת) אֲלָפִים גּוֹלֶה, וְכָל-הֶחָרָשׁ, וְהַמַּסְגֵּר:  לֹא נִשְׁאַר, זוּלַת דַּלַּת עַם-הָאָרֶץ.    14 And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths; none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land.
24.15 טו  וַיֶּגֶל אֶת-יְהוֹיָכִין, בָּבֶלָה; וְאֶת-אֵם הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-נְשֵׁי הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-סָרִיסָיו, וְאֵת אולי (אֵילֵי) הָאָרֶץ, הוֹלִיךְ גּוֹלָה מִירוּשָׁלִַם, בָּבֶלָה.    15 And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon; and the king's mother, and the king's wives, and his officers, and the chief men of the land, carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.
24.16 טז  וְאֵת כָּל-אַנְשֵׁי הַחַיִל שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים, וְהֶחָרָשׁ וְהַמַּסְגֵּר אֶלֶף--הַכֹּל, גִּבּוֹרִים עֹשֵׂי מִלְחָמָה; וַיְבִיאֵם מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל גּוֹלָה, בָּבֶלָה.    16 And all the men of might, even seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the smiths a thousand, all of them strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.
24.17 יז  וַיַּמְלֵךְ מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶת-מַתַּנְיָה דֹדוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו; וַיַּסֵּב אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, צִדְקִיָּהוּ.  {פ}    17 And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father's brother king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah. {P}
24.18 יח  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, צִדְקִיָּהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ, וְאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, חמיטל (חֲמוּטַל) בַּת-יִרְמְיָהוּ מִלִּבְנָה.    18 Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
24.19 יט  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, יְהוֹיָקִים.    19 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
24.20 כ  כִּי עַל-אַף יְהוָה, הָיְתָה בִירוּשָׁלִַם וּבִיהוּדָה, עַד-הִשְׁלִכוֹ אֹתָם, מֵעַל פָּנָיו; וַיִּמְרֹד צִדְקִיָּהוּ, בְּמֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.  {ס}    20 For through the anger of the LORD did it come to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until He had cast them out from His presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. {S}
25.1 א  וַיְהִי בִשְׁנַת הַתְּשִׁיעִית לְמָלְכוֹ, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָעֲשִׂירִי בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ, בָּא נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל הוּא וְכָל-חֵילוֹ עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּחַן עָלֶיהָ; וַיִּבְנוּ עָלֶיהָ דָּיֵק, סָבִיב.    1 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it round about.
25.2 ב  וַתָּבֹא הָעִיר, בַּמָּצוֹר, עַד עַשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ.    2 So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
25.3 ג  בְּתִשְׁעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ, וַיֶּחֱזַק הָרָעָב בָּעִיר; וְלֹא-הָיָה לֶחֶם, לְעַם הָאָרֶץ.    3 On the ninth day of the [fourth] month the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
25.4 ד  וַתִּבָּקַע הָעִיר, וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה הַלַּיְלָה דֶּרֶךְ שַׁעַר בֵּין הַחֹמֹתַיִם אֲשֶׁר עַל-גַּן הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכַשְׂדִּים עַל-הָעִיר, סָבִיב; וַיֵּלֶךְ, דֶּרֶךְ הָעֲרָבָה.    4 Then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war [fled] by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden--now the Chaldeans were against the city round about--and the king went by the way of the Arabah.
25.5 ה  וַיִּרְדְּפוּ חֵיל-כַּשְׂדִּים אַחַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּשִּׂגוּ אֹתוֹ בְּעַרְבוֹת יְרֵחוֹ; וְכָל-חֵילוֹ--נָפֹצוּ, מֵעָלָיו.    5 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him.
25.6 ו  וַיִּתְפְּשׂוּ, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּעֲלוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, רִבְלָתָה; וַיְדַבְּרוּ אִתּוֹ, מִשְׁפָּט.    6 Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.
25.7 ז  וְאֶת-בְּנֵי, צִדְקִיָּהוּ, שָׁחֲטוּ, לְעֵינָיו; וְאֶת-עֵינֵי צִדְקִיָּהוּ, עִוֵּר, וַיַּאַסְרֵהוּ בַּנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם, וַיְבִאֵהוּ בָּבֶל.  {ס}    7 And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon. {S}
25.8 ח  וּבַחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי, בְּשִׁבְעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ--הִיא שְׁנַת תְּשַׁע-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַמֶּלֶךְ נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל:  בָּא נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, עֶבֶד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    8 Now in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, unto Jerusalem.
25.9 ט  וַיִּשְׂרֹף אֶת-בֵּית-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְאֵת כָּל-בָּתֵּי יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְאֶת-כָּל-בֵּית גָּדוֹל, שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ.    9 And he burnt the house of the LORD, and the king's house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great man's house, burnt he with fire.
25.10 י  וְאֶת-חוֹמֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, סָבִיב--נָתְצוּ כָּל-חֵיל כַּשְׂדִּים, אֲשֶׁר רַב-טַבָּחִים.    10 And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, broke down the walls of Jerusalem round about.
25.11 יא  וְאֵת יֶתֶר הָעָם הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּעִיר, וְאֶת-הַנֹּפְלִים אֲשֶׁר נָפְלוּ עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ בָּבֶל, וְאֵת, יֶתֶר הֶהָמוֹן--הֶגְלָה, נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים.    11 And the residue of the people that were left in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the residue of the multitude, did Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carry away captive.
25.12 יב  וּמִדַּלַּת הָאָרֶץ, הִשְׁאִיר רַב-טַבָּחִים, לְכֹרְמִים, וּלְיֹגְבִים.    12 But the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
25.13 יג  וְאֶת-עַמּוּדֵי הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר בֵּית-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-הַמְּכֹנוֹת וְאֶת-יָם הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית-יְהוָה--שִׁבְּרוּ כַשְׂדִּים; וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-נְחֻשְׁתָּם, בָּבֶלָה.    13 And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD, and the bases and the brazen sea that were in the house of the LORD, did the Chaldeans break in pieces, and carried the brass of them to Babylon.
25.14 יד  וְאֶת-הַסִּירֹת וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמְזַמְּרוֹת וְאֶת-הַכַּפּוֹת, וְאֵת כָּל-כְּלֵי הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר יְשָׁרְתוּ-בָם--לָקָחוּ.    14 And the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the pans, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.
25.15 טו  וְאֶת-הַמַּחְתּוֹת, וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקוֹת, אֲשֶׁר זָהָב זָהָב, וַאֲשֶׁר-כֶּסֶף כָּסֶף--לָקַח, רַב-טַבָּחִים.    15 And the fire-pans, and the basins, that which was of gold, in gold, and that which was of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took away.
25.16 טז  הָעַמּוּדִים שְׁנַיִם, הַיָּם הָאֶחָד וְהַמְּכֹנוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה שְׁלֹמֹה, לְבֵית יְהוָה--לֹא-הָיָה מִשְׁקָל, לִנְחֹשֶׁת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הָאֵלֶּה.    16 The two pillars, the one sea, and the bases, which Solomon had made for the house of the LORD; the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
25.17 יז  שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה קוֹמַת הָעַמּוּד הָאֶחָד, וְכֹתֶרֶת עָלָיו נְחֹשֶׁת וְקוֹמַת הַכֹּתֶרֶת שָׁלֹשׁ אמה (אַמּוֹת), וּשְׂבָכָה וְרִמֹּנִים עַל-הַכֹּתֶרֶת סָבִיב, הַכֹּל נְחֹשֶׁת; וְכָאֵלֶּה לַעַמּוּד הַשֵּׁנִי, עַל-הַשְּׂבָכָה.    17 The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a capital of brass was upon it; and the height of the capital was three cubits; with network and pomegranates upon the capital round about, all of brass; and like unto these had the second pillar with network.
25.18 יח  וַיִּקַּח רַב-טַבָּחִים, אֶת-שְׂרָיָה כֹּהֵן הָרֹאשׁ, וְאֶת-צְפַנְיָהוּ, כֹּהֵן מִשְׁנֶה; וְאֶת-שְׁלֹשֶׁת, שֹׁמְרֵי הַסַּף.    18 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door;
25.19 יט  וּמִן-הָעִיר לָקַח סָרִיס אֶחָד אֲשֶׁר-הוּא פָקִיד עַל-אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, וַחֲמִשָּׁה אֲנָשִׁים מֵרֹאֵי פְנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר נִמְצְאוּ בָעִיר, וְאֵת הַסֹּפֵר שַׂר הַצָּבָא, הַמַּצְבִּא אֶת-עַם הָאָרֶץ; וְשִׁשִּׁים אִישׁ מֵעַם הָאָרֶץ, הַנִּמְצְאִים בָּעִיר.    19 and out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of war; and five men of them that saw the king's face, who were found in the city; and the scribe of the captain of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the city.
25.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח אֹתָם, נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים; וַיֹּלֶךְ אֹתָם עַל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, רִבְלָתָה.    20 And Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
25.21 כא  וַיַּךְ אֹתָם מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל וַיְמִיתֵם בְּרִבְלָה, בְּאֶרֶץ חֲמָת; וַיִּגֶל יְהוּדָה, מֵעַל אַדְמָתוֹ.    21 And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land.
25.22 כב  וְהָעָם, הַנִּשְׁאָר בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁאִיר, נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--וַיַּפְקֵד עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן.    22 And as for the people that were left in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over them he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, governor.
25.23 כג  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ כָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים הֵמָּה וְהָאֲנָשִׁים, כִּי-הִפְקִיד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ, הַמִּצְפָּה; וְיִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה וְיוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ וּשְׂרָיָה בֶן-תַּנְחֻמֶת הַנְּטֹפָתִי, וְיַאֲזַנְיָהוּ בֶּן-הַמַּעֲכָתִי--הֵמָּה, וְאַנְשֵׁיהֶם.    23 Now when all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.
25.24 כד  וַיִּשָּׁבַע לָהֶם גְּדַלְיָהוּ, וּלְאַנְשֵׁיהֶם, וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, אַל-תִּירְאוּ מֵעַבְדֵי הַכַּשְׂדִּים:  שְׁבוּ בָאָרֶץ, וְעִבְדוּ אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--וְיִטַב לָכֶם.  {פ}    24 And Gedaliah swore to them and to their men, and said unto them: 'Fear not because of the servants of the Chaldeans; dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.' {P}
25.25 כה  וַיְהִי בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, בָּא יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה בֶּן-אֱלִישָׁמָע מִזֶּרַע הַמְּלוּכָה וַעֲשָׂרָה אֲנָשִׁים אִתּוֹ, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ, וַיָּמֹת; וְאֶת-הַיְּהוּדִים, וְאֶת-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ אִתּוֹ, בַּמִּצְפָּה.    25 But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, and the Jews and the Chaldeans that were with him at Mizpah.
25.26 כו  וַיָּקֻמוּ כָל-הָעָם מִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל, וְשָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים, וַיָּבֹאוּ, מִצְרָיִם:  כִּי יָרְאוּ, מִפְּנֵי כַשְׂדִּים.  {ס}    26 And all the people, both small and great, and the captains of the forces, arose, and came to Egypt; for they were afraid of the Chaldeans. {S}
25.27 כז  וַיְהִי בִשְׁלֹשִׁים וָשֶׁבַע שָׁנָה, לְגָלוּת יְהוֹיָכִין מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בִּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ, בְּעֶשְׂרִים וְשִׁבְעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ; נָשָׂא אֱוִיל מְרֹדַךְ מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל בִּשְׁנַת מָלְכוֹ, אֶת-רֹאשׁ יְהוֹיָכִין מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה--מִבֵּית כֶּלֶא.    27 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, did lift up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison.
25.28 כח  וַיְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ, טֹבוֹת; וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-כִּסְאוֹ, מֵעַל כִּסֵּא הַמְּלָכִים אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, בְּבָבֶל.    28 And he spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon.
25.29 כט  וְשִׁנָּא, אֵת בִּגְדֵי כִלְאוֹ; וְאָכַל לֶחֶם תָּמִיד לְפָנָיו, כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּיו.    29 And he changed his prison garments, and did eat bread before him continually all the days of his life.
25.30 ל  וַאֲרֻחָתוֹ, אֲרֻחַת תָּמִיד נִתְּנָה-לּוֹ מֵאֵת הַמֶּלֶךְ--דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ:  כֹּל, יְמֵי חַיָּו.  {ש}    30 And for his allowance, there was a continual allowance given him of the king, every day a portion, all the days of his life. {P}
