1.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת שָׁאוּל, וְדָוִד שָׁב, מֵהַכּוֹת אֶת-הָעֲמָלֵק; וַיֵּשֶׁב דָּוִד בְּצִקְלָג, יָמִים שְׁנָיִם.    1 And it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag;
1.2 ב  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, וְהִנֵּה אִישׁ בָּא מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה מֵעִם שָׁאוּל, וּבְגָדָיו קְרֻעִים, וַאֲדָמָה עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיְהִי בְּבֹאוֹ אֶל-דָּוִד, וַיִּפֹּל אַרְצָה וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ.    2 it came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head; and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and prostrated himself.
1.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ דָּוִד, אֵי מִזֶּה תָּבוֹא; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, מִמַּחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל נִמְלָטְתִּי.    3 And David said unto him: 'From whence comest thou?' And he said unto him: 'Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.'
1.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו דָּוִד מֶה-הָיָה הַדָּבָר, הַגֶּד-נָא לִי; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲשֶׁר-נָס הָעָם מִן-הַמִּלְחָמָה, וְגַם-הַרְבֵּה נָפַל מִן-הָעָם וַיָּמֻתוּ, וְגַם שָׁאוּל וִיהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ, מֵתוּ.    4 And David said unto him: 'How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me.' And he answered: 'The people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.'
1.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-הַנַּעַר הַמַּגִּיד לוֹ:  אֵיךְ יָדַעְתָּ, כִּי-מֵת שָׁאוּל וִיהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ.    5 And David said unto the young man that told him: 'How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?'
1.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר הַנַּעַר הַמַּגִּיד לוֹ, נִקְרֹא נִקְרֵיתִי בְּהַר הַגִּלְבֹּעַ, וְהִנֵּה שָׁאוּל, נִשְׁעָן עַל-חֲנִיתוֹ; וְהִנֵּה הָרֶכֶב וּבַעֲלֵי הַפָּרָשִׁים, הִדְבִּקֻהוּ.    6 And the young man that told him said: 'As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and the horsemen pressed hard upon him.
1.7 ז  וַיִּפֶן אַחֲרָיו, וַיִּרְאֵנִי; וַיִּקְרָא אֵלַי, וָאֹמַר הִנֵּנִי.    7 And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered: Here am I.
1.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי, מִי-אָתָּה; ויאמר (וָאֹמַר) אֵלָיו, עֲמָלֵקִי אָנֹכִי.    8 And he said unto me: Who art thou? And I answered him: I am an Amalekite.
1.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, עֲמָד-נָא עָלַי וּמֹתְתֵנִי--כִּי אֲחָזַנִי, הַשָּׁבָץ:  כִּי-כָל-עוֹד נַפְשִׁי, בִּי.    9 And he said unto me: Stand, I pray thee, beside me, and slay me, for the agony hath taken hold of me; because my life is just yet in me.
1.10 י  וָאֶעֱמֹד עָלָיו, וַאֲמֹתְתֵהוּ--כִּי יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי לֹא יִחְיֶה אַחֲרֵי נִפְלוֹ; וָאֶקַּח הַנֵּזֶר אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְאֶצְעָדָה אֲשֶׁר עַל-זְרֹעוֹ, וָאֲבִיאֵם אֶל-אֲדֹנִי, הֵנָּה.    10 So I stood beside him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen; and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.'
1.11 יא  וַיַּחֲזֵק דָּוִד בִּבְגָדָו, וַיִּקְרָעֵם; וְגַם כָּל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ.    11 Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him.
1.12 יב  וַיִּסְפְּדוּ, וַיִּבְכּוּ, וַיָּצֻמוּ, עַד-הָעָרֶב:  עַל-שָׁאוּל וְעַל-יְהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ, וְעַל-עַם יְהוָה וְעַל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי נָפְלוּ, בֶּחָרֶב.  {פ}    12 And they wailed, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword. {P}
1.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-הַנַּעַר הַמַּגִּיד לוֹ, אֵי מִזֶּה, אָתָּה; וַיֹּאמֶר, בֶּן-אִישׁ גֵּר עֲמָלֵקִי אָנֹכִי.    13 And David said unto the young man that told him: 'Whence art thou?' And he answered: 'I am the son of an Amalekite stranger.'
1.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, דָּוִד:  אֵיךְ, לֹא יָרֵאתָ, לִשְׁלֹחַ יָדְךָ, לְשַׁחֵת אֶת-מְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה.    14 And David said unto him: 'How wast thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy the LORD'S anointed?'
1.15 טו  וַיִּקְרָא דָוִד, לְאַחַד מֵהַנְּעָרִים, וַיֹּאמֶר, גַּשׁ פְּגַע-בּוֹ; וַיַּכֵּהוּ, וַיָּמֹת.    15 And David called one of the young men, and said: 'Go near, and fall upon him.' And he smote him that he died.
1.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו דָּוִד, דמיך (דָּמְךָ) עַל-רֹאשֶׁךָ:  כִּי פִיךָ, עָנָה בְךָ לֵאמֹר, אָנֹכִי מֹתַתִּי, אֶת-מְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה.  {פ}    16 And David said unto him: 'Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying: I have slain the LORD'S anointed.' {P}
1.17 יז  וַיְקֹנֵן דָּוִד, אֶת-הַקִּינָה הַזֹּאת, עַל-שָׁאוּל, וְעַל-יְהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ.    17 And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son,
1.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר, לְלַמֵּד בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה קָשֶׁת, הִנֵּה כְתוּבָה, עַל-סֵפֶר הַיָּשָׁר.    18 and said--To teach the sons of Judah the bow. Behold, it is written in the book of Jashar:
1.19 יט  הַצְּבִי, יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-בָּמוֹתֶיךָ, חָלָל:  אֵיךְ, נָפְלוּ גִבּוֹרִים.    19 Thy beauty, O Israel, upon thy high places is slain! How are the mighty fallen!
1.20 כ  אַל-תַּגִּידוּ בְגַת, אַל-תְּבַשְּׂרוּ בְּחוּצֹת אַשְׁקְלוֹן:  פֶּן-תִּשְׂמַחְנָה בְּנוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים, פֶּן-תַּעֲלֹזְנָה בְּנוֹת הָעֲרֵלִים.    20 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
1.21 כא  הָרֵי בַגִּלְבֹּעַ, אַל-טַל וְאַל-מָטָר עֲלֵיכֶם--וּשְׂדֵי תְרוּמֹת:  כִּי שָׁם נִגְעַל, מָגֵן גִּבּוֹרִים--מָגֵן שָׁאוּל, בְּלִי מָשִׁיחַ בַּשָּׁמֶן.    21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew nor rain upon you, neither fields of choice fruits; for there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, not anointed with oil.
1.22 כב  מִדַּם חֲלָלִים, מֵחֵלֶב גִּבּוֹרִים--קֶשֶׁת יְהוֹנָתָן, לֹא נָשׂוֹג אָחוֹר; וְחֶרֶב שָׁאוּל, לֹא תָשׁוּב רֵיקָם.    22 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.
1.23 כג  שָׁאוּל וִיהוֹנָתָן, הַנֶּאֱהָבִים וְהַנְּעִימִם בְּחַיֵּיהֶם, וּבְמוֹתָם, לֹא נִפְרָדוּ; מִנְּשָׁרִים קַלּוּ, מֵאֲרָיוֹת גָּבֵרוּ.    23 Saul and Jonathan, the lovely and the pleasant in their lives, even in their death they were not divided; they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.
1.24 כד  בְּנוֹת, יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶל-שָׁאוּל, בְּכֶינָה; הַמַּלְבִּשְׁכֶם שָׁנִי, עִם-עֲדָנִים, הַמַּעֲלֶה עֲדִי זָהָב, עַל לְבוּשְׁכֶן.    24 Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel.
1.25 כה  אֵיךְ נָפְלוּ גִבֹּרִים, בְּתוֹךְ הַמִּלְחָמָה--יְהוֹנָתָן, עַל-בָּמוֹתֶיךָ חָלָל.    25 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! Jonathan upon thy high places is slain!
1.26 כו  צַר-לִי עָלֶיךָ, אָחִי יְהוֹנָתָן--נָעַמְתָּ לִּי, מְאֹד; נִפְלְאַתָה אַהֲבָתְךָ לִי, מֵאַהֲבַת נָשִׁים.    26 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; very pleasant hast thou been unto me; wonderful was thy love to me, passing the love of women.
1.27 כז  אֵיךְ נָפְלוּ גִבּוֹרִים, וַיֹּאבְדוּ כְּלֵי מִלְחָמָה.  {פ}    27 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished! {P}
2.1 א  וַיְהִי אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִד בַּיהוָה לֵאמֹר הַאֶעֱלֶה בְּאַחַת עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, עֲלֵה; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אָנָה אֶעֱלֶה, וַיֹּאמֶר חֶבְרֹנָה.    1 And it came to pass after this, that David inquired of the LORD, saying: 'Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah?' And the LORD said unto him: 'Go up.' And David said: 'Whither shall I go up?' And He said: 'Unto Hebron.'
2.2 ב  וַיַּעַל שָׁם דָּוִד, וְגַם שְׁתֵּי נָשָׁיו--אֲחִינֹעַם, הַיִּזְרְעֵלִית, וַאֲבִיגַיִל, אֵשֶׁת נָבָל הַכַּרְמְלִי.    2 So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
2.3 ג  וַאֲנָשָׁיו אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ הֶעֱלָה דָוִד, אִישׁ וּבֵיתוֹ; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, בְּעָרֵי חֶבְרוֹן.    3 And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household; and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.
2.4 ד  וַיָּבֹאוּ אַנְשֵׁי יְהוּדָה, וַיִּמְשְׁחוּ-שָׁם אֶת-דָּוִד לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה; וַיַּגִּדוּ לְדָוִד, לֵאמֹר, אַנְשֵׁי יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד, אֲשֶׁר קָבְרוּ אֶת-שָׁאוּל.  {ס}    4 And the men of Judah came, and they there anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying: 'The men of Jabesh-gilead were they that buried Saul.' {S}
2.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, בְּרֻכִים אַתֶּם לַיהוָה, אֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם הַחֶסֶד הַזֶּה עִם-אֲדֹנֵיכֶם עִם-שָׁאוּל, וַתִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ.    5 And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, and said unto them: 'Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shown this kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.
2.6 ו  וְעַתָּה, יַעַשׂ-יְהוָה עִמָּכֶם חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת; וְגַם אָנֹכִי, אֶעֱשֶׂה אִתְּכֶם הַטּוֹבָה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם, הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    6 And now the LORD show kindness and truth unto you; and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.
2.7 ז  וְעַתָּה תֶּחֱזַקְנָה יְדֵיכֶם, וִהְיוּ לִבְנֵי-חַיִל--כִּי-מֵת, אֲדֹנֵיכֶם שָׁאוּל; וְגַם-אֹתִי, מָשְׁחוּ בֵית-יְהוּדָה לְמֶלֶךְ--עֲלֵיהֶם.  {פ}    7 Now therefore let your hands be strong, and be ye valiant; for Saul your lord is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.' {P}
2.8 ח  וְאַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר, שַׂר-צָבָא אֲשֶׁר לְשָׁאוּל--לָקַח, אֶת-אִישׁ בֹּשֶׁת בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, וַיַּעֲבִרֵהוּ, מַחֲנָיִם.    8 Now Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, had taken Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;
2.9 ט  וַיַּמְלִכֵהוּ, אֶל-הַגִּלְעָד, וְאֶל-הָאֲשׁוּרִי, וְאֶל-יִזְרְעֶאל; וְעַל-אֶפְרַיִם, וְעַל-בִּנְיָמִן, וְעַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֻּלֹּה.  {פ}    9 and he made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel. {P}
2.10 י  בֶּן-אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, בְּמָלְכוֹ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּשְׁתַּיִם שָׁנִים, מָלָךְ; אַךְ בֵּית יְהוּדָה, הָיוּ אַחֲרֵי דָוִד.    10 Ish-bosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.
2.11 יא  וַיְהִי מִסְפַּר הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דָוִד מֶלֶךְ בְּחֶבְרוֹן עַל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה--שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, וְשִׁשָּׁה חֳדָשִׁים.  {ס}    11 And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months. {S}
2.12 יב  וַיֵּצֵא אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר, וְעַבְדֵי אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, מִמַּחֲנַיִם, גִּבְעוֹנָה.    12 And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
2.13 יג  וְיוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה וְעַבְדֵי דָוִד, יָצְאוּ, וַיִּפְגְּשׁוּם עַל-בְּרֵכַת גִּבְעוֹן, יַחְדָּו; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ אֵלֶּה עַל-הַבְּרֵכָה, מִזֶּה, וְאֵלֶּה עַל-הַבְּרֵכָה, מִזֶּה.    13 And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out; and they met together by the pool of Gibeon, and sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.
2.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְנֵר, אֶל-יוֹאָב, יָקוּמוּ נָא הַנְּעָרִים, וִישַׂחֲקוּ לְפָנֵינוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב, יָקֻמוּ.    14 And Abner said to Joab: 'Let the young men, I pray thee, arise and play before us.' And Joab said: 'Let them arise.'
2.15 טו  וַיָּקֻמוּ, וַיַּעַבְרוּ בְמִסְפָּר--שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר לְבִנְיָמִן, וּלְאִישׁ בֹּשֶׁת בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, מֵעַבְדֵי דָוִד.    15 Then they arose and passed over by number: twelve for Benjamin, and for Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.
2.16 טז  וַיַּחֲזִקוּ אִישׁ בְּרֹאשׁ רֵעֵהוּ, וְחַרְבּוֹ בְּצַד רֵעֵהוּ, וַיִּפְּלוּ, יַחְדָּו; וַיִּקְרָא לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, חֶלְקַת הַצֻּרִים אֲשֶׁר בְּגִבְעוֹן.    16 And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together; wherefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
2.17 יז  וַתְּהִי הַמִּלְחָמָה קָשָׁה עַד-מְאֹד, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיִּנָּגֶף אַבְנֵר וְאַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי עַבְדֵי דָוִד.    17 And the battle was very sore that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.
2.18 יח  וַיִּהְיוּ-שָׁם, שְׁלֹשָׁה בְּנֵי צְרוּיָה--יוֹאָב וַאֲבִישַׁי, וַעֲשָׂהאֵל; וַעֲשָׂהאֵל קַל בְּרַגְלָיו, כְּאַחַד הַצְּבָיִם אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה.    18 And the three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel; and Asahel was as light of foot as one of the roes that are in the field.
2.19 יט  וַיִּרְדֹּף עֲשָׂהאֵל, אַחֲרֵי אַבְנֵר; וְלֹא-נָטָה לָלֶכֶת, עַל-הַיָּמִין וְעַל-הַשְּׂמֹאול, מֵאַחֲרֵי, אַבְנֵר.    19 And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.
2.20 כ  וַיִּפֶן אַבְנֵר, אַחֲרָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר, הַאַתָּה זֶה עֲשָׂהאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר, אָנֹכִי.    20 Then Abner looked behind him, and said: 'Is it thou, Asahel?' And he answered: 'It is I.'
2.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אַבְנֵר, נְטֵה לְךָ עַל-יְמִינְךָ אוֹ עַל-שְׂמֹאלֶךָ, וֶאֱחֹז לְךָ אֶחָד מֵהַנְּעָרִים, וְקַח-לְךָ אֶת-חֲלִצָתוֹ; וְלֹא-אָבָה עֲשָׂהאֵל, לָסוּר מֵאַחֲרָיו.    21 And Abner said to him: 'Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour.' But Asahel would not turn aside from following him.
2.22 כב  וַיֹּסֶף עוֹד אַבְנֵר, לֵאמֹר אֶל-עֲשָׂהאֵל, סוּר לְךָ, מֵאַחֲרָי:  לָמָּה אַכֶּכָּה, אַרְצָה, וְאֵיךְ אֶשָּׂא פָנַי, אֶל-יוֹאָב אָחִיךָ.    22 And Abner said again to Asahel: 'Turn thee aside from following me; wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?'
2.23 כג  וַיְמָאֵן לָסוּר, וַיַּכֵּהוּ אַבְנֵר בְּאַחֲרֵי הַחֲנִית אֶל-הַחֹמֶשׁ וַתֵּצֵא הַחֲנִית מֵאַחֲרָיו, וַיִּפָּל-שָׁם, וַיָּמָת תַּחְתָּו; וַיְהִי כָּל-הַבָּא אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-נָפַל שָׁם עֲשָׂהאֵל, וַיָּמֹת--וַיַּעֲמֹדוּ.    23 Howbeit he refused to turn aside; wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him in the groin, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place; and it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.
2.24 כד  וַיִּרְדְּפוּ יוֹאָב וַאֲבִישַׁי, אַחֲרֵי אַבְנֵר; וְהַשֶּׁמֶשׁ בָּאָה--וְהֵמָּה בָּאוּ עַד-גִּבְעַת אַמָּה, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי-גִיחַ דֶּרֶךְ מִדְבַּר גִּבְעוֹן.    24 But Joab and Abishai pursued after Abner; and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
2.25 כה  וַיִּתְקַבְּצוּ בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן אַחֲרֵי אַבְנֵר, וַיִּהְיוּ לַאֲגֻדָּה אֶחָת; וַיַּעַמְדוּ, עַל רֹאשׁ-גִּבְעָה אֶחָת.    25 And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one band, and stood on the top of a hill.
2.26 כו  וַיִּקְרָא אַבְנֵר אֶל-יוֹאָב, וַיֹּאמֶר הֲלָנֶצַח תֹּאכַל חֶרֶב--הֲלוֹא יָדַעְתָּה, כִּי-מָרָה תִהְיֶה בָּאַחֲרוֹנָה; וְעַד-מָתַי לֹא-תֹאמַר לָעָם, לָשׁוּב מֵאַחֲרֵי אֲחֵיהֶם.    26 Then Abner called to Joab, and said: 'Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?'
2.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב--חַי הָאֱלֹהִים, כִּי לוּלֵא דִּבַּרְתָּ:  כִּי אָז מֵהַבֹּקֶר נַעֲלָה הָעָם, אִישׁ מֵאַחֲרֵי אָחִיו.    27 And Joab said: 'As God liveth, if thou hadst not spoken, surely then only after the morning the people had gone away, every one from following his brother.'
2.28 כח  וַיִּתְקַע יוֹאָב, בַּשּׁוֹפָר, וַיַּעַמְדוּ כָּל-הָעָם, וְלֹא-יִרְדְּפוּ עוֹד אַחֲרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא-יָסְפוּ עוֹד, לְהִלָּחֵם.    28 So Joab blew the horn, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.
2.29 כט  וְאַבְנֵר וַאֲנָשָׁיו, הָלְכוּ בָּעֲרָבָה, כֹּל, הַלַּיְלָה הַהוּא; וַיַּעַבְרוּ אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וַיֵּלְכוּ כָּל-הַבִּתְרוֹן, וַיָּבֹאוּ, מַחֲנָיִם.    29 And Abner and his men went all that night through the Arabah; and they passed over the Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and came to Mahanaim.
2.30 ל  וְיוֹאָב, שָׁב מֵאַחֲרֵי אַבְנֵר, וַיִּקְבֹּץ, אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם; וַיִּפָּקְדוּ מֵעַבְדֵי דָוִד, תִּשְׁעָה-עָשָׂר אִישׁ--וַעֲשָׂהאֵל.    30 And Joab returned from following Abner; and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and Asahel.
2.31 לא  וְעַבְדֵי דָוִד, הִכּוּ מִבִּנְיָמִן, וּבְאַנְשֵׁי, אַבְנֵר:  שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים אִישׁ, מֵתוּ.    31 But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, even of Abner's men--three hundred and threescore men died.
2.32 לב  וַיִּשְׂאוּ, אֶת-עֲשָׂהאֵל, וַיִּקְבְּרֻהוּ בְּקֶבֶר אָבִיו, אֲשֶׁר בֵּית לָחֶם; וַיֵּלְכוּ כָל-הַלַּיְלָה, יוֹאָב וַאֲנָשָׁיו, וַיֵּאֹר לָהֶם, בְּחֶבְרוֹן.    32 And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Beth-lehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and the day broke upon them at Hebron.
3.1 א  וַתְּהִי הַמִּלְחָמָה, אֲרֻכָּה, בֵּין בֵּית שָׁאוּל, וּבֵין בֵּית דָּוִד; וְדָוִד הֹלֵךְ וְחָזֵק, וּבֵית שָׁאוּל הֹלְכִים וְדַלִּים.  {ס}    1 Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David; and David waxed stronger and stronger, but the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker. {S}
3.2 ב  וילדו (וַיִּוָּלְדוּ) לְדָוִד בָּנִים, בְּחֶבְרוֹן; וַיְהִי בְכוֹרוֹ אַמְנוֹן, לַאֲחִינֹעַם הַיִּזְרְעֵאלִת.    2 And unto David were sons born in Hebron; and his first-born was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;
3.3 ג  וּמִשְׁנֵהוּ כִלְאָב, לאביגל (לַאֲבִיגַיִל) אֵשֶׁת נָבָל הַכַּרְמְלִי; וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁי אַבְשָׁלוֹם בֶּן-מַעֲכָה, בַּת-תַּלְמַי מֶלֶךְ גְּשׁוּר.    3 and his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;
3.4 ד  וְהָרְבִיעִי, אֲדֹנִיָּה בֶן-חַגִּית; וְהַחֲמִישִׁי, שְׁפַטְיָה בֶן-אֲבִיטָל.    4 and the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;
3.5 ה  וְהַשִּׁשִּׁי יִתְרְעָם, לְעֶגְלָה אֵשֶׁת דָּוִד; אֵלֶּה יֻלְּדוּ לְדָוִד, בְּחֶבְרוֹן.  {פ}    5 and the sixth, Ithream, of Eglah David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron. {P}
3.6 ו  וַיְהִי, בִּהְיוֹת הַמִּלְחָמָה, בֵּין בֵּית שָׁאוּל, וּבֵין בֵּית דָּוִד; וְאַבְנֵר הָיָה מִתְחַזֵּק, בְּבֵית שָׁאוּל.    6 And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner showed himself strong in the house of Saul.
3.7 ז  וּלְשָׁאוּל פִּלֶגֶשׁ, וּשְׁמָהּ רִצְפָּה בַת-אַיָּה; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-אַבְנֵר, מַדּוּעַ בָּאתָה, אֶל-פִּילֶגֶשׁ אָבִי.    7 Now Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah; and [Ish-bosheth] said to Abner: 'Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine?'
3.8 ח  וַיִּחַר לְאַבְנֵר מְאֹד עַל-דִּבְרֵי אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת, וַיֹּאמֶר הֲרֹאשׁ כֶּלֶב אָנֹכִי אֲשֶׁר לִיהוּדָה, הַיּוֹם אֶעֱשֶׂה-חֶסֶד עִם-בֵּית שָׁאוּל אָבִיךָ אֶל-אֶחָיו וְאֶל-מֵרֵעֵהוּ, וְלֹא הִמְצִיתִךָ בְּיַד-דָּוִד; וַתִּפְקֹד עָלַי עֲוֺן הָאִשָּׁה, הַיּוֹם.  {ס}    8 Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ish-bosheth, and said: 'Am I a dog's head that belongeth to Judah? This day do I show kindness unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, and yet thou chargest me this day with a fault concerning this woman. {S}
3.9 ט  כֹּה-יַעֲשֶׂה אֱלֹהִים לְאַבְנֵר, וְכֹה יֹסִיף לוֹ:  כִּי, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה לְדָוִד--כִּי-כֵן, אֶעֱשֶׂה-לּוֹ.    9 God do so to Abner, and more also, if, as the LORD hath sworn to David, I do not even so to him;
3.10 י  לְהַעֲבִיר הַמַּמְלָכָה, מִבֵּית שָׁאוּל; וּלְהָקִים אֶת-כִּסֵּא דָוִד, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וְעַל-יְהוּדָה--מִדָּן, וְעַד-בְּאֵר שָׁבַע.    10 to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beer-sheba.'
3.11 יא  וְלֹא-יָכֹל עוֹד, לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-אַבְנֵר דָּבָר, מִיִּרְאָתוֹ, אֹתוֹ.  {ס}    11 And he could not answer Abner another word, because he feared him. {S}
3.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁלַח אַבְנֵר מַלְאָכִים אֶל-דָּוִד תַּחְתָּו לֵאמֹר, לְמִי-אָרֶץ:  לֵאמֹר, כָּרְתָה בְרִיתְךָ אִתִּי, וְהִנֵּה יָדִי עִמָּךְ, לְהָסֵב אֵלֶיךָ אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    12 And Abner sent messengers to David straightway, saying: 'Whose is the land?' saying also: 'Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring over all Israel unto thee.'
3.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר טוֹב--אֲנִי, אֶכְרֹת אִתְּךָ בְּרִית:  אַךְ דָּבָר אֶחָד אָנֹכִי שֹׁאֵל מֵאִתְּךָ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-תִרְאֶה אֶת-פָּנַי--כִּי אִם-לִפְנֵי הֱבִיאֲךָ אֵת מִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל, בְּבֹאֲךָ לִרְאוֹת אֶת-פָּנָי.  {ס}    13 And he said: 'Well; I will make a league with thee; but one thing I require of thee, that is, thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.' {S}
3.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת בֶּן-שָׁאוּל לֵאמֹר:  תְּנָה אֶת-אִשְׁתִּי, אֶת-מִיכַל, אֲשֶׁר אֵרַשְׂתִּי לִי, בְּמֵאָה עָרְלוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    14 And David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth Saul's son, saying: 'Deliver me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed to me for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.'
3.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁלַח אִישׁ בֹּשֶׁת, וַיִּקָּחֶהָ מֵעִם אִישׁ--מֵעִם, פַּלְטִיאֵל בֶּן-לוש (לָיִשׁ).    15 And Ish-bosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Paltiel the son of Laish.
3.16 טז  וַיֵּלֶךְ אִתָּהּ אִישָׁהּ, הָלוֹךְ וּבָכֹה אַחֲרֶיהָ--עַד-בַּחֻרִים; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אַבְנֵר לֵךְ שׁוּב, וַיָּשֹׁב.    16 And her husband went with her, weeping as he went, and followed her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him: 'Go, return'; and he returned.
3.17 יז  וּדְבַר-אַבְנֵר הָיָה, עִם-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  גַּם-תְּמוֹל, גַּם-שִׁלְשֹׁם, הֱיִיתֶם מְבַקְשִׁים אֶת-דָּוִד לְמֶלֶךְ, עֲלֵיכֶם.    17 And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying: 'In times past ye sought for David to be king over you;
3.18 יח  וְעַתָּה, עֲשׂוּ:  כִּי יְהוָה, אָמַר אֶל-דָּוִד לֵאמֹר, בְּיַד דָּוִד עַבְדִּי הוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּמִיַּד כָּל-אֹיְבֵיהֶם.    18 now then do it; for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying: By the hand of My servant David I will save My people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.'
3.19 יט  וַיְדַבֵּר גַּם-אַבְנֵר, בְּאָזְנֵי בִנְיָמִין; וַיֵּלֶךְ גַּם-אַבְנֵר, לְדַבֵּר בְּאָזְנֵי דָוִד בְּחֶבְרוֹן, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-טוֹב בְּעֵינֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבְעֵינֵי כָּל-בֵּית בִּנְיָמִן.    19 And Abner also spoke in the ears of Benjamin; and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and to the whole house of Benjamin.
3.20 כ  וַיָּבֹא אַבְנֵר אֶל-דָּוִד חֶבְרוֹן, וְאִתּוֹ עֶשְׂרִים אֲנָשִׁים; וַיַּעַשׂ דָּוִד לְאַבְנֵר וְלַאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, מִשְׁתֶּה.    20 So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.
3.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְנֵר אֶל-דָּוִד אָקוּמָה וְאֵלֵכָה וְאֶקְבְּצָה אֶל-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִכְרְתוּ אִתְּךָ בְּרִית, וּמָלַכְתָּ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תְּאַוֶּה נַפְשֶׁךָ; וַיְשַׁלַּח דָּוִד אֶת-אַבְנֵר, וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּשָׁלוֹם.    21 And Abner said unto David: 'I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a covenant with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thy soul desireth.' And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.
3.22 כב  וְהִנֵּה עַבְדֵי דָוִד וְיוֹאָב בָּא מֵהַגְּדוּד, וְשָׁלָל רָב עִמָּם הֵבִיאוּ; וְאַבְנֵר, אֵינֶנּוּ עִם-דָּוִד בְּחֶבְרוֹן--כִּי שִׁלְּחוֹ, וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּשָׁלוֹם.    22 And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from a foray, and brought in a great spoil with them; but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.
3.23 כג  וְיוֹאָב וְכָל-הַצָּבָא אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, בָּאוּ; וַיַּגִּדוּ לְיוֹאָב, לֵאמֹר, בָּא-אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיְשַׁלְּחֵהוּ וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּשָׁלוֹם.    23 When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying: 'Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.'
3.24 כד  וַיָּבֹא יוֹאָב אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר מֶה עָשִׂיתָה:  הִנֵּה-בָא אַבְנֵר אֵלֶיךָ, לָמָּה-זֶּה שִׁלַּחְתּוֹ וַיֵּלֶךְ הָלוֹךְ.    24 Then Joab came to the king, and said: 'What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?
3.25 כה  יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר, כִּי לְפַתֹּתְךָ בָּא; וְלָדַעַת אֶת-מוֹצָאֲךָ, וְאֶת-מבואך (מוֹבָאֶךָ), וְלָדַעַת, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה עֹשֶׂה.    25 Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest.'
3.26 כו  וַיֵּצֵא יוֹאָב, מֵעִם דָּוִד, וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אַחֲרֵי אַבְנֵר, וַיָּשִׁבוּ אֹתוֹ מִבּוֹר הַסִּרָה; וְדָוִד, לֹא יָדָע.    26 And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from Bor-sirah; but David knew it not.
3.27 כז  וַיָּשָׁב אַבְנֵר, חֶבְרוֹן, וַיַּטֵּהוּ יוֹאָב אֶל-תּוֹךְ הַשַּׁעַר, לְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ בַּשֶּׁלִי; וַיַּכֵּהוּ שָׁם, הַחֹמֶשׁ--וַיָּמָת, בְּדַם עֲשָׂהאֵל אָחִיו.    27 And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there in the groin, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.
3.28 כח  וַיִּשְׁמַע דָּוִד, מֵאַחֲרֵי כֵן, וַיֹּאמֶר נָקִי אָנֹכִי וּמַמְלַכְתִּי מֵעִם יְהוָה, עַד-עוֹלָם--מִדְּמֵי, אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר.    28 And afterward when David heard it, he said: 'I and my kingdom are guiltless before the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner;
3.29 כט  יָחֻלוּ עַל-רֹאשׁ יוֹאָב, וְאֶל כָּל-בֵּית אָבִיו; וְאַל-יִכָּרֵת מִבֵּית יוֹאָב זָב וּמְצֹרָע וּמַחֲזִיק בַּפֶּלֶךְ, וְנֹפֵל בַּחֶרֶב--וַחֲסַר-לָחֶם.    29 let it fall upon the head of Joab, and upon all his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth by the sword, or that lacketh bread.'
3.30 ל  וְיוֹאָב וַאֲבִישַׁי אָחִיו, הָרְגוּ לְאַבְנֵר:  עַל אֲשֶׁר הֵמִית אֶת-עֲשָׂהאֵל אֲחִיהֶם, בְּגִבְעוֹן--בַּמִּלְחָמָה.  {ס}    30 So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle. {S}
3.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-יוֹאָב וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, קִרְעוּ בִגְדֵיכֶם וְחִגְרוּ שַׂקִּים, וְסִפְדוּ, לִפְנֵי אַבְנֵר; וְהַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, הֹלֵךְ אַחֲרֵי הַמִּטָּה.    31 And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him: 'Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and wail before Abner.' And king David followed the bier.
3.32 לב  וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֶת-אַבְנֵר, בְּחֶבְרוֹן; וַיִּשָּׂא הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-קוֹלוֹ, וַיֵּבְךְּ אֶל-קֶבֶר אַבְנֵר, וַיִּבְכּוּ, כָּל-הָעָם.  {ס}    32 And they buried Abner in Hebron; and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept. {S}
3.33 לג  וַיְקֹנֵן הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-אַבְנֵר, וַיֹּאמַר:  הַכְּמוֹת נָבָל, יָמוּת אַבְנֵר.    33 And the king lamented for Abner, and said: Should Abner die as a churl dieth?
3.34 לד  יָדֶךָ לֹא-אֲסֻרוֹת, וְרַגְלֶיךָ לֹא-לִנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם הֻגָּשׁוּ, כִּנְפוֹל לִפְנֵי בְנֵי-עַוְלָה, נָפָלְתָּ; וַיֹּסִפוּ כָל-הָעָם, לִבְכּוֹת עָלָיו.    34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters; as a man falleth before the children of iniquity, so didst thou fall. And all the people wept again over him.
3.35 לה  וַיָּבֹא כָל-הָעָם, לְהַבְרוֹת אֶת-דָּוִד לֶחֶם--בְּעוֹד הַיּוֹם; וַיִּשָּׁבַע דָּוִד לֵאמֹר, כֹּה יַעֲשֶׂה-לִּי אֱלֹהִים וְכֹה יֹסִיף, כִּי אִם-לִפְנֵי בוֹא-הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ אֶטְעַם-לֶחֶם, אוֹ כָל-מְאוּמָה.    35 And all the people came to cause David to eat bread while it was yet day; but David swore, saying: 'God do so to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or aught else, till the sun be down.'
3.36 לו  וְכָל-הָעָם הִכִּירוּ, וַיִּיטַב בְּעֵינֵיהֶם, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם טוֹב.    36 And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them; whatsoever the king did, pleased all the people.
3.37 לז  וַיֵּדְעוּ כָל-הָעָם וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא:  כִּי לֹא הָיְתָה מֵהַמֶּלֶךְ, לְהָמִית אֶת-אַבְנֵר בֶּן-נֵר.  {ס}    37 So all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner. {S}
3.38 לח  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-עֲבָדָיו:  הֲלוֹא תֵדְעוּ--כִּי-שַׂר וְגָדוֹל נָפַל הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    38 And the king said unto his servants: 'Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
3.39 לט  וְאָנֹכִי הַיּוֹם רַךְ וּמָשׁוּחַ מֶלֶךְ, וְהָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה בְּנֵי צְרוּיָה קָשִׁים מִמֶּנִּי:  יְשַׁלֵּם יְהוָה לְעֹשֵׂה הָרָעָה, כְּרָעָתוֹ.  {פ}    39 And I am this day weak, and just anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me; the LORD reward the evildoer according to his wickedness.' {P}
4.1 א  וַיִּשְׁמַע בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, כִּי מֵת אַבְנֵר בְּחֶבְרוֹן, וַיִּרְפּוּ, יָדָיו; וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, נִבְהָלוּ.    1 And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands became feeble, and all the Israelites were affrighted.
4.2 ב  וּשְׁנֵי אֲנָשִׁים שָׂרֵי-גְדוּדִים הָיוּ בֶן-שָׁאוּל שֵׁם הָאֶחָד בַּעֲנָה וְשֵׁם הַשֵּׁנִי רֵכָב, בְּנֵי רִמּוֹן הַבְּאֵרֹתִי--מִבְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן:  כִּי גַּם-בְּאֵרוֹת, תֵּחָשֵׁב עַל-בִּנְיָמִן.    2 And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands; the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin; for Beeroth also is reckoned to Benjamin;
4.3 ג  וַיִּבְרְחוּ הַבְּאֵרֹתִים, גִּתָּיְמָה; וַיִּהְיוּ-שָׁם גָּרִים, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}    3 and the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and have been sojourners there until this day. {S}
4.4 ד  וְלִיהוֹנָתָן, בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, בֵּן, נְכֵה רַגְלָיִם; בֶּן-חָמֵשׁ שָׁנִים הָיָה בְּבֹא שְׁמֻעַת שָׁאוּל וִיהוֹנָתָן מִיִּזְרְעֶאל, וַתִּשָּׂאֵהוּ אֹמַנְתּוֹ וַתָּנֹס, וַיְהִי בְּחָפְזָהּ לָנוּס וַיִּפֹּל וַיִּפָּסֵחַ, וּשְׁמוֹ מְפִיבֹשֶׁת.    4 Now Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled; and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.
4.5 ה  וַיֵּלְכוּ בְּנֵי-רִמּוֹן הַבְּאֵרֹתִי, רֵכָב וּבַעֲנָה, וַיָּבֹאוּ כְּחֹם הַיּוֹם, אֶל-בֵּית אִישׁ בֹּשֶׁת; וְהוּא שֹׁכֵב, אֵת מִשְׁכַּב הַצָּהֳרָיִם.    5 And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ish-bosheth, as he took his rest at noon.
4.6 ו  וְהֵנָּה בָּאוּ עַד-תּוֹךְ הַבַּיִת, לֹקְחֵי חִטִּים, וַיַּכֻּהוּ, אֶל-הַחֹמֶשׁ; וְרֵכָב וּבַעֲנָה אָחִיו, נִמְלָטוּ.    6 And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him in the groin; and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.
4.7 ז  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַבַּיִת, וְהוּא-שֹׁכֵב עַל-מִטָּתוֹ בַּחֲדַר מִשְׁכָּבוֹ, וַיַּכֻּהוּ וַיְמִתֻהוּ, וַיָּסִירוּ אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיִּקְחוּ, אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ, וַיֵּלְכוּ דֶּרֶךְ הָעֲרָבָה, כָּל-הַלָּיְלָה.    7 Now when they came into the house, as he lay on his bed in his bed-chamber, they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and went by the way of the Arabah all night.
4.8 ח  וַיָּבִאוּ אֶת-רֹאשׁ אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת אֶל-דָּוִד, חֶבְרוֹן, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, הִנֵּה-רֹאשׁ אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת בֶּן-שָׁאוּל אֹיִבְךָ אֲשֶׁר בִּקֵּשׁ אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ; וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה לַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ נְקָמוֹת, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, מִשָּׁאוּל, וּמִזַּרְעוֹ.    8 And they brought the head of Ish-bosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king: 'Behold the head of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, who sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed.'
4.9 ט  וַיַּעַן דָּוִד אֶת-רֵכָב וְאֶת-בַּעֲנָה אָחִיו, בְּנֵי רִמּוֹן הַבְּאֵרֹתִי--וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם:  חַי-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-פָּדָה אֶת-נַפְשִׁי מִכָּל-צָרָה.    9 And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them: 'As the LORD liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
4.10 י  כִּי הַמַּגִּיד לִי לֵאמֹר הִנֵּה-מֵת שָׁאוּל, וְהוּא-הָיָה כִמְבַשֵּׂר בְּעֵינָיו, וָאֹחֲזָה בוֹ, וָאֶהְרְגֵהוּ בְּצִקְלָג--אֲשֶׁר לְתִתִּי-לוֹ, בְּשֹׂרָה.    10 when one told me, saying: Behold, Saul is dead, and he was in his own eyes as though he brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, instead of giving a reward for his tidings.
4.11 יא  אַף כִּי-אֲנָשִׁים רְשָׁעִים, הָרְגוּ אֶת-אִישׁ-צַדִּיק בְּבֵיתוֹ--עַל-מִשְׁכָּבוֹ; וְעַתָּה, הֲלוֹא אֲבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-דָּמוֹ מִיֶּדְכֶם, וּבִעַרְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, מִן-הָאָרֶץ.    11 How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed, shall I not now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?'
4.12 יב  וַיְצַו דָּוִד אֶת-הַנְּעָרִים וַיַּהַרְגוּם, וַיְקַצְּצוּ אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם וְאֶת-רַגְלֵיהֶם, וַיִּתְלוּ עַל-הַבְּרֵכָה, בְּחֶבְרוֹן; וְאֵת רֹאשׁ אִישׁ-בֹּשֶׁת לָקָחוּ, וַיִּקְבְּרוּ בְקֶבֶר-אַבְנֵר בְּחֶבְרוֹן.  {פ}    12 And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up beside the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth, and buried it in the grave of Abner in Hebron. {P}
5.1 א  וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-דָּוִד--חֶבְרוֹנָה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לֵאמֹר, הִנְנוּ עַצְמְךָ וּבְשָׂרְךָ אֲנָחְנוּ.    1 Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spoke, saying: 'Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
5.2 ב  גַּם-אֶתְמוֹל גַּם-שִׁלְשׁוֹם, בִּהְיוֹת שָׁאוּל מֶלֶךְ עָלֵינוּ, אַתָּה הָיִיתָה מוציא (הַמּוֹצִיא) וְהַמֵּבִי, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה לְךָ, אַתָּה תִרְעֶה אֶת-עַמִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאַתָּה תִּהְיֶה לְנָגִיד, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 In times past, when Saul was king over us, it was thou that didst lead out and bring in Israel; and the LORD said to thee: Thou shalt feed My people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over Israel.'
5.3 ג  וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, חֶבְרוֹנָה, וַיִּכְרֹת לָהֶם הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד בְּרִית בְּחֶבְרוֹן, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּמְשְׁחוּ אֶת-דָּוִד לְמֶלֶךְ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the LORD; and they anointed David king over Israel. {S}
5.4 ד  בֶּן-שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה דָּוִד, בְּמָלְכוֹ; אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, מָלָךְ.    4 David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.
5.5 ה  בְּחֶבְרוֹן מָלַךְ עַל-יְהוּדָה, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים וְשִׁשָּׁה חֳדָשִׁים; וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם מָלַךְ, שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנָה, עַל כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וִיהוּדָה.    5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.
5.6 ו  וַיֵּלֶךְ הַמֶּלֶךְ וַאֲנָשָׁיו יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶל-הַיְבֻסִי יוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ; וַיֹּאמֶר לְדָוִד לֵאמֹר, לֹא-תָבוֹא הֵנָּה, כִּי אִם-הֱסִירְךָ הַעִוְרִים וְהַפִּסְחִים לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יָבוֹא דָוִד הֵנָּה.    6 And the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, who spoke unto David, saying: 'Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither'; thinking: 'David cannot come in hither.'
5.7 ז  וַיִּלְכֹּד דָּוִד, אֵת מְצֻדַת צִיּוֹן--הִיא, עִיר דָּוִד.    7 Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.
5.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כָּל-מַכֵּה יְבֻסִי וְיִגַּע בַּצִּנּוֹר, וְאֶת-הַפִּסְחִים וְאֶת-הַעִוְרִים, שנאו (שְׂנוּאֵי) נֶפֶשׁ דָּוִד; עַל-כֵּן, יֹאמְרוּ, עִוֵּר וּפִסֵּחַ, לֹא יָבוֹא אֶל-הַבָּיִת.    8 And David said on that day: 'Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites, and getteth up to the gutter, and [taketh away] the lame and the blind, that are hated of David's soul--.' Wherefore they say: 'There are the blind and the lame; he cannot come into the house.'
5.9 ט  וַיֵּשֶׁב דָּוִד בַּמְּצֻדָה, וַיִּקְרָא-לָהּ עִיר דָּוִד; וַיִּבֶן דָּוִד סָבִיב, מִן-הַמִּלּוֹא וָבָיְתָה.    9 And David dwelt in the stronghold, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.
5.10 י  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד, הָלוֹךְ וְגָדוֹל; וַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת, עִמּוֹ.  {פ}    10 And David waxed greater and greater; for the LORD, the God of hosts, was with him. {P}
5.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִירָם מֶלֶךְ-צֹר מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-דָּוִד, וַעֲצֵי אֲרָזִים, וְחָרָשֵׁי עֵץ וְחָרָשֵׁי אֶבֶן קִיר; וַיִּבְנוּ-בַיִת, לְדָוִד.    11 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar-trees, and carpenters, and masons; and they built David a house.
5.12 יב  וַיֵּדַע דָּוִד, כִּי-הֱכִינוֹ יְהוָה לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכִי נִשֵּׂא מַמְלַכְתּוֹ, בַּעֲבוּר עַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    12 And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that He had exalted his kingdom for His people Israel's sake. {S}
5.13 יג  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד עוֹד פִּלַגְשִׁים וְנָשִׁים, מִירוּשָׁלִַם, אַחֲרֵי, בֹּאוֹ מֵחֶבְרוֹן; וַיִּוָּלְדוּ עוֹד לְדָוִד, בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת.    13 And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron; and there were yet sons and daughters born to David.
5.14 יד  וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת הַיִּלֹּדִים לוֹ--בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  שַׁמּוּעַ וְשׁוֹבָב, וְנָתָן וּשְׁלֹמֹה.    14 And these are the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon;
5.15 טו  וְיִבְחָר וֶאֱלִישׁוּעַ, וְנֶפֶג וְיָפִיעַ.    15 and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia;
5.16 טז  וֶאֱלִישָׁמָע וְאֶלְיָדָע, וֶאֱלִיפָלֶט.  {פ}    16 and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet. {P}
5.17 יז  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, כִּי-מָשְׁחוּ אֶת-דָּוִד לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעֲלוּ כָל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-דָּוִד; וַיִּשְׁמַע דָּוִד, וַיֵּרֶד אֶל-הַמְּצוּדָה.    17 And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold.
5.18 יח  וּפְלִשְׁתִּים, בָּאוּ; וַיִּנָּטְשׁוּ, בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים.    18 Now the Philistines had come and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
5.19 יט  וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִד בַּיהוָה, לֵאמֹר, הַאֶעֱלֶה אֶל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, הֲתִתְּנֵם בְּיָדִי;  {פ}  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-דָּוִד עֲלֵה, כִּי-נָתֹן אֶתֵּן אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים בְּיָדֶךָ.    19 And David inquired of the LORD, saying: 'Shall I go up against the Philistines? wilt Thou deliver them into my hand?' {P} And the LORD said unto David: 'Go up; for I will certainly deliver the Philistines into thy hand.'
5.20 כ  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד בְּבַעַל-פְּרָצִים, וַיַּכֵּם שָׁם דָּוִד, וַיֹּאמֶר, פָּרַץ יְהוָה אֶת-אֹיְבַי לְפָנַי כְּפֶרֶץ מָיִם; עַל-כֵּן, קָרָא שֵׁם-הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא--בַּעַל פְּרָצִים.    20 And David came to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there; and he said: 'The LORD hath broken mine enemies before me, like the breach of waters.' Therefore the name of that place was called Baal-perazim.
5.21 כא  וַיַּעַזְבוּ-שָׁם, אֶת-עֲצַבֵּיהֶם; וַיִּשָּׂאֵם דָּוִד, וַאֲנָשָׁיו.  {פ}    21 And they left their images there, and David and his men took them away. {P}
5.22 כב  וַיֹּסִפוּ עוֹד פְּלִשְׁתִּים, לַעֲלוֹת; וַיִּנָּטְשׁוּ, בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים.    22 And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
5.23 כג  וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִד בַּיהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא תַעֲלֶה; הָסֵב, אֶל-אַחֲרֵיהֶם, וּבָאתָ לָהֶם, מִמּוּל בְּכָאִים.    23 And when David inquired of the LORD, He said: 'Thou shalt not go up; make a circuit behind them, and come upon them over against the mulberry-trees.
5.24 כד  וִיהִי בשמעך (כְּשָׁמְעֲךָ) אֶת-קוֹל צְעָדָה, בְּרָאשֵׁי הַבְּכָאִים--אָז תֶּחֱרָץ:  כִּי אָז, יָצָא יְהוָה לְפָנֶיךָ, לְהַכּוֹת, בְּמַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים.    24 And it shall be, when thou hearest the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry-trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself; for then is the LORD gone out before thee to smite the host of the Philistines.'
5.25 כה  וַיַּעַשׂ דָּוִד כֵּן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּהוּ יְהוָה; וַיַּךְ, אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, מִגֶּבַע, עַד-בֹּאֲךָ גָזֶר.  {פ}    25 And David did so, as the LORD commanded him, and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gezer. {P}
6.1 א  וַיֹּסֶף עוֹד דָּוִד אֶת-כָּל-בָּחוּר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁלֹשִׁים אָלֶף.    1 And David again gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.
6.2 ב  וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד, וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, מִבַּעֲלֵי, יְהוּדָה--לְהַעֲלוֹת מִשָּׁם, אֵת אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר-נִקְרָא שֵׁם שֵׁם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת יֹשֵׁב הַכְּרֻבִים, עָלָיו.    2 And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him, from Baale-judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whereupon is called the Name, even the name of the LORD of hosts that sitteth upon the cherubim.
6.3 ג  וַיַּרְכִּבוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶל-עֲגָלָה חֲדָשָׁה, וַיִּשָּׂאֻהוּ, מִבֵּית אֲבִינָדָב אֲשֶׁר בַּגִּבְעָה; וְעֻזָּא וְאַחְיוֹ, בְּנֵי אֲבִינָדָב, נֹהֲגִים, אֶת-הָעֲגָלָה חֲדָשָׁה.    3 And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in the hill; and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the new cart.
6.4 ד  וַיִּשָּׂאֻהוּ, מִבֵּית אֲבִינָדָב אֲשֶׁר בַּגִּבְעָה, עִם, אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים; וְאַחְיוֹ, הֹלֵךְ לִפְנֵי הָאָרוֹן.    4 And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was in the hill, with the ark of God, and Ahio went before the ark.
6.5 ה  וְדָוִד וְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, מְשַׂחֲקִים לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בְּכֹל, עֲצֵי בְרוֹשִׁים; וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת וּבִנְבָלִים וּבְתֻפִּים, וּבִמְנַעַנְעִים וּבְצֶלְצֱלִים.    5 And David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD with all manner of instruments made of cypress-wood, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with sistra, and with cymbals.
6.6 ו  וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-גֹּרֶן נָכוֹן; וַיִּשְׁלַח עֻזָּה אֶל-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאחֶז בּוֹ--כִּי שָׁמְטוּ, הַבָּקָר.    6 And when they came to the threshing-floor of Nacon, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen stumbled.
6.7 ז  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה בְּעֻזָּה, וַיַּכֵּהוּ שָׁם הָאֱלֹהִים עַל-הַשַּׁל; וַיָּמָת שָׁם, עִם אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים.    7 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.
6.8 ח  וַיִּחַר לְדָוִד, עַל אֲשֶׁר פָּרַץ יְהוָה פֶּרֶץ בְּעֻזָּה; וַיִּקְרָא לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, פֶּרֶץ עֻזָּה, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    8 And David was displeased, because the LORD had broken forth upon Uzzah; and that place was called Perez-uzzah, unto this day.
6.9 ט  וַיִּרָא דָוִד אֶת-יְהוָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵיךְ יָבוֹא אֵלַי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה.    9 And David was afraid of the LORD that day; and he said: 'How shall the ark of the LORD come unto me?'
6.10 י  וְלֹא-אָבָה דָוִד, לְהָסִיר אֵלָיו אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה--עַל-עִיר דָּוִד; וַיַּטֵּהוּ דָוִד, בֵּית עֹבֵד-אֱדֹם הַגִּתִּי.    10 So David would not remove the ark of the LORD unto him into the city of David; but David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
6.11 יא  וַיֵּשֶׁב אֲרוֹן יְהוָה בֵּית עֹבֵד אֱדֹם, הַגִּתִּי--שְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים; וַיְבָרֶךְ יְהוָה אֶת-עֹבֵד אֱדֹם, וְאֶת-כָּל-בֵּיתוֹ.    11 And the ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months; and the LORD blessed Obed-edom, and all his house.
6.12 יב  וַיֻּגַּד, לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד לֵאמֹר, בֵּרַךְ יְהוָה אֶת-בֵּית עֹבֵד אֱדֹם וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, בַּעֲבוּר, אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד, וַיַּעַל אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים מִבֵּית עֹבֵד אֱדֹם עִיר דָּוִד--בְּשִׂמְחָה.    12 And it was told king David, saying: 'The LORD hath blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God.' And David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with joy.
6.13 יג  וַיְהִי, כִּי צָעֲדוּ נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן-יְהוָה--שִׁשָּׁה צְעָדִים:  וַיִּזְבַּח שׁוֹר, וּמְרִיא.    13 And it was so, that when they that bore the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling.
6.14 יד  וְדָוִד מְכַרְכֵּר בְּכָל-עֹז, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְדָוִד, חָגוּר אֵפוֹד בָּד.    14 And David danced before the LORD with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod.
6.15 טו  וְדָוִד וְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, מַעֲלִים אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, בִּתְרוּעָה, וּבְקוֹל שׁוֹפָר.    15 So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the horn.
6.16 טז  וְהָיָה אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, בָּא עִיר דָּוִד; וּמִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל נִשְׁקְפָה בְּעַד הַחַלּוֹן, וַתֵּרֶא אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד מְפַזֵּז וּמְכַרְכֵּר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַתִּבֶז לוֹ, בְּלִבָּהּ.    16 And it was so, as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.
6.17 יז  וַיָּבִאוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, וַיַּצִּגוּ אֹתוֹ בִּמְקוֹמוֹ, בְּתוֹךְ הָאֹהֶל, אֲשֶׁר נָטָה-לוֹ דָּוִד; וַיַּעַל דָּוִד עֹלוֹת לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וּשְׁלָמִים.    17 And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in its place, in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it; and David offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before the LORD.
6.18 יח  וַיְכַל דָּוִד, מֵהַעֲלוֹת הָעוֹלָה וְהַשְּׁלָמִים; וַיְבָרֶךְ אֶת-הָעָם, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.    18 And when David had made an end of offering the burnt-offering and the peace-offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts.
6.19 יט  וַיְחַלֵּק לְכָל-הָעָם לְכָל-הֲמוֹן יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמֵאִישׁ וְעַד-אִשָּׁה, לְאִישׁ חַלַּת לֶחֶם אַחַת, וְאֶשְׁפָּר אֶחָד וַאֲשִׁישָׁה אֶחָת; וַיֵּלֶךְ כָּל-הָעָם, אִישׁ לְבֵיתוֹ.    19 And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, both to men and women, to every one a cake of bread, and a cake made in a pan, and a sweet cake. So all the people departed every one to his house.
6.20 כ  וַיָּשָׁב דָּוִד, לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ;  {ס}  וַתֵּצֵא מִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל, לִקְרַאת דָּוִד, וַתֹּאמֶר מַה-נִּכְבַּד הַיּוֹם מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר נִגְלָה הַיּוֹם לְעֵינֵי אַמְהוֹת עֲבָדָיו, כְּהִגָּלוֹת נִגְלוֹת אַחַד הָרֵקִים.    20 Then David returned to bless his household. {S} And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said: 'How did the king of Israel get him honour to-day, who uncovered himself to-day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!'
6.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-מִיכַל, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר-בִּי מֵאָבִיךְ וּמִכָּל-בֵּיתוֹ, לְצַוֺּת אֹתִי נָגִיד עַל-עַם יְהוָה עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְשִׂחַקְתִּי, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    21 And David said unto Michal: 'Before the LORD, who chose me above thy father, and above all his house, to appoint me prince over the people of the LORD, over Israel, before the LORD will I make merry.
6.22 כב  וּנְקַלֹּתִי עוֹד מִזֹּאת, וְהָיִיתִי שָׁפָל בְּעֵינָי; וְעִם-הָאֲמָהוֹת אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתְּ, עִמָּם אִכָּבֵדָה.    22 And I will be yet more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight; and with the handmaids whom thou hast spoken of, with them will I get me honour.'
6.23 כג  וּלְמִיכַל, בַּת-שָׁאוּל, לֹא-הָיָה לָהּ, יָלֶד--עַד, יוֹם מוֹתָהּ.  {פ}    23 And Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death. {P}
7.1 א  וַיְהִי, כִּי-יָשַׁב הַמֶּלֶךְ בְּבֵיתוֹ; וַיהוָה הֵנִיחַ-לוֹ מִסָּבִיב, מִכָּל-אֹיְבָיו.    1 And it came to pass, when the king dwelt in his house, and the LORD had given him rest from all his enemies round about,
7.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-נָתָן הַנָּבִיא, רְאֵה נָא, אָנֹכִי יוֹשֵׁב בְּבֵית אֲרָזִים; וַאֲרוֹן, הָאֱלֹהִים, יֹשֵׁב, בְּתוֹךְ הַיְרִיעָה.    2 that the king said unto Nathan the prophet: 'See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.'
7.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר נָתָן אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר בִּלְבָבְךָ לֵךְ עֲשֵׂה:  כִּי יְהוָה, עִמָּךְ.    3 And Nathan said to the king: 'Go, do all that is in thy heart; for the LORD is with thee.'
7.4 ד  וַיְהִי, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא;  {ס}  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-נָתָן, לֵאמֹר.    4 And it came to pass the same night, {S} that the word of the LORD came unto Nathan, saying:
7.5 ה  לֵךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-עַבְדִּי אֶל-דָּוִד,  {ס}  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  הַאַתָּה תִּבְנֶה-לִּי בַיִת, לְשִׁבְתִּי.    5 'Go and tell My servant David: {S} Thus saith the LORD: Shalt thou build Me a house for Me to dwell in?
7.6 ו  כִּי לֹא יָשַׁבְתִּי, בְּבַיִת, לְמִיּוֹם הַעֲלֹתִי אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מִמִּצְרַיִם, וְעַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וָאֶהְיֶה, מִתְהַלֵּךְ, בְּאֹהֶל, וּבְמִשְׁכָּן.    6 for I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.
7.7 ז  בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-הִתְהַלַּכְתִּי, בְּכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֲדָבָר דִּבַּרְתִּי אֶת-אַחַד שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי לִרְעוֹת אֶת-עַמִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  לָמָּה לֹא-בְנִיתֶם לִי, בֵּית אֲרָזִים.    7 In all places wherein I have walked among all the children of Israel, spoke I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed My people Israel, saying: Why have ye not built Me a house of cedar?
7.8 ח  וְעַתָּה כֹּה-תֹאמַר לְעַבְדִּי לְדָוִד, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֲנִי לְקַחְתִּיךָ מִן-הַנָּוֶה, מֵאַחַר הַצֹּאן--לִהְיוֹת נָגִיד, עַל-עַמִּי עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    8 Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto My servant David: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, that thou shouldest be prince over My people, over Israel.
7.9 ט  וָאֶהְיֶה עִמְּךָ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר הָלַכְתָּ, וָאַכְרִתָה אֶת-כָּל-אֹיְבֶיךָ, מִפָּנֶיךָ; וְעָשִׂתִי לְךָ שֵׁם גָּדוֹל, כְּשֵׁם הַגְּדֹלִים אֲשֶׁר בָּאָרֶץ.    9 And I have been with thee whithersoever thou didst go, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee; and I will make thee a great name, like unto the name of the great ones that are in the earth.
7.10 י  וְשַׂמְתִּי מָקוֹם לְעַמִּי לְיִשְׂרָאֵל וּנְטַעְתִּיו, וְשָׁכַן תַּחְתָּיו, וְלֹא יִרְגַּז, עוֹד; וְלֹא-יֹסִיפוּ בְנֵי-עַוְלָה לְעַנּוֹתוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה.    10 And I will appoint a place for My people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and be disquieted no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as at the first,
7.11 יא  וּלְמִן-הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי שֹׁפְטִים עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַהֲנִיחֹתִי לְךָ, מִכָּל-אֹיְבֶיךָ; וְהִגִּיד לְךָ יְהוָה, כִּי-בַיִת יַעֲשֶׂה-לְּךָ יְהוָה.    11 even from the day that I commanded judges to be over My people Israel; and I will cause thee to rest from all thine enemies. Moreover the LORD telleth thee that the LORD will make thee a house.
7.12 יב  כִּי יִמְלְאוּ יָמֶיךָ, וְשָׁכַבְתָּ אֶת-אֲבֹתֶיךָ, וַהֲקִימֹתִי אֶת-זַרְעֲךָ אַחֲרֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר יֵצֵא מִמֵּעֶיךָ; וַהֲכִינֹתִי, אֶת-מַמְלַכְתּוֹ.    12 When thy days are fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, that shall proceed out of thy body, and I will establish his kingdom.
7.13 יג  הוּא יִבְנֶה-בַּיִת, לִשְׁמִי; וְכֹנַנְתִּי אֶת-כִּסֵּא מַמְלַכְתּוֹ, עַד-עוֹלָם.    13 He shall build a house for My name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever.
7.14 יד  אֲנִי אֶהְיֶה-לּוֹ לְאָב, וְהוּא יִהְיֶה-לִּי לְבֵן--אֲשֶׁר, בְּהַעֲוֺתוֹ, וְהֹכַחְתִּיו בְּשֵׁבֶט אֲנָשִׁים, וּבְנִגְעֵי בְּנֵי אָדָם.    14 I will be to him for a father, and he shall be to Me for a son; if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men;
7.15 טו  וְחַסְדִּי, לֹא-יָסוּר מִמֶּנּוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר הֲסִרֹתִי מֵעִם שָׁאוּל, אֲשֶׁר הֲסִרֹתִי מִלְּפָנֶיךָ.    15 but My mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.
7.16 טז  וְנֶאְמַן בֵּיתְךָ וּמַמְלַכְתְּךָ עַד-עוֹלָם, לְפָנֶיךָ:  כִּסְאֲךָ, יִהְיֶה נָכוֹן עַד-עוֹלָם.    16 And thy house and thy kingdom shall be made sure for ever before thee; thy throne shall be established for ever.'
7.17 יז  כְּכֹל הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וּכְכֹל הַחִזָּיוֹן הַזֶּה--כֵּן דִּבֶּר נָתָן, אֶל-דָּוִד.  {פ}    17 According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. {P}
7.18 יח  וַיָּבֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, וַיֵּשֶׁב לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי אָנֹכִי אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה וּמִי בֵיתִי--כִּי הֲבִאֹתַנִי, עַד-הֲלֹם.    18 Then David the king went in, and sat before the LORD; and he said: 'Who am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my house, that Thou hast brought me thus far?
7.19 יט  וַתִּקְטַן עוֹד זֹאת בְּעֵינֶיךָ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וַתְּדַבֵּר גַּם אֶל-בֵּית-עַבְדְּךָ לְמֵרָחוֹק; וְזֹאת תּוֹרַת הָאָדָם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    19 And this was yet a small thing in Thine eyes, O Lord GOD; but Thou hast spoken also of Thy servant's house for a great while to come; and this too after the manner of great men, O Lord GOD.
7.20 כ  וּמַה-יּוֹסִיף דָּוִד עוֹד, לְדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ; וְאַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-עַבְדְּךָ, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    20 And what can David say more unto Thee? for Thou knowest Thy servant, O Lord GOD.
7.21 כא  בַּעֲבוּר דְּבָרְךָ, וּכְלִבְּךָ, עָשִׂיתָ, אֵת כָּל-הַגְּדוּלָּה הַזֹּאת--לְהוֹדִיעַ, אֶת-עַבְדֶּךָ.    21 For Thy word's sake, and according to Thine own heart, hast Thou wrought all this greatness, to make Thy servant know it.
7.22 כב  עַל-כֵּן גָּדַלְתָּ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים:  כִּי-אֵין כָּמוֹךָ, וְאֵין אֱלֹהִים זוּלָתֶךָ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁמַעְנוּ, בְּאָזְנֵינוּ.    22 Therefore Thou art great, O LORD God; for there is none like Thee, neither is there any God beside Thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
7.23 כג  וּמִי כְעַמְּךָ כְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, גּוֹי אֶחָד בָּאָרֶץ--אֲשֶׁר הָלְכוּ-אֱלֹהִים לִפְדּוֹת-לוֹ לְעָם וְלָשׂוּם לוֹ שֵׁם, וְלַעֲשׂוֹת לָכֶם הַגְּדוּלָּה וְנֹרָאוֹת לְאַרְצֶךָ, מִפְּנֵי עַמְּךָ אֲשֶׁר פָּדִיתָ לְּךָ מִמִּצְרַיִם, גּוֹיִם וֵאלֹהָיו.    23 And who is like Thy people, like Israel, a nation one in the earth, whom God went to redeem unto Himself for a people, and to make Him a name, and to do for Thy land great things and tremendous, even for you, [in driving out] from before Thy people, whom Thou didst redeem to Thee out of Egypt, the nations and their gods?
7.24 כד  וַתְּכוֹנֵן לְךָ אֶת-עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל לְךָ, לְעָם--עַד-עוֹלָם; וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, הָיִיתָ לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים.  {ס}    24 And Thou didst establish to Thyself Thy people Israel to be a people unto Thee for ever; and Thou, LORD, becamest their God. {S}
7.25 כה  וְעַתָּה, יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים, הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ עַל-עַבְדְּךָ וְעַל-בֵּיתוֹ, הָקֵם עַד-עוֹלָם; וַעֲשֵׂה, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ.    25 And now, O LORD God, the word that Thou hast spoken concerning Thy servant, and concerning his house, confirm Thou it for ever, and do as Thou hast spoken.
7.26 כו  וְיִגְדַּל שִׁמְךָ עַד-עוֹלָם, לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהִים עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבֵית עַבְדְּךָ דָוִד, יִהְיֶה נָכוֹן לְפָנֶיךָ.    26 And let Thy name be magnified for ever, that it may be said: The LORD of hosts is God over Israel; and the house of Thy servant David shall be established before Thee.
7.27 כז  כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, גָּלִיתָה אֶת-אֹזֶן עַבְדְּךָ לֵאמֹר, בַּיִת, אֶבְנֶה-לָּךְ; עַל-כֵּן, מָצָא עַבְדְּךָ אֶת-לִבּוֹ, לְהִתְפַּלֵּל אֵלֶיךָ, אֶת-הַתְּפִלָּה הַזֹּאת.    27 For Thou, O LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, hast revealed to Thy servant, saying: I will build thee a house; therefore hath Thy servant taken heart to pray this prayer unto Thee.
7.28 כח  וְעַתָּה אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אַתָּה-הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים, וּדְבָרֶיךָ, יִהְיוּ אֱמֶת; וַתְּדַבֵּר, אֶל-עַבְדְּךָ, אֶת-הַטּוֹבָה, הַזֹּאת.    28 And now, O Lord GOD, Thou alone art God, and Thy words are truth, and Thou hast promised this good thing unto Thy servant;
7.29 כט  וְעַתָּה, הוֹאֵל וּבָרֵךְ אֶת-בֵּית עַבְדְּךָ, לִהְיוֹת לְעוֹלָם, לְפָנֶיךָ:  כִּי-אַתָּה אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, דִּבַּרְתָּ, וּמִבִּרְכָתְךָ, יְבֹרַךְ בֵּית-עַבְדְּךָ לְעוֹלָם.  {פ}    29 now therefore let it please Thee to bless the house of Thy servant, that it may continue for ever before Thee; for Thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it; and through Thy blessing let the house of Thy servant be blessed for ever.' {P}
8.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיַּךְ דָּוִד אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיַּכְנִיעֵם; וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד אֶת-מֶתֶג הָאַמָּה, מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים.    1 And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them; and David took Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.
8.2 ב  וַיַּךְ אֶת-מוֹאָב, וַיְמַדְּדֵם בַּחֶבֶל הַשְׁכֵּב אוֹתָם אַרְצָה, וַיְמַדֵּד שְׁנֵי-חֲבָלִים לְהָמִית, וּמְלֹא הַחֶבֶל לְהַחֲיוֹת; וַתְּהִי מוֹאָב לְדָוִד, לַעֲבָדִים נֹשְׂאֵי מִנְחָה.    2 And he smote Moab, and measured them with the line, making them to lie down on the ground; and he measured two lines to put to death, and one full line to keep alive. And the Moabites became servants to David, and brought presents.
8.3 ג  וַיַּךְ דָּוִד, אֶת-הֲדַדְעֶזֶר בֶּן-רְחֹב מֶלֶךְ צוֹבָה, בְּלֶכְתּוֹ, לְהָשִׁיב יָדוֹ בִּנְהַר-    (פְּרָת).    3 David smote also Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to establish his dominion at the river Euphrates.
8.4 ד  וַיִּלְכֹּד דָּוִד מִמֶּנּוּ, אֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע-מֵאוֹת פָּרָשִׁים, וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, אִישׁ רַגְלִי; וַיְעַקֵּר דָּוִד אֶת-כָּל-הָרֶכֶב, וַיּוֹתֵר מִמֶּנּוּ מֵאָה רָכֶב.    4 And David took from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for a hundred chariots.
8.5 ה  וַתָּבֹא, אֲרַם דַּמֶּשֶׂק, לַעְזֹר, לַהֲדַדְעֶזֶר מֶלֶךְ צוֹבָה; וַיַּךְ דָּוִד בַּאֲרָם, עֶשְׂרִים-וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף אִישׁ.    5 And when the Arameans of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Arameans two and twenty thousand men.
8.6 ו  וַיָּשֶׂם דָּוִד נְצִבִים, בַּאֲרַם דַּמֶּשֶׂק, וַתְּהִי אֲרָם לְדָוִד, לַעֲבָדִים נוֹשְׂאֵי מִנְחָה; וַיֹּשַׁע יְהוָה אֶת-דָּוִד, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר הָלָךְ.    6 Then David put garrisons in Aram of Damascus; and the Arameans became servants to David, and brought presents. And the LORD gave victory to David whithersoever he went.
8.7 ז  וַיִּקַּח דָּוִד, אֵת שִׁלְטֵי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ, אֶל עַבְדֵי הֲדַדְעָזֶר; וַיְבִיאֵם, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.
8.8 ח  וּמִבֶּטַח וּמִבֵּרֹתַי, עָרֵי הֲדַדְעָזֶר:  לָקַח הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, נְחֹשֶׁת--הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.  {ס}    8 And from Betah and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass. {S}
8.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁמַע, תֹּעִי מֶלֶךְ חֲמָת:  כִּי הִכָּה דָוִד, אֵת כָּל-חֵיל הֲדַדְעָזֶר.    9 And when Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer,
8.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלַח תֹּעִי אֶת-יוֹרָם-בְּנוֹ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ-דָּוִד לִשְׁאָל-לוֹ לְשָׁלוֹם וּלְבָרְכוֹ, עַל אֲשֶׁר נִלְחַם בַּהֲדַדְעֶזֶר וַיַּכֵּהוּ--כִּי-אִישׁ מִלְחֲמוֹת תֹּעִי, הָיָה הֲדַדְעָזֶר; וּבְיָדוֹ, הָיוּ כְּלֵי-כֶסֶף וּכְלֵי-זָהָב--וּכְלֵי נְחֹשֶׁת.    10 then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bless him--because he had fought against Hadadezer and smitten him; for Hadadezer had wars with Toi--and he brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass.
8.11 יא  גַּם-אֹתָם, הִקְדִּישׁ הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד לַיהוָה, עִם-הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב אֲשֶׁר הִקְדִּישׁ, מִכָּל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר כִּבֵּשׁ.    11 These also did king David dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver and gold that he dedicated of all the nations which he subdued:
8.12 יב  מֵאֲרָם וּמִמּוֹאָב וּמִבְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וּמִפְּלִשְׁתִּים וּמֵעֲמָלֵק, וּמִשְּׁלַל הֲדַדְעֶזֶר בֶּן-רְחֹב, מֶלֶךְ צוֹבָה.    12 of Aram, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
8.13 יג  וַיַּעַשׂ דָּוִד, שֵׁם, בְּשֻׁבוֹ, מֵהַכּוֹתוֹ אֶת-אֲרָם בְּגֵיא-מֶלַח--שְׁמוֹנָה עָשָׂר, אָלֶף.    13 And David got him a name when he returned from smiting the Arameans in the Valley of Salt, even eighteen thousand men.
8.14 יד  וַיָּשֶׂם בֶּאֱדוֹם נְצִבִים, בְּכָל-אֱדוֹם שָׂם נְצִבִים, וַיְהִי כָל-אֱדוֹם, עֲבָדִים לְדָוִד; וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה אֶת-דָּוִד, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר הָלָךְ.    14 And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all the Edomites became servants to David. And the LORD gave victory to David whithersoever he went.
8.15 טו  וַיִּמְלֹךְ דָּוִד, עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְהִי דָוִד, עֹשֶׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה--לְכָל-עַמּוֹ.    15 And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed justice and righteousness unto all his people.
8.16 טז  וְיוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, עַל-הַצָּבָא; וִיהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-אֲחִילוּד, מַזְכִּיר.    16 And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;
8.17 יז  וְצָדוֹק בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב וַאֲחִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֶבְיָתָר, כֹּהֲנִים; וּשְׂרָיָה, סוֹפֵר.    17 and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Seraiah was scribe;
8.18 יח  וּבְנָיָהוּ, בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע, וְהַכְּרֵתִי, וְהַפְּלֵתִי; וּבְנֵי דָוִד, כֹּהֲנִים הָיוּ.  {ס}    18 and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief ministers. {S}
9.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד--הֲכִי יֶשׁ-עוֹד, אֲשֶׁר נוֹתַר לְבֵית שָׁאוּל; וְאֶעֱשֶׂה עִמּוֹ חֶסֶד, בַּעֲבוּר יְהוֹנָתָן.    1 And David said: 'Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake?'
9.2 ב  וּלְבֵית שָׁאוּל עֶבֶד וּשְׁמוֹ צִיבָא, וַיִּקְרְאוּ-לוֹ אֶל-דָּוִד; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵלָיו הַאַתָּה צִיבָא, וַיֹּאמֶר עַבְדֶּךָ.    2 Now there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba, and they called him unto David; and the king said unto him: 'Art thou Ziba?' And he said: 'Thy servant is he.'
9.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, הַאֶפֶס עוֹד אִישׁ לְבֵית שָׁאוּל, וְאֶעֱשֶׂה עִמּוֹ, חֶסֶד אֱלֹהִים; וַיֹּאמֶר צִיבָא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עוֹד בֵּן לִיהוֹנָתָן נְכֵה רַגְלָיִם.    3 And the king said: 'Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may show the kindness of God unto him?' And Ziba said unto the king: 'Jonathan hath yet a son, who is lame on his feet.'
9.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר-לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵיפֹה הוּא; וַיֹּאמֶר צִיבָא, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, הִנֵּה-הוּא בֵּית מָכִיר בֶּן-עַמִּיאֵל, בְּלוֹ דְבָר.    4 And the king said unto him: 'Where is he?' And Ziba said unto the king: 'Behold, he is in the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, in Lo-debar.'
9.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח, הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד; וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ, מִבֵּית מָכִיר בֶּן-עַמִּיאֵל--מִלּוֹ דְבָר.    5 Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, from Lo-debar.
9.6 ו  וַיָּבֹא מְפִיבֹשֶׁת בֶּן-יְהוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, אֶל-דָּוִד, וַיִּפֹּל עַל-פָּנָיו, וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד מְפִיבֹשֶׁת, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה עַבְדֶּךָ.    6 And Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came unto David, and fell on his face, and prostrated himself. And David said: 'Mephibosheth!' And he answered: 'Behold thy servant!'
9.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ דָוִד אַל-תִּירָא, כִּי עָשֹׂה אֶעֱשֶׂה עִמְּךָ חֶסֶד בַּעֲבוּר יְהוֹנָתָן אָבִיךָ, וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי לְךָ, אֶת-כָּל-שְׂדֵה שָׁאוּל אָבִיךָ; וְאַתָּה, תֹּאכַל לֶחֶם עַל-שֻׁלְחָנִי--תָּמִיד.    7 And David said unto him: 'Fear not; for I will surely show thee kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.'
9.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר מֶה עַבְדֶּךָ:  כִּי פָנִיתָ, אֶל-הַכֶּלֶב הַמֵּת אֲשֶׁר כָּמוֹנִי.    8 And he bowed down, and said: 'What is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?'
9.9 ט  וַיִּקְרָא הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-צִיבָא נַעַר שָׁאוּל--וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר הָיָה לְשָׁאוּל וּלְכָל-בֵּיתוֹ, נָתַתִּי לְבֶן-אֲדֹנֶיךָ.    9 Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him: 'All that pertained to Saul and to all his house have I given unto thy master's son.
9.10 י  וְעָבַדְתָּ לּוֹ אֶת-הָאֲדָמָה אַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ וַעֲבָדֶיךָ וְהֵבֵאתָ, וְהָיָה לְבֶן-אֲדֹנֶיךָ לֶּחֶם וַאֲכָלוֹ, וּמְפִיבֹשֶׁת בֶּן-אֲדֹנֶיךָ, יֹאכַל תָּמִיד לֶחֶם עַל-שֻׁלְחָנִי; וּלְצִיבָא, חֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר בָּנִים--וְעֶשְׂרִים עֲבָדִים.    10 And thou shalt till the land for him, thou, and thy sons, and thy servants; and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may have bread to eat; but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat bread continually at my table.' Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
9.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר צִיבָא, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר יְצַוֶּה אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-עַבְדּוֹ, כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה עַבְדֶּךָ; וּמְפִיבֹשֶׁת, אֹכֵל עַל-שֻׁלְחָנִי, כְּאַחַד, מִבְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    11 Then said Ziba unto the king: 'According to all that my lord the king commandeth his servant, so shall thy servant do; but Mephibosheth eateth at my table as one of the king's sons.'
9.12 יב  וְלִמְפִיבֹשֶׁת בֵּן-קָטָן, וּשְׁמוֹ מִיכָא; וְכֹל מוֹשַׁב בֵּית-צִיבָא, עֲבָדִים לִמְפִיבֹשֶׁת.    12 Now Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Mica. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.
9.13 יג  וּמְפִיבֹשֶׁת, יֹשֵׁב בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, כִּי עַל-שֻׁלְחַן הַמֶּלֶךְ תָּמִיד, הוּא אֹכֵל; וְהוּא פִסֵּחַ, שְׁתֵּי רַגְלָיו.  {פ}    13 But Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem; for he did eat continually at the king's table; and he was lame on both his feet. {P}
10.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיָּמָת, מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן; וַיִּמְלֹךְ חָנוּן בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.    1 And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.
10.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶעֱשֶׂה-חֶסֶד עִם-חָנוּן בֶּן-נָחָשׁ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אָבִיו עִמָּדִי חֶסֶד, וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד לְנַחֲמוֹ בְּיַד-עֲבָדָיו, אֶל-אָבִיו; וַיָּבֹאוּ עַבְדֵי דָוִד, אֶרֶץ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.    2 And David said: 'I will show kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father showed kindness unto me.' So David sent by the hand of his servants to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.
10.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ שָׂרֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן אֶל-חָנוּן אֲדֹנֵיהֶם, הַמְכַבֵּד דָּוִד אֶת-אָבִיךָ בְּעֵינֶיךָ--כִּי-שָׁלַח לְךָ, מְנַחֲמִים; הֲלוֹא בַּעֲבוּר חֲקֹר אֶת-הָעִיר, וּלְרַגְּלָהּ וּלְהָפְכָהּ, שָׁלַח דָּוִד אֶת-עֲבָדָיו, אֵלֶיךָ.    3 But the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord: 'Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? hath not David sent his servants unto thee to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?'
10.4 ד  וַיִּקַּח חָנוּן אֶת-עַבְדֵי דָוִד, וַיְגַלַּח אֶת-חֲצִי זְקָנָם, וַיִּכְרֹת אֶת-מַדְוֵיהֶם בַּחֵצִי, עַד שְׁתוֹתֵיהֶם; וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם.    4 So Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.
10.5 ה  וַיַּגִּדוּ לְדָוִד וַיִּשְׁלַח לִקְרָאתָם, כִּי-הָיוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים נִכְלָמִים מְאֹד; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁבוּ בִירֵחוֹ, עַד-יְצַמַּח זְקַנְכֶם וְשַׁבְתֶּם.    5 When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them; for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said: 'Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.'
10.6 ו  וַיִּרְאוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, כִּי נִבְאֲשׁוּ בְּדָוִד; וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן וַיִּשְׂכְּרוּ אֶת-אֲרַם בֵּית-רְחוֹב וְאֶת-אֲרַם צוֹבָא, עֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף רַגְלִי, וְאֶת-מֶלֶךְ מַעֲכָה אֶלֶף אִישׁ, וְאִישׁ טוֹב שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף אִישׁ.    6 And when the children of Ammon saw that they were become odious to David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Arameans of Beth-rehob, and the Arameans of Zobah, twenty thousand footmen, and the king of Maacah with a thousand men, and the men of Tob twelve thousand men.
10.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁמַע, דָּוִד; וַיִּשְׁלַח, אֶת-יוֹאָב, וְאֵת כָּל-הַצָּבָא, הַגִּבֹּרִים.    7 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.
10.8 ח  וַיֵּצְאוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וַיַּעַרְכוּ מִלְחָמָה פֶּתַח הַשָּׁעַר; וַאֲרַם צוֹבָא וּרְחוֹב וְאִישׁ-טוֹב וּמַעֲכָה, לְבַדָּם בַּשָּׂדֶה.    8 And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entrance of the gate; and the Arameans of Zobah, and of Rehob, and the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.
10.9 ט  וַיַּרְא יוֹאָב, כִּי-הָיְתָה אֵלָיו פְּנֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה, מִפָּנִים, וּמֵאָחוֹר; וַיִּבְחַר, מִכֹּל בְּחוּרֵי בישראל (יִשְׂרָאֵל), וַיַּעֲרֹךְ, לִקְרַאת אֲרָם.    9 Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Arameans;
10.10 י  וְאֵת, יֶתֶר הָעָם, נָתַן, בְּיַד אַבְשַׁי אָחִיו; וַיַּעֲרֹךְ, לִקְרַאת בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.    10 and the rest of the people he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother, and he put them in array against the children of Ammon.
10.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר, אִם-תֶּחֱזַק אֲרָם מִמֶּנִּי--וְהָיִתָה לִּי, לִישׁוּעָה; וְאִם-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן יֶחֶזְקוּ מִמְּךָ, וְהָלַכְתִּי לְהוֹשִׁיעַ לָךְ.    11 And he said: 'If the Arameans be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me, but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.
10.12 יב  חֲזַק וְנִתְחַזַּק בְּעַד-עַמֵּנוּ, וּבְעַד עָרֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וַיהוָה, יַעֲשֶׂה הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינָיו.    12 Be of good courage, and let us prove strong for our people, and for the cities of our God; and the LORD do that which seemeth Him good.'
10.13 יג  וַיִּגַּשׁ יוֹאָב, וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר עִמּוֹ, לַמִּלְחָמָה, בַּאֲרָם; וַיָּנֻסוּ, מִפָּנָיו.    13 So Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh unto the battle against the Arameans; and they fled before him.
10.14 יד  וּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן רָאוּ, כִּי-נָס אֲרָם, וַיָּנֻסוּ מִפְּנֵי אֲבִישַׁי, וַיָּבֹאוּ הָעִיר; וַיָּשָׁב יוֹאָב, מֵעַל בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וַיָּבֹא, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    14 And when the children of Ammon saw that the Arameans were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai, and entered into the city. Then Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.
10.15 טו  וַיַּרְא אֲרָם, כִּי נִגַּף לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּאָסְפוּ, יָחַד.    15 And when the Arameans saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they gathered themselves together.
10.16 טז  וַיִּשְׁלַח הֲדַדְעֶזֶר, וַיֹּצֵא אֶת-אֲרָם אֲשֶׁר מֵעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר, וַיָּבֹאוּ, חֵילָם; וְשׁוֹבַךְ שַׂר-צְבָא הֲדַדְעֶזֶר, לִפְנֵיהֶם.  {ס}    16 And Hadadezer sent, and brought out the Arameans that were beyond the River; and they came to Helam, with Shobach the captain of the host of Hadadezer at their head. {S}
10.17 יז  וַיֻּגַּד לְדָוִד, וַיֶּאֱסֹף אֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיַּעֲבֹר אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וַיָּבֹא, חֵלָאמָה; וַיַּעַרְכוּ אֲרָם לִקְרַאת דָּוִד, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ עִמּוֹ.    17 And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Arameans set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.
10.18 יח  וַיָּנָס אֲרָם, מִפְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּהֲרֹג דָּוִד מֵאֲרָם שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת רֶכֶב, וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף פָּרָשִׁים; וְאֵת שׁוֹבַךְ שַׂר-צְבָאוֹ הִכָּה, וַיָּמָת שָׁם.    18 And the Arameans fled before Israel; and David slew of the Arameans seven hundred drivers of chariots, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, so that he died there.
10.19 יט  וַיִּרְאוּ כָל-הַמְּלָכִים עַבְדֵי הֲדַדְעֶזֶר, כִּי נִגְּפוּ לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּשְׁלִמוּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעַבְדוּם; וַיִּרְאוּ אֲרָם, לְהוֹשִׁיעַ עוֹד אֶת-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.  {פ}    19 And when all the kings that were servants to Hadadezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Arameans feared to help the children of Ammon any more. {P}
11.1 א  וַיְהִי לִתְשׁוּבַת הַשָּׁנָה לְעֵת צֵאת הַמְּלָאכִים, וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד אֶת-יוֹאָב וְאֶת-עֲבָדָיו עִמּוֹ וְאֶת-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיַּשְׁחִתוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וַיָּצֻרוּ, עַל-רַבָּה; וְדָוִד, יוֹשֵׁב בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    1 And it came to pass, at the return of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem. {S}
11.2 ב  וַיְהִי לְעֵת הָעֶרֶב, וַיָּקָם דָּוִד מֵעַל מִשְׁכָּבוֹ וַיִּתְהַלֵּךְ עַל-גַּג בֵּית-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּרְא אִשָּׁה רֹחֶצֶת, מֵעַל הַגָּג; וְהָאִשָּׁה, טוֹבַת מַרְאֶה מְאֹד.    2 And it came to pass at eventide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house; and from the roof he saw a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.
11.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד, וַיִּדְרֹשׁ לָאִשָּׁה; וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲלוֹא-זֹאת בַּת-שֶׁבַע בַּת-אֱלִיעָם--אֵשֶׁת, אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי.    3 And David sent and inquired after the woman. And one said: 'Is not this Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?'
11.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד מַלְאָכִים וַיִּקָּחֶהָ, וַתָּבוֹא אֵלָיו וַיִּשְׁכַּב עִמָּהּ, וְהִיא מִתְקַדֶּשֶׁת, מִטֻּמְאָתָהּ; וַתָּשָׁב, אֶל-בֵּיתָהּ.    4 And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness; and she returned unto her house.
11.5 ה  וַתַּהַר, הָאִשָּׁה; וַתִּשְׁלַח וַתַּגֵּד לְדָוִד, וַתֹּאמֶר הָרָה אָנֹכִי.    5 And the woman conceived; and she sent and told David, and said: 'I am with child.'
11.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד, אֶל-יוֹאָב, שְׁלַח אֵלַי, אֶת-אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי; וַיִּשְׁלַח יוֹאָב אֶת-אוּרִיָּה, אֶל-דָּוִד.    6 And David sent to Joab[, saying]: 'Send me Uriah the Hittite.' And Joab sent Uriah to David.
11.7 ז  וַיָּבֹא אוּרִיָּה, אֵלָיו; וַיִּשְׁאַל דָּוִד, לִשְׁלוֹם יוֹאָב וְלִשְׁלוֹם הָעָם, וְלִשְׁלוֹם, הַמִּלְחָמָה.    7 And when Uriah was come unto him, David asked of him how Joab did, and how the people fared, and how the war prospered.
11.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לְאוּרִיָּה, רֵד לְבֵיתְךָ וּרְחַץ רַגְלֶיךָ; וַיֵּצֵא אוּרִיָּה מִבֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַתֵּצֵא אַחֲרָיו מַשְׂאַת הַמֶּלֶךְ.    8 And David said to Uriah: 'Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet.' And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a mess of food from the king.
11.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אוּרִיָּה, פֶּתַח בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת, כָּל-עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנָיו; וְלֹא יָרַד, אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ.    9 But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.
11.10 י  וַיַּגִּדוּ לְדָוִד לֵאמֹר, לֹא-יָרַד אוּרִיָּה אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אוּרִיָּה, הֲלוֹא מִדֶּרֶךְ אַתָּה בָא--מַדּוּעַ, לֹא-יָרַדְתָּ אֶל-בֵּיתֶךָ.    10 And when they had told David, saying: 'Uriah went not down unto his house', David said unto Uriah: 'Art thou not come from a journey? wherefore didst thou not go down unto thy house?'
11.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר אוּרִיָּה אֶל-דָּוִד, הָאָרוֹן וְיִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה יֹשְׁבִים בַּסֻּכּוֹת וַאדֹנִי יוֹאָב וְעַבְדֵי אֲדֹנִי עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה חֹנִים, וַאֲנִי אָבוֹא אֶל-בֵּיתִי לֶאֱכֹל וְלִשְׁתּוֹת, וְלִשְׁכַּב עִם-אִשְׁתִּי; חַיֶּךָ וְחֵי נַפְשֶׁךָ, אִם-אֶעֱשֶׂה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    11 And Uriah said unto David: 'The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in booths; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open field; shall I then go into my house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.'
11.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אוּרִיָּה, שֵׁב בָּזֶה גַּם-הַיּוֹם--וּמָחָר אֲשַׁלְּחֶךָּ; וַיֵּשֶׁב אוּרִיָּה בִירוּשָׁלִַם בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וּמִמָּחֳרָת.    12 And David said to Uriah: 'Tarry here to-day also, and to-morrow I will let thee depart.' So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow.
11.13 יג  וַיִּקְרָא-לוֹ דָוִד, וַיֹּאכַל לְפָנָיו וַיֵּשְׁתְּ--וַיְשַׁכְּרֵהוּ; וַיֵּצֵא בָעֶרֶב, לִשְׁכַּב בְּמִשְׁכָּבוֹ עִם-עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנָיו, וְאֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, לֹא יָרָד.    13 And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk; and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.
11.14 יד  וַיְהִי בַבֹּקֶר, וַיִּכְתֹּב דָּוִד סֵפֶר אֶל-יוֹאָב; וַיִּשְׁלַח, בְּיַד אוּרִיָּה.    14 And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.
11.15 טו  וַיִּכְתֹּב בַּסֵּפֶר, לֵאמֹר:  הָבוּ אֶת-אוּרִיָּה, אֶל-מוּל פְּנֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה הַחֲזָקָה, וְשַׁבְתֶּם מֵאַחֲרָיו, וְנִכָּה וָמֵת.  {ס}    15 And he wrote in the letter, saying: 'Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.' {S}
11.16 טז  וַיְהִי, בִּשְׁמוֹר יוֹאָב אֶל-הָעִיר; וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-אוּרִיָּה, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יָדַע, כִּי אַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל שָׁם.    16 And it came to pass, when Joab kept watch upon the city, that he assigned Uriah unto the place where he knew that valiant men were.
11.17 יז  וַיֵּצְאוּ אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ אֶת-יוֹאָב, וַיִּפֹּל מִן-הָעָם, מֵעַבְדֵי דָוִד; וַיָּמָת, גַּם אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי.    17 And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab; and there fell some of the people, even of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.
11.18 יח  וַיִּשְׁלַח, יוֹאָב; וַיַּגֵּד לְדָוִד, אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה.    18 Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;
11.19 יט  וַיְצַו אֶת-הַמַּלְאָךְ, לֵאמֹר:  כְּכַלּוֹתְךָ, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה--לְדַבֵּר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.    19 and he charged the messenger, saying: 'When thou hast made an end of telling all the things concerning the war unto the king,
11.20 כ  וְהָיָה, אִם-תַּעֲלֶה חֲמַת הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאָמַר לְךָ, מַדּוּעַ נִגַּשְׁתֶּם אֶל-הָעִיר לְהִלָּחֵם:  הֲלוֹא יְדַעְתֶּם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-יֹרוּ מֵעַל הַחוֹמָה.    20 it shall be that, if the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee: Wherefore went ye so nigh unto the city to fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?
11.21 כא  מִי-הִכָּה אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-יְרֻבֶּשֶׁת, הֲלוֹא-אִשָּׁה הִשְׁלִיכָה עָלָיו פֶּלַח רֶכֶב מֵעַל הַחוֹמָה וַיָּמָת בְּתֵבֵץ, לָמָּה נִגַּשְׁתֶּם, אֶל-הַחוֹמָה; וְאָמַרְתָּ--גַּם עַבְדְּךָ אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי, מֵת.    21 who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast an upper millstone upon him from the wall, that he died at Thebez? why went ye so nigh the wall? then shalt thou say: Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.'
11.22 כב  וַיֵּלֶךְ, הַמַּלְאָךְ; וַיָּבֹא וַיַּגֵּד לְדָוִד, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ יוֹאָב.    22 So the messenger went, and came and told David all that Joab had sent him for.
11.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמַּלְאָךְ, אֶל-דָּוִד, כִּי-גָבְרוּ עָלֵינוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיֵּצְאוּ אֵלֵינוּ הַשָּׂדֶה; וַנִּהְיֶה עֲלֵיהֶם, עַד-פֶּתַח הַשָּׁעַר.    23 And the messenger said unto David: 'The men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entrance of the gate.
11.24 כד  וַיֹּראוּ הַמּוֹרִאים אֶל-עֲבָדֶיךָ מֵעַל הַחוֹמָה, וַיָּמוּתוּ מֵעַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְגַם, עַבְדְּךָ אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי--מֵת.  {ס}    24 And the shooters shot at thy servants from off the wall; and some of the king's servants are dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.' {S}
11.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-הַמַּלְאָךְ, כֹּה-תֹאמַר אֶל-יוֹאָב אַל-יֵרַע בְּעֵינֶיךָ אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה--כִּי-כָזֹה וְכָזֶה, תֹּאכַל הֶחָרֶב; הַחֲזֵק מִלְחַמְתְּךָ אֶל-הָעִיר וְהָרְסָהּ, וְחַזְּקֵהוּ.    25 Then David said unto the messenger: 'Thus shalt thou say unto Joab: Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth in one manner or another; make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it; and encourage thou him.'
11.26 כו  וַתִּשְׁמַע אֵשֶׁת אוּרִיָּה, כִּי-מֵת אוּרִיָּה אִישָׁהּ; וַתִּסְפֹּד, עַל-בַּעְלָהּ.    26 And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she made lamentation for her husband.
11.27 כז  וַיַּעֲבֹר הָאֵבֶל, וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד וַיַּאַסְפָהּ אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ וַתְּהִי-לוֹ לְאִשָּׁה, וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, בֵּן; וַיֵּרַע הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה דָוִד, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.  {פ}    27 And when the mourning was past, David sent and took her home to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD. {P}
12.1 א  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה אֶת-נָתָן, אֶל-דָּוִד; וַיָּבֹא אֵלָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ שְׁנֵי אֲנָשִׁים הָיוּ בְּעִיר אֶחָת, אֶחָד עָשִׁיר, וְאֶחָד רָאשׁ.    1 And the LORD sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him: 'There were two men in one city: the one rich, and the other poor.
12.2 ב  לְעָשִׁיר, הָיָה צֹאן וּבָקָר--הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.    2 The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds;
12.3 ג  וְלָרָשׁ אֵין-כֹּל, כִּי אִם-כִּבְשָׂה אַחַת קְטַנָּה אֲשֶׁר קָנָה, וַיְחַיֶּהָ, וַתִּגְדַּל עִמּוֹ וְעִם-בָּנָיו יַחְדָּו; מִפִּתּוֹ תֹאכַל וּמִכֹּסוֹ תִשְׁתֶּה, וּבְחֵיקוֹ תִשְׁכָּב, וַתְּהִי-לוֹ, כְּבַת.    3 but the poor man had nothing save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and reared; and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own morsel, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.
12.4 ד  וַיָּבֹא הֵלֶךְ, לְאִישׁ הֶעָשִׁיר, וַיַּחְמֹל לָקַחַת מִצֹּאנוֹ וּמִבְּקָרוֹ, לַעֲשׂוֹת לָאֹרֵחַ הַבָּא-לוֹ; וַיִּקַּח, אֶת-כִּבְשַׂת הָאִישׁ הָרָאשׁ, וַיַּעֲשֶׂהָ, לָאִישׁ הַבָּא אֵלָיו.    4 And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him, but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.'
12.5 ה  וַיִּחַר-אַף דָּוִד בָּאִישׁ, מְאֹד; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-נָתָן, חַי-יְהוָה, כִּי בֶן-מָוֶת הָאִישׁ הָעֹשֶׂה זֹאת.    5 And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan: 'As the LORD liveth, the man that hath done this deserveth to die;
12.6 ו  וְאֶת-הַכִּבְשָׂה, יְשַׁלֵּם אַרְבַּעְתָּיִם:  עֵקֶב, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, וְעַל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-חָמָל.  {ס}    6 and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.' {S}
12.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר נָתָן אֶל-דָּוִד, אַתָּה הָאִישׁ;  {ס}  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָנֹכִי מְשַׁחְתִּיךָ לְמֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָנֹכִי הִצַּלְתִּיךָ, מִיַּד שָׁאוּל.    7 And Nathan said to David: 'Thou art the man. {S} Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;
12.8 ח  וָאֶתְּנָה לְךָ אֶת-בֵּית אֲדֹנֶיךָ, וְאֶת-נְשֵׁי אֲדֹנֶיךָ בְּחֵיקֶךָ, וָאֶתְּנָה לְךָ, אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה; וְאִם-מְעָט--וְאֹסִפָה לְּךָ, כָּהֵנָּה וְכָהֵנָּה.    8 and I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that were too little, then would I add unto thee so much more.
12.9 ט  מַדּוּעַ בָּזִיתָ אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בעינו (בְּעֵינַי), אֵת אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי הִכִּיתָ בַחֶרֶב, וְאֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ לָקַחְתָּ לְּךָ לְאִשָּׁה; וְאֹתוֹ הָרַגְתָּ, בְּחֶרֶב בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.    9 Wherefore hast thou despised the word of the LORD, to do that which is evil in My sight? Uriah the Hittite thou hast smitten with the sword, and his wife thou hast taken to be thy wife, and him thou hast slain with the sword of the children of Ammon.
12.10 י  וְעַתָּה, לֹא-תָסוּר חֶרֶב מִבֵּיתְךָ--עַד-עוֹלָם:  עֵקֶב, כִּי בְזִתָנִי, וַתִּקַּח אֶת-אֵשֶׁת אוּרִיָּה הַחִתִּי, לִהְיוֹת לְךָ לְאִשָּׁה.  {ס}    10 Now therefore, the sword shall never depart from thy house; because thou hast despised Me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife. {S}
12.11 יא  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מֵקִים עָלֶיךָ רָעָה מִבֵּיתֶךָ, וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶת-נָשֶׁיךָ לְעֵינֶיךָ, וְנָתַתִּי לְרֵעֶיךָ; וְשָׁכַב עִם-נָשֶׁיךָ, לְעֵינֵי הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ הַזֹּאת.    11 Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.
12.12 יב  כִּי אַתָּה, עָשִׂיתָ בַסָּתֶר; וַאֲנִי, אֶעֱשֶׂה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, נֶגֶד כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְנֶגֶד הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.  {ס}    12 For thou didst it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.' {S}
12.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-נָתָן, חָטָאתִי לַיהוָה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר נָתָן אֶל-דָּוִד, גַּם-יְהוָה הֶעֱבִיר חַטָּאתְךָ--לֹא תָמוּת.    13 And David said unto Nathan: 'I have sinned against the LORD.' {S} And Nathan said unto David: 'The LORD also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.
12.14 יד  אֶפֶס, כִּי-נִאֵץ נִאַצְתָּ אֶת-אֹיְבֵי יְהוָה, בַּדָּבָר, הַזֶּה; גַּם, הַבֵּן הַיִּלּוֹד לְךָ--מוֹת יָמוּת.    14 Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast greatly blasphemed the enemies of the LORD, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.'
12.15 טו  וַיֵּלֶךְ נָתָן, אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ; וַיִּגֹּף יְהוָה, אֶת-הַיֶּלֶד אֲשֶׁר יָלְדָה אֵשֶׁת-אוּרִיָּה לְדָוִד--וַיֵּאָנַשׁ.    15 And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bore unto David, and it was very sick.
12.16 טז  וַיְבַקֵּשׁ דָּוִד אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים, בְּעַד הַנָּעַר; וַיָּצָם דָּוִד צוֹם, וּבָא וְלָן וְשָׁכַב אָרְצָה.    16 David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and as often as he went in, he lay all night upon the earth.
12.17 יז  וַיָּקֻמוּ זִקְנֵי בֵיתוֹ, עָלָיו, לַהֲקִימוֹ, מִן-הָאָרֶץ; וְלֹא אָבָה, וְלֹא-בָרָא אִתָּם לָחֶם.    17 And the elders of his house arose, and stood beside him, to raise him up from the earth; but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.
12.18 יח  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וַיָּמָת הַיָּלֶד; וַיִּרְאוּ עַבְדֵי דָוִד לְהַגִּיד לוֹ כִּי-מֵת הַיֶּלֶד, כִּי אָמְרוּ הִנֵּה בִהְיוֹת הַיֶּלֶד חַי דִּבַּרְנוּ אֵלָיו וְלֹא-שָׁמַע בְּקוֹלֵנוּ, וְאֵיךְ נֹאמַר אֵלָיו מֵת הַיֶּלֶד, וְעָשָׂה רָעָה.    18 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead; for they said: 'Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spoke unto him, and he hearkened not unto our voice; how then shall we tell him that the child is dead, so that he do himself some harm?'
12.19 יט  וַיַּרְא דָּוִד, כִּי עֲבָדָיו מִתְלַחֲשִׁים, וַיָּבֶן דָּוִד, כִּי מֵת הַיָּלֶד; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-עֲבָדָיו הֲמֵת הַיֶּלֶד, וַיֹּאמְרוּ מֵת.    19 But when David saw that his servants whispered together, David perceived that the child was dead; and David said unto his servants: 'Is the child dead?' And they said: 'He is dead.'
12.20 כ  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד מֵהָאָרֶץ וַיִּרְחַץ וַיָּסֶךְ, וַיְחַלֵּף שִׂמְלֹתָו, וַיָּבֹא בֵית-יְהוָה, וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ; וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, וַיִּשְׁאַל, וַיָּשִׂימוּ לוֹ לֶחֶם וַיֹּאכַל.    20 Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel; and he came into the house of the LORD, and worshipped; then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat.
12.21 כא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ עֲבָדָיו אֵלָיו, מָה-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָה; בַּעֲבוּר הַיֶּלֶד חַי, צַמְתָּ וַתֵּבְךְּ, וְכַאֲשֶׁר מֵת הַיֶּלֶד, קַמְתָּ וַתֹּאכַל לָחֶם.    21 Then said his servants unto him: 'What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.'
12.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר--בְּעוֹד הַיֶּלֶד חַי, צַמְתִּי וָאֶבְכֶּה:  כִּי אָמַרְתִּי מִי יוֹדֵעַ, יחנני (וְחַנַּנִי) יְהוָה וְחַי הַיָּלֶד.    22 And he said: 'While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; for I said: Who knoweth whether the LORD will not be gracious to me, that the child may live?
12.23 כג  וְעַתָּה מֵת, לָמָּה זֶּה אֲנִי צָם--הַאוּכַל לַהֲשִׁיבוֹ, עוֹד:  אֲנִי הֹלֵךְ אֵלָיו, וְהוּא לֹא-יָשׁוּב אֵלָי.    23 But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he will not return to me.'
12.24 כד  וַיְנַחֵם דָּוִד, אֵת בַּת-שֶׁבַע אִשְׁתּוֹ, וַיָּבֹא אֵלֶיהָ, וַיִּשְׁכַּב עִמָּהּ; וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן, ויקרא (וַתִּקְרָא) אֶת-שְׁמוֹ שְׁלֹמֹה, וַיהוָה, אֲהֵבוֹ.    24 And David comforted Bath-sheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her; and she bore a son, and called his name Solomon. And the LORD loved him;
12.25 כה  וַיִּשְׁלַח, בְּיַד נָתָן הַנָּבִיא, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, יְדִידְיָהּ--בַּעֲבוּר, יְהוָה.  {פ}    25 and He sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and he called his name Jedidiah, for the LORD'S sake. {P}
12.26 כו  וַיִּלָּחֶם יוֹאָב, בְּרַבַּת בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן; וַיִּלְכֹּד, אֶת-עִיר הַמְּלוּכָה.    26 Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city.
12.27 כז  וַיִּשְׁלַח יוֹאָב מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-דָּוִד; וַיֹּאמֶר נִלְחַמְתִּי בְרַבָּה, גַּם-לָכַדְתִּי אֶת-עִיר הַמָּיִם.    27 And Joab sent messengers to David, and said: 'I have fought against Rabbah, yea, I have taken the city of waters.
12.28 כח  וְעַתָּה, אֱסֹף אֶת-יֶתֶר הָעָם, וַחֲנֵה עַל-הָעִיר, וְלָכְדָהּ:  פֶּן-אֶלְכֹּד אֲנִי אֶת-הָעִיר, וְנִקְרָא שְׁמִי עָלֶיהָ.    28 Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it; lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.'
12.29 כט  וַיֶּאֱסֹף דָּוִד אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, וַיֵּלֶךְ רַבָּתָה; וַיִּלָּחֶם בָּהּ, וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ.    29 And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.
12.30 ל  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-עֲטֶרֶת-מַלְכָּם מֵעַל רֹאשׁוֹ וּמִשְׁקָלָהּ כִּכַּר זָהָב, וְאֶבֶן יְקָרָה, וַתְּהִי, עַל-רֹאשׁ דָּוִד; וּשְׁלַל הָעִיר הוֹצִיא, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.    30 And he took the crown of Malcam from off his head; and the weight thereof was a talent of gold, and in it were precious stones; and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceeding much.
12.31 לא  וְאֶת-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ הוֹצִיא, וַיָּשֶׂם בַּמְּגֵרָה וּבַחֲרִצֵי הַבַּרְזֶל וּבְמַגְזְרֹת הַבַּרְזֶל וְהֶעֱבִיר אוֹתָם במלכן (בַּמַּלְבֵּן), וְכֵן יַעֲשֶׂה, לְכֹל עָרֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן; וַיָּשָׁב דָּוִד וְכָל-הָעָם, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}    31 And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brickkiln; and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem. {P}
13.1 א  וַיְהִי אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וּלְאַבְשָׁלוֹם בֶּן-דָּוִד אָחוֹת יָפָה--וּשְׁמָהּ תָּמָר; וַיֶּאֱהָבֶהָ, אַמְנוֹן בֶּן-דָּוִד.    1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.
13.2 ב  וַיֵּצֶר לְאַמְנוֹן לְהִתְחַלּוֹת, בַּעֲבוּר תָּמָר אֲחֹתוֹ--כִּי בְתוּלָה, הִיא; וַיִּפָּלֵא בְּעֵינֵי אַמְנוֹן, לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהּ מְאוּמָה.    2 And Amnon was so distressed that he fell sick because of his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and it seemed hard to Amnon to do any thing unto her.
13.3 ג  וּלְאַמְנוֹן רֵעַ, וּשְׁמוֹ יוֹנָדָב, בֶּן-שִׁמְעָה, אֲחִי דָוִד; וְיוֹנָדָב, אִישׁ חָכָם מְאֹד.    3 But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother; and Jonadab was a very subtle man.
13.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, מַדּוּעַ אַתָּה כָּכָה דַּל בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר--הֲלוֹא, תַּגִּיד לִי; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, אַמְנוֹן, אֶת-תָּמָר אֲחוֹת אַבְשָׁלֹם אָחִי, אֲנִי אֹהֵב.    4 And he said unto him: 'Why, O son of the king, art thou thus becoming leaner from day to day? wilt thou not tell me?' And Amnon said unto him: 'I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.'
13.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ יְהוֹנָדָב, שְׁכַב עַל-מִשְׁכָּבְךָ וְהִתְחָל; וּבָא אָבִיךָ לִרְאוֹתֶךָ, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו תָּבֹא נָא תָמָר אֲחוֹתִי וְתַבְרֵנִי לֶחֶם וְעָשְׂתָה לְעֵינַי אֶת-הַבִּרְיָה, לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר אֶרְאֶה, וְאָכַלְתִּי מִיָּדָהּ.    5 And Jonadab said unto him: 'Lay thee down on thy bed, and feign thyself sick; and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him: Let my sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and give me bread to eat, and dress the food in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.'
13.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁכַּב אַמְנוֹן, וַיִּתְחָל; וַיָּבֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ לִרְאוֹתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר אַמְנוֹן אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ תָּבוֹא-נָא תָּמָר אֲחֹתִי וּתְלַבֵּב לְעֵינַי שְׁתֵּי לְבִבוֹת, וְאֶבְרֶה, מִיָּדָהּ.    6 So Amnon lay down, and feigned himself sick; and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king: 'Let my sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand.'
13.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁלַח דָּוִד אֶל-תָּמָר, הַבַּיְתָה לֵאמֹר:  לְכִי נָא, בֵּית אַמְנוֹן אָחִיךְ, וַעֲשִׂי-לוֹ, הַבִּרְיָה.    7 Then David sent home to Tamar, saying: 'Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dress him food.'
13.8 ח  וַתֵּלֶךְ תָּמָר, בֵּית אַמְנוֹן אָחִיהָ--וְהוּא שֹׁכֵב; וַתִּקַּח אֶת-הַבָּצֵק ותלוש (וַתָּלָשׁ) וַתְּלַבֵּב לְעֵינָיו, וַתְּבַשֵּׁל אֶת-הַלְּבִבוֹת.    8 So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was lying down. And she took dough, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes.
13.9 ט  וַתִּקַּח אֶת-הַמַּשְׂרֵת וַתִּצֹק לְפָנָיו, וַיְמָאֵן לֶאֱכוֹל; וַיֹּאמֶר אַמְנוֹן, הוֹצִיאוּ כָל-אִישׁ מֵעָלַי, וַיֵּצְאוּ כָל-אִישׁ, מֵעָלָיו.    9 And she took the pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said: 'Have out all men from me.' And they went out every man from him.
13.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר אַמְנוֹן אֶל-תָּמָר, הָבִיאִי הַבִּרְיָה הַחֶדֶר, וְאֶבְרֶה, מִיָּדֵךְ; וַתִּקַּח תָּמָר, אֶת-הַלְּבִבוֹת אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂתָה, וַתָּבֵא לְאַמְנוֹן אָחִיהָ, הֶחָדְרָה.    10 And Amnon said unto Tamar: 'Bring the food into the chamber, that I may eat of thy hand.' And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.
13.11 יא  וַתַּגֵּשׁ אֵלָיו, לֶאֱכֹל; וַיַּחֲזֶק-בָּהּ וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ, בּוֹאִי שִׁכְבִי עִמִּי אֲחוֹתִי.    11 And when she had brought them near unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her: 'Come lie with me, my sister.'
13.12 יב  וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ, אַל-אָחִי אַל-תְּעַנֵּנִי--כִּי לֹא-יֵעָשֶׂה כֵן, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  אַל-תַּעֲשֵׂה, אֶת-הַנְּבָלָה הַזֹּאת.    12 And she answered him: 'Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel; do not thou this wanton deed.
13.13 יג  וַאֲנִי, אָנָה אוֹלִיךְ אֶת-חֶרְפָּתִי, וְאַתָּה תִּהְיֶה כְּאַחַד הַנְּבָלִים, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וְעַתָּה דַּבֶּר-נָא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, כִּי לֹא יִמְנָעֵנִי מִמֶּךָּ.    13 And I, whither shall I carry my shame? and as for thee, thou wilt be as one of the base men in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.'
13.14 יד  וְלֹא אָבָה, לִשְׁמֹעַ בְּקוֹלָהּ; וַיֶּחֱזַק מִמֶּנָּה וַיְעַנֶּהָ, וַיִּשְׁכַּב אֹתָהּ.    14 Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice; but being stronger than she, he forced her, and lay with her.
13.15 טו  וַיִּשְׂנָאֶהָ אַמְנוֹן, שִׂנְאָה גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד--כִּי גְדוֹלָה הַשִּׂנְאָה אֲשֶׁר שְׂנֵאָהּ, מֵאַהֲבָה אֲשֶׁר אֲהֵבָהּ; וַיֹּאמֶר-לָהּ אַמְנוֹן, קוּמִי לֵכִי.    15 Then Amnon hated her with exceeding great hatred; for the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her: 'Arise, be gone.'
13.16 טז  וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ, אַל-אוֹדֹת הָרָעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת, מֵאַחֶרֶת אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתָ עִמִּי, לְשַׁלְּחֵנִי; וְלֹא אָבָה, לִשְׁמֹעַ לָהּ.    16 And she said unto him: 'Not so, because this great wrong in putting me forth is worse than the other that thou didst unto me.' But he would not hearken unto her.
13.17 יז  וַיִּקְרָא, אֶת-נַעֲרוֹ מְשָׁרְתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁלְחוּ-נָא אֶת-זֹאת מֵעָלַי הַחוּצָה; וּנְעֹל הַדֶּלֶת, אַחֲרֶיהָ.    17 Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said: 'Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.'--
13.18 יח  וְעָלֶיהָ כְּתֹנֶת פַּסִּים, כִּי כֵן תִּלְבַּשְׁןָ בְנוֹת-הַמֶּלֶךְ הַבְּתוּלֹת מְעִילִים; וַיֹּצֵא אוֹתָהּ מְשָׁרְתוֹ הַחוּץ, וְנָעַל הַדֶּלֶת אַחֲרֶיהָ.    18 Now she had a garment of many colours upon her; for with such robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled.--And his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.
13.19 יט  וַתִּקַּח תָּמָר אֵפֶר עַל-רֹאשָׁהּ, וּכְתֹנֶת הַפַּסִּים אֲשֶׁר עָלֶיהָ קָרָעָה; וַתָּשֶׂם יָדָהּ עַל-רֹאשָׁהּ, וַתֵּלֶךְ הָלוֹךְ וְזָעָקָה.    19 And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of many colours that was on her; and she laid her hand on her head, and went her way, crying aloud as she went.
13.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ אַבְשָׁלוֹם אָחִיהָ, הַאֲמִינוֹן אָחִיךְ הָיָה עִמָּךְ, וְעַתָּה אֲחוֹתִי הַחֲרִישִׁי אָחִיךְ הוּא, אַל-תָּשִׁיתִי אֶת-לִבֵּךְ לַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַתֵּשֶׁב תָּמָר וְשֹׁמֵמָה, בֵּית אַבְשָׁלוֹם אָחִיהָ.    20 And Absalom her brother said unto her: 'Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but now hold thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; take not this thing to heart.' So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house.
13.21 כא  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד--שָׁמַע, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיִּחַר לוֹ, מְאֹד.    21 But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth.
13.22 כב  וְלֹא-דִבֶּר אַבְשָׁלוֹם עִם-אַמְנוֹן, לְמֵרָע וְעַד-טוֹב:  כִּי-שָׂנֵא אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶת-אַמְנוֹן, עַל-דְּבַר אֲשֶׁר עִנָּה, אֵת תָּמָר אֲחֹתוֹ.  {פ}    22 And Absalom spoke unto Amnon neither good nor bad; for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar. {P}
13.23 כג  וַיְהִי, לִשְׁנָתַיִם יָמִים, וַיִּהְיוּ גֹזְזִים לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם, בְּבַעַל חָצוֹר אֲשֶׁר עִם-אֶפְרָיִם; וַיִּקְרָא אַבְשָׁלוֹם, לְכָל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    23 And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheep-shearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside Ephraim; and Absalom invited all the king's sons.
13.24 כד  וַיָּבֹא אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה-נָא גֹזְזִים לְעַבְדֶּךָ; יֵלֶךְ-נָא הַמֶּלֶךְ וַעֲבָדָיו, עִם-עַבְדֶּךָ.    24 And Absalom came to the king, and said: 'Behold now, thy servant hath sheep-shearers; let the king, I pray thee, and his servants go with thy servant.'
13.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אַל-בְּנִי אַל-נָא נֵלֵךְ כֻּלָּנוּ, וְלֹא נִכְבַּד, עָלֶיךָ; וַיִּפְרָץ-בּוֹ וְלֹא-אָבָה לָלֶכֶת, וַיְבָרְכֵהוּ.    25 And the king said to Absalom: 'Nay, my son, let us not all go, lest we be burdensome unto thee.' And he pressed him; howbeit he would not go, but blessed him.
13.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, וָלֹא, יֵלֶךְ-נָא אִתָּנוּ אַמְנוֹן אָחִי; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָמָּה יֵלֵךְ עִמָּךְ.    26 Then said Absalom: 'If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us.' And the king said unto him: 'Why should he go with thee?'
13.27 כז  וַיִּפְרָץ-בּוֹ, אַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיִּשְׁלַח אִתּוֹ אֶת-אַמְנוֹן, וְאֵת כָּל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    27 But Absalom pressed him, and he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him. {S}
13.28 כח  וַיְצַו אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶת-נְעָרָיו לֵאמֹר, רְאוּ נָא כְּטוֹב לֵב-אַמְנוֹן בַּיַּיִן וְאָמַרְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם הַכּוּ אֶת-אַמְנוֹן וַהֲמִתֶּם אֹתוֹ--אַל-תִּירָאוּ:  הֲלוֹא, כִּי אָנֹכִי צִוִּיתִי אֶתְכֶם--חִזְקוּ, וִהְיוּ לִבְנֵי-חָיִל.    28 And Absalom commanded his servants, saying: 'Mark ye now, when Amnon's heart is merry with wine; and when I say unto you: Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not; have not I commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant.'
13.29 כט  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ נַעֲרֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם, לְאַמְנוֹן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה, אַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיָּקֻמוּ כָּל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּרְכְּבוּ אִישׁ עַל-פִּרְדּוֹ--וַיָּנֻסוּ.    29 And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose, and every man got him up upon his mule, and fled.
13.30 ל  וַיְהִי, הֵמָּה בַדֶּרֶךְ, וְהַשְּׁמֻעָה בָאָה, אֶל-דָּוִד לֵאמֹר:  הִכָּה אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶת-כָּל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְלֹא-נוֹתַר מֵהֶם אֶחָד.  {פ}    30 And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that the tidings came to David, saying: 'Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.' {P}
13.31 לא  וַיָּקָם הַמֶּלֶךְ וַיִּקְרַע אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וַיִּשְׁכַּב אָרְצָה; וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו נִצָּבִים, קְרֻעֵי בְגָדִים.  {ס}    31 Then the king arose, and rent his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent. {S}
13.32 לב  וַיַּעַן יוֹנָדָב בֶּן-שִׁמְעָה אֲחִי-דָוִד וַיֹּאמֶר, אַל-יֹאמַר אֲדֹנִי אֵת כָּל-הַנְּעָרִים בְּנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ הֵמִיתוּ--כִּי-אַמְנוֹן לְבַדּוֹ, מֵת:  כִּי-עַל-פִּי אַבְשָׁלוֹם, הָיְתָה שׂוּמָה, מִיּוֹם עַנֹּתוֹ, אֵת תָּמָר אֲחֹתוֹ.    32 And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother, answered and said: 'Let not my lord suppose that they have killed all the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead; for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.
13.33 לג  וְעַתָּה אַל-יָשֵׂם אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-לִבּוֹ, דָּבָר לֵאמֹר, כָּל-בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, מֵתוּ:  כִּי-אם (  ) אַמְנוֹן לְבַדּוֹ, מֵת.  {פ}    33 Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead; for Amnon only is dead.' {P}
13.34 לד  וַיִּבְרַח, אַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיִּשָּׂא הַנַּעַר הַצֹּפֶה, אֶת-עֵינָו, וַיַּרְא וְהִנֵּה עַם-רַב הֹלְכִים מִדֶּרֶךְ אַחֲרָיו, מִצַּד הָהָר.    34 But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people in a roundabout way by the hill-side.
13.35 לה  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹנָדָב אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, הִנֵּה בְנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ בָּאוּ:  כִּדְבַר עַבְדְּךָ, כֵּן הָיָה.    35 And Jonadab said unto the king: 'Behold, the king's sons are come; as thy servant said, so it is.'
13.36 לו  וַיְהִי כְּכַלֹּתוֹ לְדַבֵּר, וְהִנֵּה בְנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ בָּאוּ, וַיִּשְׂאוּ קוֹלָם, וַיִּבְכּוּ; וְגַם-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו, בָּכוּ, בְּכִי גָּדוֹל מְאֹד.    36 And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice, and wept; and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.
13.37 לז  וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם בָּרַח, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-תַּלְמַי בֶּן-עמיחור (עַמִּיהוּד) מֶלֶךְ גְּשׁוּר; וַיִּתְאַבֵּל עַל-בְּנוֹ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.    37 But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And [David] mourned for his son every day.
13.38 לח  וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם בָּרַח, וַיֵּלֶךְ גְּשׁוּר; וַיְהִי-שָׁם, שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים.    38 So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.
13.39 לט  וַתְּכַל דָּוִד הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָצֵאת אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם:  כִּי-נִחַם עַל-אַמְנוֹן, כִּי-מֵת.  {ס}    39 And the soul of king David failed with longing for Absalom; for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead. {S}
14.1 א  וַיֵּדַע, יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרֻיָה:  כִּי-לֵב הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    1 Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward Absalom.
14.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח יוֹאָב תְּקוֹעָה, וַיִּקַּח מִשָּׁם אִשָּׁה חֲכָמָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ הִתְאַבְּלִי-נָא וְלִבְשִׁי-נָא בִגְדֵי-אֵבֶל, וְאַל-תָּסוּכִי שֶׁמֶן, וְהָיִית, כְּאִשָּׁה זֶה יָמִים רַבִּים מִתְאַבֶּלֶת עַל-מֵת.    2 And Joab sent to Tekoa, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her: 'I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on mourning apparel, I pray thee, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead;
14.3 ג  וּבָאת, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְדִבַּרְתְּ אֵלָיו, כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיָּשֶׂם יוֹאָב אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים, בְּפִיהָ.    3 and go in to the king, and speak on this manner unto him.' So Joab put the words in her mouth.
14.4 ד  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה הַתְּקֹעִית, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַתִּפֹּל עַל-אַפֶּיהָ אַרְצָה, וַתִּשְׁתָּחוּ; וַתֹּאמֶר, הוֹשִׁעָה הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    4 And when the woman of Tekoa spoke to the king, she fell on her face to the ground, and prostrated herself, and said: 'Help, O king.' {S}
14.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר-לָהּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, מַה-לָּךְ; וַתֹּאמֶר, אֲבָל אִשָּׁה-אַלְמָנָה אָנִי--וַיָּמָת אִישִׁי.    5 And the king said unto her: 'What aileth thee?' And she answered: 'Of a truth I am a widow, my husband being dead.
14.6 ו  וּלְשִׁפְחָתְךָ, שְׁנֵי בָנִים, וַיִּנָּצוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם בַּשָּׂדֶה, וְאֵין מַצִּיל בֵּינֵיהֶם; וַיַּכּוֹ הָאֶחָד אֶת-הָאֶחָד, וַיָּמֶת אֹתוֹ.    6 And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other, and killed him.
14.7 ז  וְהִנֵּה קָמָה כָל-הַמִּשְׁפָּחָה עַל-שִׁפְחָתֶךָ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ תְּנִי אֶת-מַכֵּה אָחִיו וּנְמִתֵהוּ בְּנֶפֶשׁ אָחִיו אֲשֶׁר הָרָג, וְנַשְׁמִידָה, גַּם אֶת-הַיּוֹרֵשׁ; וְכִבּוּ, אֶת-גַּחַלְתִּי אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁאָרָה, לְבִלְתִּי שום- (שִׂים-) לְאִישִׁי שֵׁם וּשְׁאֵרִית, עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.  {פ}    7 And, behold, the whole family is risen against thy handmaid, and they said: Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him for the life of his brother whom he slew, and so destroy the heir also. Thus will they quench my coal which is left, and will leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the face of the earth.' {P}
14.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה, לְכִי לְבֵיתֵךְ; וַאֲנִי, אֲצַוֶּה עָלָיִךְ.    8 And the king said unto the woman: 'Go to thy house, and I will give charge concerning thee.'
14.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה הַתְּקוֹעִית, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עָלַי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ הֶעָוֺן, וְעַל-בֵּית אָבִי; וְהַמֶּלֶךְ וְכִסְאוֹ, נָקִי.  {ס}    9 And the woman of Tekoa said unto the king: 'My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house; and the king and his throne be guiltless.' {S}
14.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, הַמֶּלֶךְ:  הַמְדַבֵּר אֵלַיִךְ וַהֲבֵאתוֹ אֵלַי, וְלֹא-יֹסִיף עוֹד לָגַעַת בָּךְ.    10 And the king said: 'Whosoever saith aught unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.'
14.11 יא  וַתֹּאמֶר יִזְכָּר-נָא הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, מהרבית (מֵהַרְבַּת) גֹּאֵל הַדָּם לְשַׁחֵת, וְלֹא יַשְׁמִידוּ, אֶת-בְּנִי; וַיֹּאמֶר, חַי-יְהוָה, אִם-יִפֹּל מִשַּׂעֲרַת בְּנֵךְ, אָרְצָה.    11 Then said she: 'I pray thee, let the king remember the LORD thy God, that the avenger of blood destroy not any more, lest they destroy my son.' And he said: 'As the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.'
14.12 יב  וַתֹּאמֶר, הָאִשָּׁה, תְּדַבֶּר-נָא שִׁפְחָתְךָ אֶל-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, דָּבָר; וַיֹּאמֶר, דַּבֵּרִי.  {ס}    12 Then the woman said: 'Let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak a word unto my lord the king.' And he said: 'Say on.' {S}
14.13 יג  וַתֹּאמֶר, הָאִשָּׁה, וְלָמָּה חָשַׁבְתָּה כָּזֹאת, עַל-עַם אֱלֹהִים; וּמִדַּבֵּר הַמֶּלֶךְ הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, כְּאָשֵׁם, לְבִלְתִּי הָשִׁיב הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-נִדְּחוֹ.    13 And the woman said: 'Wherefore then hast thou devised such a thing against the people of God? for in speaking this word the king is as one that is guilty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished one.
14.14 יד  כִּי-מוֹת נָמוּת--וְכַמַּיִם הַנִּגָּרִים אַרְצָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא יֵאָסֵפוּ; וְלֹא-יִשָּׂא אֱלֹהִים, נֶפֶשׁ, וְחָשַׁב מַחֲשָׁבוֹת, לְבִלְתִּי יִדַּח מִמֶּנּוּ נִדָּח.    14 For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person; but let him devise means, that he that is banished be not an outcast from him.
14.15 טו  וְעַתָּה אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתִי לְדַבֵּר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲדֹנִי, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה--כִּי יֵרְאֻנִי, הָעָם; וַתֹּאמֶר שִׁפְחָתְךָ אֲדַבְּרָה-נָּא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אוּלַי יַעֲשֶׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-דְּבַר אֲמָתוֹ.    15 Now therefore seeing that I am come to speak this word unto my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid; and thy handmaid said: I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king will perform the request of his servant.
14.16 טז  כִּי יִשְׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְהַצִּיל אֶת-אֲמָתוֹ מִכַּף הָאִישׁ, לְהַשְׁמִיד אֹתִי וְאֶת-בְּנִי יַחַד, מִנַּחֲלַת אֱלֹהִים.    16 For the king will hear, to deliver his servant out of the hand of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God.
14.17 יז  וַתֹּאמֶר, שִׁפְחָתְךָ, יִהְיֶה-נָּא דְּבַר-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לִמְנֻחָה:  כִּי כְּמַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים, כֵּן אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ לִשְׁמֹעַ הַטּוֹב וְהָרָע, וַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, יְהִי עִמָּךְ.  {פ}    17 Then thy handmaid said: Let, I pray thee, the word of my lord the king be for my comfort; for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad; and the LORD thy God be with thee.' {P}
14.18 יח  וַיַּעַן הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה, אַל-נָא תְכַחֲדִי מִמֶּנִּי דָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁאֵל אֹתָךְ; וַתֹּאמֶר, הָאִשָּׁה, יְדַבֶּר-נָא, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    18 Then the king answered and said unto the woman: 'Hide not from me, I pray thee, aught that I shall ask thee.' And the woman said: 'Let my lord the king now speak.'
14.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, הֲיַד יוֹאָב אִתָּךְ בְּכָל-זֹאת; וַתַּעַן הָאִשָּׁה וַתֹּאמֶר חֵי-נַפְשְׁךָ אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אִם-אִשׁ לְהֵמִין וּלְהַשְׂמִיל, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ--כִּי-עַבְדְּךָ יוֹאָב הוּא צִוָּנִי, וְהוּא שָׂם בְּפִי שִׁפְחָתְךָ אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.    19 And the king said: 'Is the hand of Joab with thee in all this?' And the woman answered and said: 'As thy soul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from aught that my lord the king hath spoken; for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thy handmaid;
14.20 כ  לְבַעֲבוּר סַבֵּב אֶת-פְּנֵי הַדָּבָר, עָשָׂה עַבְדְּךָ יוֹאָב אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַאדֹנִי חָכָם, כְּחָכְמַת מַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים, לָדַעַת, אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בָּאָרֶץ.  {ס}    20 to change the face of the matter hath thy servant Joab done this thing; and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth.' {S}
14.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-יוֹאָב, הִנֵּה-נָא עָשִׂיתִי אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וְלֵךְ הָשֵׁב אֶת-הַנַּעַר, אֶת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    21 And the king said unto Joab: 'Behold now, I have granted this request; go therefore, bring the young man Absalom back.'
14.22 כב  וַיִּפֹּל יוֹאָב אֶל-פָּנָיו אַרְצָה וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ, וַיְבָרֶךְ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב הַיּוֹם יָדַע עַבְדְּךָ כִּי-מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-דְּבַר עבדו (עַבְדֶּךָ).    22 And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and prostrated himself, and blessed the king; and Joab said: 'To-day thy servant knoweth that I have found favour in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath performed the request of thy servant.'
14.23 כג  וַיָּקָם יוֹאָב, וַיֵּלֶךְ גְּשׁוּרָה; וַיָּבֵא אֶת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    23 So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. {S}
14.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ יִסֹּב אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, וּפָנַי לֹא יִרְאֶה; וַיִּסֹּב אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, וּפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ לֹא רָאָה.  {ס}    24 And the king said: 'Let him turn to his own house, but let him not see my face.' So Absalom turned to his own house, and saw not the king's face. {S}
14.25 כה  וּכְאַבְשָׁלוֹם, לֹא-הָיָה אִישׁ-יָפֶה בְּכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְהַלֵּל מְאֹד:  מִכַּף רַגְלוֹ וְעַד קָדְקֳדוֹ, לֹא-הָיָה בוֹ מוּם.    25 Now in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty; from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
14.26 כו  וּבְגַלְּחוֹ, אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְהָיָה מִקֵּץ יָמִים לַיָּמִים אֲשֶׁר יְגַלֵּחַ, כִּי-כָבֵד עָלָיו וְגִלְּחוֹ; וְשָׁקַל אֶת-שְׂעַר רֹאשׁוֹ, מָאתַיִם שְׁקָלִים בְּאֶבֶן הַמֶּלֶךְ.    26 And when he polled his head--now it was at every year's end that he polled it; because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he polled it--he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels, after the king's weight.
14.27 כז  וַיִּוָּלְדוּ לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם שְׁלוֹשָׁה בָנִים, וּבַת אַחַת וּשְׁמָהּ תָּמָר; הִיא הָיְתָה, אִשָּׁה יְפַת מַרְאֶה.  {פ}    27 And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar; she was a woman of a fair countenance. {P}
14.28 כח  וַיֵּשֶׁב אַבְשָׁלוֹם בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, שְׁנָתַיִם יָמִים; וּפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֹא רָאָה.    28 And Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem; and he saw not the kings face.
14.29 כט  וַיִּשְׁלַח אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶל-יוֹאָב, לִשְׁלֹחַ אֹתוֹ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְלֹא אָבָה, לָבוֹא אֵלָיו; וַיִּשְׁלַח עוֹד שֵׁנִית, וְלֹא אָבָה לָבוֹא.    29 Then Absalom sent for Joab, to send him to the king; but he would not come to him; and he sent again a second time, but he would not come.
14.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-עֲבָדָיו רְאוּ חֶלְקַת יוֹאָב אֶל-יָדִי, וְלוֹ-שָׁם שְׂעֹרִים--לְכוּ, והוצתיה (וְהַצִּיתוּהָ) בָאֵשׁ; וַיַּצִּתוּ עַבְדֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶת-הַחֶלְקָה--בָּאֵשׁ.  {פ}    30 Therefore he said unto his servants: 'See, Joab's field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire.' And Absalom's servants set the field on fire. {P}
14.31 לא  וַיָּקָם יוֹאָב, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם הַבָּיְתָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, לָמָּה הִצִּיתוּ עֲבָדֶיךָ אֶת-הַחֶלְקָה אֲשֶׁר-לִי בָּאֵשׁ.    31 Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him: 'Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?'
14.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶל-יוֹאָב הִנֵּה שָׁלַחְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר בֹּא הֵנָּה וְאֶשְׁלְחָה אֹתְךָ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, לָמָּה בָּאתִי מִגְּשׁוּר--טוֹב לִי, עֹד אֲנִי-שָׁם; וְעַתָּה, אֶרְאֶה פְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאִם-יֶשׁ-בִּי עָוֺן, וֶהֱמִתָנִי.    32 And Absalom answered Joab: 'Behold, I sent unto thee, saying: Come hither, that I may send thee to the king, to say: Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it were better for me to be there still; now therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be iniquity in me, let him kill me.'
14.33 לג  וַיָּבֹא יוֹאָב אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ, וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם וַיָּבֹא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לוֹ עַל-אַפָּיו אַרְצָה לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּשַּׁק הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם.  {ס}    33 So Joab came to the king, and told him; and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king; and the king kissed Absalom. {S}
15.1 א  וַיְהִי, מֵאַחֲרֵי כֵן, וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ אַבְשָׁלוֹם, מֶרְכָּבָה וְסֻסִים; וַחֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ, רָצִים לְפָנָיו.    1 And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him a chariot and horses, and fifty men to run before him.
15.2 ב  וְהִשְׁכִּים, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, וְעָמַד, עַל-יַד דֶּרֶךְ הַשָּׁעַר; וַיְהִי כָּל-הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ-רִיב לָבוֹא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ לַמִּשְׁפָּט, וַיִּקְרָא אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֵלָיו וַיֹּאמֶר אֵי-מִזֶּה עִיר אַתָּה, וַיֹּאמֶר, מֵאַחַד שִׁבְטֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל עַבְדֶּךָ.    2 And Absalom used to rise up early, and stand beside the way of the gate; and it was so, that when any man had a suit which should come to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said: 'Of what city art thou?' And he said: 'Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.'
15.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אַבְשָׁלוֹם, רְאֵה דְבָרֶיךָ טוֹבִים וּנְכֹחִים; וְשֹׁמֵעַ אֵין-לְךָ, מֵאֵת הַמֶּלֶךְ.    3 And Absalom said unto him: 'See, thy matters are good and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.'
15.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, מִי-יְשִׂמֵנִי שֹׁפֵט, בָּאָרֶץ; וְעָלַי, יָבוֹא כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ-רִיב וּמִשְׁפָּט--וְהִצְדַּקְתִּיו.    4 Absalom said moreover: 'Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man who hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice!'
15.5 ה  וְהָיָה, בִּקְרָב-אִישׁ, לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת, לוֹ; וְשָׁלַח אֶת-יָדוֹ וְהֶחֱזִיק לוֹ, וְנָשַׁק לוֹ.    5 And it was so, that when any man came nigh to prostrate himself before him, he put forth his hand, and took hold of him, and kissed him.
15.6 ו  וַיַּעַשׂ אַבְשָׁלוֹם כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-יָבֹאוּ לַמִּשְׁפָּט, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיְגַנֵּב, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶת-לֵב, אַנְשֵׁי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    6 And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king for judgment; so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. {P}
15.7 ז  וַיְהִי, מִקֵּץ אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵלְכָה נָּא וַאֲשַׁלֵּם אֶת-נִדְרִי אֲשֶׁר-נָדַרְתִּי לַיהוָה, בְּחֶבְרוֹן.    7 And it came to pass at the end of forty years, that Absalom said unto the king: 'I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the LORD, in Hebron.
15.8 ח  כִּי-נֵדֶר נָדַר עַבְדְּךָ, בְּשִׁבְתִּי בִגְשׁוּר בַּאֲרָם לֵאמֹר:  אִם-ישיב (יָשׁוֹב) יְשִׁיבֵנִי יְהוָה יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְעָבַדְתִּי אֶת-יְהוָה.    8 For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Aram, saying: If the LORD shall indeed bring me back to Jerusalem, then I will serve the LORD.'
15.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר-לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֵךְ בְּשָׁלוֹם; וַיָּקָם, וַיֵּלֶךְ חֶבְרוֹנָה.  {פ}    9 And the king said unto him: 'Go in peace.' So he arose, and went to Hebron. {P}
15.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלַח אַבְשָׁלוֹם מְרַגְּלִים, בְּכָל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  כְּשָׁמְעֲכֶם, אֶת-קוֹל הַשֹּׁפָר, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, מָלַךְ אַבְשָׁלוֹם בְּחֶבְרוֹן.    10 But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying: 'As soon as ye hear the sound of the horn, then ye shall say: Absalom is king in Hebron.'
15.11 יא  וְאֶת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, הָלְכוּ מָאתַיִם אִישׁ מִירוּשָׁלִַם, קְרֻאִים, וְהֹלְכִים לְתֻמָּם; וְלֹא יָדְעוּ, כָּל-דָּבָר.    11 And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were invited, and went in their simplicity; and they knew not any thing.
15.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁלַח אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶת-אֲחִיתֹפֶל הַגִּילֹנִי יוֹעֵץ דָּוִד, מֵעִירוֹ מִגִּלֹה, בְּזָבְחוֹ, אֶת-הַזְּבָחִים; וַיְהִי הַקֶּשֶׁר אַמִּץ, וְהָעָם הוֹלֵךְ וָרָב אֶת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    12 And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counsellor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered the sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom.
15.13 יג  וַיָּבֹא, הַמַּגִּיד, אֶל-דָּוִד, לֵאמֹר:  הָיָה לֶב-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַחֲרֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    13 And there came a messenger to David, saying: 'The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.'
15.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לְכָל-עֲבָדָיו אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ בִירוּשָׁלִַם, קוּמוּ וְנִבְרָחָה--כִּי לֹא-תִהְיֶה-לָּנוּ פְלֵיטָה, מִפְּנֵי אַבְשָׁלֹם; מַהֲרוּ לָלֶכֶת, פֶּן-יְמַהֵר וְהִשִּׂגָנוּ וְהִדִּיחַ עָלֵינוּ אֶת-הָרָעָה, וְהִכָּה הָעִיר, לְפִי-חָרֶב.    14 And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem: 'Arise, and let us flee; for else none of us shall escape from Absalom; make speed to depart, lest he overtake us quickly, and bring down evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.'
15.15 טו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ עַבְדֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִבְחַר אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, הִנֵּה עֲבָדֶיךָ.    15 And the king's servants said unto the king: 'Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall choose.'
15.16 טז  וַיֵּצֵא הַמֶּלֶךְ וְכָל-בֵּיתוֹ, בְּרַגְלָיו; וַיַּעֲזֹב הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת עֶשֶׂר נָשִׁים פִּלַגְשִׁים--לִשְׁמֹר הַבָּיִת.    16 And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the king left ten women, that were concubines, to keep the house.
15.17 יז  וַיֵּצֵא הַמֶּלֶךְ וְכָל-הָעָם, בְּרַגְלָיו; וַיַּעַמְדוּ, בֵּית הַמֶּרְחָק.    17 And the king went forth, and all the people after him; and they tarried in Beth-merhak.
15.18 יח  וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו עֹבְרִים עַל-יָדוֹ, וְכָל-הַכְּרֵתִי וְכָל-הַפְּלֵתִי; וְכָל-הַגִּתִּים שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ בְרַגְלוֹ מִגַּת, עֹבְרִים, עַל-פְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    18 And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men that came after him from Gath, passed on before the king. {S}
15.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-אִתַּי הַגִּתִּי, לָמָּה תֵלֵךְ גַּם-אַתָּה אִתָּנוּ; שׁוּב וְשֵׁב עִם-הַמֶּלֶךְ כִּי-נָכְרִי אַתָּה, וְגַם-גֹּלֶה אַתָּה לִמְקוֹמֶךָ.    19 Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite: 'Wherefore goest thou also with us? return, and abide with the king; for thou art a foreigner, and also an exile from thine own place.
15.20 כ  תְּמוֹל בּוֹאֶךָ, וְהַיּוֹם אנועך (אֲנִיעֲךָ) עִמָּנוּ לָלֶכֶת, וַאֲנִי הוֹלֵךְ, עַל אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי הוֹלֵךְ; שׁוּב וְהָשֵׁב אֶת-אַחֶיךָ עִמָּךְ, חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת.    20 Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us, seeing I go whither I may? return thou, and take back thy brethren with thee in kindness and truth.'
15.21 כא  וַיַּעַן אִתַּי אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמַר:  חַי-יְהוָה, וְחֵי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, כִּי אם (  ) בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה-שָּׁם אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אִם-לְמָוֶת אִם-לְחַיִּים, כִּי-שָׁם יִהְיֶה עַבְדֶּךָ.    21 And Ittai answered the king, and said: 'As the LORD liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life, even there also will thy servant be.'
15.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אִתַּי, לֵךְ וַעֲבֹר; וַיַּעֲבֹר אִתַּי הַגִּתִּי, וְכָל-אֲנָשָׁיו, וְכָל-הַטַּף, אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ.    22 And David said to Ittai: 'Go and pass over.' And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with him.
15.23 כג  וְכָל-הָאָרֶץ, בּוֹכִים קוֹל גָּדוֹל, וְכָל-הָעָם, עֹבְרִים; וְהַמֶּלֶךְ, עֹבֵר בְּנַחַל קִדְרוֹן, וְכָל-הָעָם עֹבְרִים, עַל-פְּנֵי-דֶרֶךְ אֶת-הַמִּדְבָּר.    23 And all the country wept with a loud voice, as all the people passed over; and as the king passed over the brook Kidron, all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.
15.24 כד  וְהִנֵּה גַם-צָדוֹק וְכָל-הַלְוִיִּם אִתּוֹ, נֹשְׂאִים אֶת-אֲרוֹן בְּרִית הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיַּצִּקוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיַּעַל אֶבְיָתָר--עַד-תֹּם כָּל-הָעָם, לַעֲבוֹר מִן-הָעִיר.  {ס}    24 And, lo, Zadok also came, and all the Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God; and they set down the ark of God--but Abiathar went up--until all the people had done passing out of the city. {S}
15.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ לְצָדוֹק, הָשֵׁב אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים הָעִיר:  אִם-אֶמְצָא חֵן, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--וֶהֱשִׁבַנִי, וְהִרְאַנִי אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-נָוֵהוּ.    25 And the king said unto Zadok: 'Carry back the ark of God into the city; if I shall find favour in the eyes of the LORD, He will bring me back, and show me both it, and His habitation;
15.26 כו  וְאִם כֹּה יֹאמַר, לֹא חָפַצְתִּי בָּךְ:  הִנְנִי--יַעֲשֶׂה-לִּי, כַּאֲשֶׁר טוֹב בְּעֵינָיו.  {ס}    26 but if He say thus: I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let Him do to me as seemeth good unto Him.' {S}
15.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-צָדוֹק הַכֹּהֵן, הֲרוֹאֶה אַתָּה, שֻׁבָה הָעִיר בְּשָׁלוֹם; וַאֲחִימַעַץ בִּנְךָ וִיהוֹנָתָן בֶּן-אֶבְיָתָר, שְׁנֵי בְנֵיכֶם--אִתְּכֶם.    27 The king said also unto Zadok the priest: 'Seest thou? return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.
15.28 כח  רְאוּ אָנֹכִי מִתְמַהְמֵהַּ, בעברות (בְּעַרְבוֹת) הַמִּדְבָּר--עַד בּוֹא דָבָר מֵעִמָּכֶם, לְהַגִּיד לִי.    28 See, I will tarry in the plains of the wilderness, until there come word from you to announce unto me.'
15.29 כט  וַיָּשֶׁב צָדוֹק וְאֶבְיָתָר אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָאֱלֹהִים, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, שָׁם.    29 Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God back to Jerusalem; and they abode there.
15.30 ל  וְדָוִד עֹלֶה בְמַעֲלֵה הַזֵּיתִים עֹלֶה וּבוֹכֶה, וְרֹאשׁ לוֹ חָפוּי, וְהוּא, הֹלֵךְ יָחֵף; וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, חָפוּ אִישׁ רֹאשׁוֹ, וְעָלוּ עָלֹה, וּבָכֹה.    30 And David went up by the ascent of the mount of Olives, and wept as he went up; and he had his head covered, and went barefoot; and all the people that were with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.
15.31 לא  וְדָוִד הִגִּיד לֵאמֹר, אֲחִיתֹפֶל בַּקֹּשְׁרִים עִם-אַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, סַכֶּל-נָא אֶת-עֲצַת אֲחִיתֹפֶל יְהוָה.    31 And one told David, saying: 'Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom.' And David said: 'O LORD, I pray Thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.'
15.32 לב  וַיְהִי דָוִד בָּא עַד-הָרֹאשׁ, אֲשֶׁר-יִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה שָׁם לֵאלֹהִים; וְהִנֵּה לִקְרָאתוֹ, חוּשַׁי הָאַרְכִּי, קָרוּעַ כֻּתָּנְתּוֹ, וַאֲדָמָה עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ.    32 And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the ascent, where God was wont to be worshipped, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head.
15.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, דָּוִד:  אִם עָבַרְתָּ אִתִּי, וְהָיִתָ עָלַי לְמַשָּׂא.    33 And David said unto him: 'If thou passest on with me, then thou wilt be a burden unto Me;
15.34 לד  וְאִם-הָעִיר תָּשׁוּב, וְאָמַרְתָּ לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם עַבְדְּךָ אֲנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶהְיֶה--עֶבֶד אָבִיךָ וַאֲנִי מֵאָז, וְעַתָּה וַאֲנִי עַבְדֶּךָ; וְהֵפַרְתָּה לִי, אֵת עֲצַת אֲחִיתֹפֶל.    34 but if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom: I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father's servant in time past, so will I now be thy servant; then wilt thou defeat for me the counsel of Ahithophel.
15.35 לה  וַהֲלוֹא עִמְּךָ שָׁם, צָדוֹק וְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֲנִים; וְהָיָה, כָּל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁמַע מִבֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ--תַּגִּיד, לְצָדוֹק וּלְאֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֲנִים.    35 And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests? therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.
15.36 לו  הִנֵּה-שָׁם עִמָּם, שְׁנֵי בְנֵיהֶם--אֲחִימַעַץ לְצָדוֹק, וִיהוֹנָתָן לְאֶבְיָתָר; וּשְׁלַחְתֶּם בְּיָדָם אֵלַי, כָּל-דָּבָר אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁמָעוּ.    36 Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye shall hear.'
15.37 לז  וַיָּבֹא חוּשַׁי רֵעֶה דָוִד, הָעִיר; וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם, יָבוֹא יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    37 So Hushai David's friend came into the city; and Absalom was at the point of coming into Jerusalem. {S}
16.1 א  וְדָוִד, עָבַר מְעַט מֵהָרֹאשׁ, וְהִנֵּה צִיבָא נַעַר מְפִיבֹשֶׁת, לִקְרָאתוֹ; וְצֶמֶד חֲמֹרִים חֲבֻשִׁים, וַעֲלֵיהֶם מָאתַיִם לֶחֶם וּמֵאָה צִמּוּקִים וּמֵאָה קַיִץ--וְנֵבֶל יָיִן.    1 And when David was a little past the top, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and a hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine.
16.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-צִיבָא, מָה-אֵלֶּה לָּךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר צִיבָא הַחֲמוֹרִים לְבֵית-הַמֶּלֶךְ לִרְכֹּב, ולהלחם (וְהַלֶּחֶם) וְהַקַּיִץ לֶאֱכוֹל הַנְּעָרִים, וְהַיַּיִן, לִשְׁתּוֹת הַיָּעֵף בַּמִּדְבָּר.    2 And the king said unto Ziba: 'What meanest thou by these?' And Ziba said: 'The asses are for the king's household to ride on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as are faint in the wilderness may drink.'
16.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאַיֵּה בֶּן-אֲדֹנֶיךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר צִיבָא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, הִנֵּה יוֹשֵׁב בִּירוּשָׁלִַם--כִּי אָמַר, הַיּוֹם יָשִׁיבוּ לִי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל אֵת מַמְלְכוּת אָבִי.    3 And the king said: 'And where is thy master's son?' And Ziba said unto the king: 'Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem; for he said: To-day will the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.'
16.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְצִבָא, הִנֵּה לְךָ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר לִמְפִיבֹשֶׁת; וַיֹּאמֶר צִיבָא הִשְׁתַּחֲוֵיתִי, אֶמְצָא-חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    4 Then said the king to Ziba: 'Behold, thine is all that pertaineth unto Mephibosheth.' And Ziba said: 'I prostrate myself; let me find favour in thy sight, my lord, O king.'
16.5 ה  וּבָא הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, עַד-בַּחוּרִים; וְהִנֵּה מִשָּׁם אִישׁ יוֹצֵא מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת בֵּית-שָׁאוּל, וּשְׁמוֹ שִׁמְעִי בֶן-גֵּרָא, יֹצֵא יָצוֹא, וּמְקַלֵּל.    5 And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, there came out thence a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera; he came out, and kept on cursing as he came.
16.6 ו  וַיְסַקֵּל בָּאֲבָנִים אֶת-דָּוִד, וְאֶת-כָּל-עַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד; וְכָל-הָעָם, וְכָל-הַגִּבֹּרִים, מִימִינוֹ, וּמִשְּׂמֹאלוֹ.    6 And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David; and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left.
16.7 ז  וְכֹה-אָמַר שִׁמְעִי, בְּקַלְלוֹ; צֵא צֵא אִישׁ הַדָּמִים, וְאִישׁ הַבְּלִיָּעַל.    7 And thus said Shimei when he cursed: 'Begone, begone, thou man of blood, and base fellow;
16.8 ח  הֵשִׁיב עָלֶיךָ יְהוָה כֹּל דְּמֵי בֵית-שָׁאוּל, אֲשֶׁר מָלַכְתָּ תַּחְתָּו, וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה אֶת-הַמְּלוּכָה, בְּיַד אַבְשָׁלוֹם בְּנֶךָ; וְהִנְּךָ, בְּרָעָתֶךָ, כִּי אִישׁ דָּמִים, אָתָּה.    8 the LORD hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son; and, behold, thou art taken in thine own mischief, because thou art a man of blood.'
16.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲבִישַׁי בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָמָּה יְקַלֵּל הַכֶּלֶב הַמֵּת הַזֶּה, אֶת-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ; אֶעְבְּרָה-נָּא, וְאָסִירָה אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ.  {ס}    9 Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king: 'Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head.' {S}
16.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, מַה-לִּי וְלָכֶם בְּנֵי צְרֻיָה; כי (כֹּה) יְקַלֵּל, וכי (כִּי) יְהוָה אָמַר לוֹ קַלֵּל אֶת-דָּוִד, וּמִי יֹאמַר, מַדּוּעַ עָשִׂיתָה כֵּן.  {ס}    10 And the king said: 'What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? So let him curse, because the LORD hath said unto him: Curse David; who then shall say: Wherefore hast thou done so?' {S}
16.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-אֲבִישַׁי וְאֶל-כָּל-עֲבָדָיו, הִנֵּה בְנִי אֲשֶׁר-יָצָא מִמֵּעַי מְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-נַפְשִׁי; וְאַף כִּי-עַתָּה בֶּן-הַיְמִינִי, הַנִּחוּ לוֹ וִיקַלֵּל--כִּי אָמַר-לוֹ, יְהוָה.    11 And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants: 'Behold, my son, who came forth of my body, seeketh my life; how much more this Benjamite now? let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD hath bidden him.
16.12 יב  אוּלַי יִרְאֶה יְהוָה, בעוני (בְּעֵינִי); וְהֵשִׁיב יְהוָה לִי טוֹבָה, תַּחַת קִלְלָתוֹ הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    12 It may be that the LORD will look on mine eye, and that the LORD will requite me good for his cursing of me this day.'
16.13 יג  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד וַאֲנָשָׁיו, בַּדָּרֶךְ;  {ס}  וְשִׁמְעִי הֹלֵךְ בְּצֵלַע הָהָר לְעֻמָּתוֹ, הָלוֹךְ וַיְקַלֵּל, וַיְסַקֵּל בָּאֲבָנִים לְעֻמָּתוֹ, וְעִפַּר בֶּעָפָר.  {פ}    13 So David and his men went by the way; {S} and Shimei went along on the hill-side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust. {P}
16.14 יד  וַיָּבֹא הַמֶּלֶךְ וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, עֲיֵפִים; וַיִּנָּפֵשׁ, שָׁם.    14 And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary; and he refreshed himself there.
16.15 טו  וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם, וְכָל-הָעָם אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּאוּ, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַאֲחִיתֹפֶל, אִתּוֹ.    15 And Absalom, and all the people, the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.
16.16 טז  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר-בָּא חוּשַׁי הָאַרְכִּי רֵעֶה דָוִד--אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר חוּשַׁי אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ יְחִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    16 And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom: 'Long live the king, long live the king.'
16.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶל-חוּשַׁי, זֶה חַסְדְּךָ אֶת-רֵעֶךָ; לָמָּה לֹא-הָלַכְתָּ, אֶת-רֵעֶךָ.    17 And Absalom said to Hushai: 'Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?'
16.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר חוּשַׁי, אֶל-אַבְשָׁלֹם, לֹא, כִּי אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר יְהוָה וְהָעָם הַזֶּה וְכָל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל--לא (לוֹ) אֶהְיֶה, וְאִתּוֹ אֵשֵׁב.    18 And Hushai said unto Absalom: 'Nay; but whom the LORD, and this people, and all the men of Israel have chosen, his will I be, and with him will I abide.
16.19 יט  וְהַשֵּׁנִית, לְמִי אֲנִי אֶעֱבֹד--הֲלוֹא, לִפְנֵי בְנוֹ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר עָבַדְתִּי לִפְנֵי אָבִיךָ, כֵּן אֶהְיֶה לִפָנֶיךָ.  {פ}    19 And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father's presence, so will I be in thy presence.' {P}
16.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶל-אֲחִיתֹפֶל:  הָבוּ לָכֶם עֵצָה, מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה.    20 Then said Absalom to Ahithophel: 'Give your counsel what we shall do.'
16.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲחִיתֹפֶל, אֶל-אַבְשָׁלֹם, בּוֹא אֶל-פִּלַגְשֵׁי אָבִיךָ, אֲשֶׁר הִנִּיחַ לִשְׁמוֹר הַבָּיִת; וְשָׁמַע כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי-נִבְאַשְׁתָּ אֶת-אָבִיךָ, וְחָזְקוּ, יְדֵי כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אִתָּךְ.    21 And Ahithophel said unto Absalom: 'Go in unto thy father's concubines, that he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel will hear that thou art abhorred of thy father; then will the hands of all that are with thee be strong.'
16.22 כב  וַיַּטּוּ לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם הָאֹהֶל, עַל-הַגָּג; וַיָּבֹא אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶל-פִּלַגְשֵׁי אָבִיו, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    22 So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.--
16.23 כג  וַעֲצַת אֲחִיתֹפֶל, אֲשֶׁר יָעַץ בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִשְׁאַל-    (אִישׁ), בִּדְבַר הָאֱלֹהִים; כֵּן כָּל-עֲצַת אֲחִיתֹפֶל, גַּם-לְדָוִד גַּם לְאַבְשָׁלֹם.  {ס}    23 Now the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, was as if a man inquired of the word of God; so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom. {S}
17.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲחִיתֹפֶל, אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם:  אֶבְחֲרָה נָּא, שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף אִישׁ, וְאָקוּמָה וְאֶרְדְּפָה אַחֲרֵי-דָוִד, הַלָּיְלָה.    1 Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom: 'Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night;
17.2 ב  וְאָבוֹא עָלָיו, וְהוּא יָגֵעַ וּרְפֵה יָדַיִם, וְהַחֲרַדְתִּי אֹתוֹ, וְנָס כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ; וְהִכֵּיתִי אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְבַדּוֹ.    2 and I will come upon him while he is weary and weak-handed, and will make him afraid; and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only;
17.3 ג  וְאָשִׁיבָה כָל-הָעָם, אֵלֶיךָ:  כְּשׁוּב הַכֹּל--הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה מְבַקֵּשׁ, כָּל-הָעָם יִהְיֶה שָׁלוֹם.    3 and I will bring back all the people unto thee; when all shall have returned, [save] the man whom thou seekest, all the people will be in peace.'
17.4 ד  וַיִּישַׁר הַדָּבָר, בְּעֵינֵי אַבְשָׁלֹם, וּבְעֵינֵי, כָּל-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    4 And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel. {S}
17.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, קְרָא נָא, גַּם לְחוּשַׁי הָאַרְכִּי; וְנִשְׁמְעָה מַה-בְּפִיו, גַּם-הוּא.    5 Then said Absalom: 'Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith.'
17.6 ו  וַיָּבֹא חוּשַׁי, אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֵלָיו לֵאמֹר כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה דִּבֶּר אֲחִיתֹפֶל, הֲנַעֲשֶׂה אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ; אִם-אַיִן, אַתָּה דַבֵּר.  {ס}    6 And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spoke unto him, saying: 'Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner; shall we do after his saying? if not, speak thou.' {S}
17.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר חוּשַׁי, אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם:  לֹא-טוֹבָה הָעֵצָה אֲשֶׁר-יָעַץ אֲחִיתֹפֶל, בַּפַּעַם הַזֹּאת.    7 And Hushai said unto Absalom: 'The counsel that Ahithophel hath given this time is not good.'
17.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר חוּשַׁי, אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-אָבִיךָ וְאֶת-אֲנָשָׁיו כִּי גִבֹּרִים הֵמָּה וּמָרֵי נֶפֶשׁ הֵמָּה, כְּדֹב שַׁכּוּל, בַּשָּׂדֶה; וְאָבִיךָ אִישׁ מִלְחָמָה, וְלֹא יָלִין אֶת-הָעָם.    8 Hushai said moreover: 'Thou knowest thy father and his men, that they are mighty men, and they are embittered in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field; and thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.
17.9 ט  הִנֵּה עַתָּה הוּא-נֶחְבָּא בְּאַחַת הַפְּחָתִים, אוֹ בְּאַחַד הַמְּקוֹמֹת; וְהָיָה, כִּנְפֹל בָּהֶם בַּתְּחִלָּה, וְשָׁמַע הַשֹּׁמֵעַ וְאָמַר, הָיְתָה מַגֵּפָה בָּעָם אֲשֶׁר אַחֲרֵי אַבְשָׁלֹם.    9 Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some place; and it will come to pass, when they fall upon them at the first, and whosoever heareth it shall say: There is a slaughter among the people that follow Absalom;
17.10 י  וְהוּא גַם-בֶּן-חַיִל, אֲשֶׁר לִבּוֹ כְּלֵב הָאַרְיֵה--הִמֵּס יִמָּס:  כִּי-יֹדֵעַ כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי-גִבּוֹר אָבִיךָ, וּבְנֵי-חַיִל אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ.    10 then even he that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt; for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they that are with him are valiant men.
17.11 יא  כִּי יָעַצְתִּי, הֵאָסֹף יֵאָסֵף עָלֶיךָ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִדָּן וְעַד-בְּאֵר שֶׁבַע, כַּחוֹל אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַיָּם, לָרֹב; וּפָנֶיךָ הֹלְכִים, בַּקְרָב.    11 But I counsel that all Israel be gathered together unto thee, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.
17.12 יב  וּבָאנוּ אֵלָיו, באחת (בְּאַחַד) הַמְּקוֹמֹת אֲשֶׁר נִמְצָא שָׁם, וְנַחְנוּ עָלָיו, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִפֹּל הַטַּל עַל-הָאֲדָמָה; וְלֹא-נוֹתַר בּוֹ וּבְכָל-הָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, גַּם-אֶחָד.    12 So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground; and of him and of all the men that are with him we will not leave so much as one.
17.13 יג  וְאִם-אֶל-עִיר, יֵאָסֵף--וְהִשִּׂיאוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-הָעִיר הַהִיא, חֲבָלִים; וְסָחַבְנוּ אֹתוֹ עַד-הַנַּחַל, עַד אֲשֶׁר-לֹא-נִמְצָא שָׁם גַּם-צְרוֹר.  {פ}    13 Moreover, if he withdraw himself into a city, then shall all Israel bring up ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the valley until there be not one small stone found there.' {P}
17.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אַבְשָׁלוֹם, וְכָל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, טוֹבָה עֲצַת חוּשַׁי הָאַרְכִּי, מֵעֲצַת אֲחִיתֹפֶל;  {ס}  וַיהוָה צִוָּה, לְהָפֵר אֶת-עֲצַת אֲחִיתֹפֶל הַטּוֹבָה, לְבַעֲבוּר הָבִיא יְהוָה אֶל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אֶת-הָרָעָה.  {ס}    14 And Absalom and all the men of Israel said: 'The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel.' {S} --For the LORD had ordained to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom. {S}
17.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר חוּשַׁי, אֶל-צָדוֹק וְאֶל-אֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֲנִים, כָּזֹאת וְכָזֹאת יָעַץ אֲחִיתֹפֶל אֶת-אַבְשָׁלֹם, וְאֵת זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכָזֹאת וְכָזֹאת, יָעַצְתִּי אָנִי.    15 Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests: 'Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled.
17.16 טז  וְעַתָּה שִׁלְחוּ מְהֵרָה וְהַגִּידוּ לְדָוִד לֵאמֹר, אַל-תָּלֶן הַלַּיְלָה בְּעַרְבוֹת הַמִּדְבָּר, וְגַם, עָבוֹר תַּעֲבוֹר--פֶּן יְבֻלַּע לַמֶּלֶךְ, וּלְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ.    16 Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying: Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness, but in any wise pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.'
17.17 יז  וִיהוֹנָתָן וַאֲחִימַעַץ עֹמְדִים בְּעֵין-רֹגֵל, וְהָלְכָה הַשִּׁפְחָה וְהִגִּידָה לָהֶם, וְהֵם יֵלְכוּ, וְהִגִּידוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד:  כִּי לֹא יוּכְלוּ לְהֵרָאוֹת, לָבוֹא הָעִירָה.    17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by En-rogel; and a maid-servant used to go and tell them; and they went and told king David; for they might not be seen to come into the city.
17.18 יח  וַיַּרְא אֹתָם נַעַר, וַיַּגֵּד לְאַבְשָׁלֹם; וַיֵּלְכוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם מְהֵרָה וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-בֵּית-אִישׁ בְּבַחוּרִים, וְלוֹ בְאֵר בַּחֲצֵרוֹ--וַיֵּרְדוּ שָׁם.    18 But a lad saw them, and told Absalom; and they went both of them away quickly, and came to the house of a man in Bahurim, who had a well in his court; and they went down thither.
17.19 יט  וַתִּקַּח הָאִשָּׁה, וַתִּפְרֹשׂ אֶת-הַמָּסָךְ עַל-פְּנֵי הַבְּאֵר, וַתִּשְׁטַח עָלָיו, הָרִפוֹת; וְלֹא נוֹדַע, דָּבָר.    19 And the woman took and spread the covering over the well's mouth, and strewed groats thereon; and nothing was known.
17.20 כ  וַיָּבֹאוּ עַבְדֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה הַבַּיְתָה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אַיֵּה אֲחִימַעַץ וִיהוֹנָתָן, וַתֹּאמֶר לָהֶם הָאִשָּׁה, עָבְרוּ מִיכַל הַמָּיִם; וַיְבַקְשׁוּ וְלֹא מָצָאוּ, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    20 And Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house; and they said: 'Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?' And the woman said unto them: 'They are gone over the brook of water.' And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem. {S}
17.21 כא  וַיְהִי אַחֲרֵי לֶכְתָּם, וַיַּעֲלוּ מֵהַבְּאֵר, וַיֵּלְכוּ, וַיַּגִּדוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-דָּוִד, קוּמוּ וְעִבְרוּ מְהֵרָה אֶת-הַמַּיִם--כִּי-כָכָה יָעַץ עֲלֵיכֶם, אֲחִיתֹפֶל.    21 And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David; and they said unto David: 'Arise ye, and pass quickly over the water; for thus hath Ahithophel counselled against you.'
17.22 כב  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד, וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, וַיַּעַבְרוּ, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן:  עַד-אוֹר הַבֹּקֶר, עַד-אַחַד לֹא נֶעְדָּר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָבַר, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן.    22 Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they passed over the Jordan; by the morning light there lacked not one of them that was not gone over the Jordan.
17.23 כג  וַאֲחִיתֹפֶל רָאָה, כִּי לֹא נֶעֶשְׂתָה עֲצָתוֹ, וַיַּחֲבֹשׁ אֶת-הַחֲמוֹר וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ אֶל-עִירוֹ, וַיְצַו אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ וַיֵּחָנַק; וַיָּמָת, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּקֶבֶר אָבִיו.  {ס}    23 And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his ass, and arose, and got him home, unto his city, and set his house in order, and strangled himself; and he died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father. {S}
17.24 כד  וְדָוִד, בָּא מַחֲנָיְמָה; וְאַבְשָׁלֹם, עָבַר אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן--הוּא, וְכָל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ.    24 When David was come to Mahanaim, Absalom passed over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
17.25 כה  וְאֶת-עֲמָשָׂא, שָׂם אַבְשָׁלֹם תַּחַת יוֹאָב--עַל-הַצָּבָא; וַעֲמָשָׂא בֶן-אִישׁ, וּשְׁמוֹ יִתְרָא הַיִּשְׂרְאֵלִי, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא אֶל-אֲבִיגַל בַּת-נָחָשׁ, אֲחוֹת צְרוּיָה אֵם יוֹאָב.    25 And Absalom had set Amasa over the host instead of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of a man, whose name was Ithra the Jesraelite, that went in to Abigal the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's mother.
17.26 כו  וַיִּחַן יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאַבְשָׁלֹם, אֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד.  {ס}    26 And Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead. {S}
17.27 כז  וַיְהִי, כְּבוֹא דָוִד מַחֲנָיְמָה; וְשֹׁבִי בֶן-נָחָשׁ מֵרַבַּת בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן, וּמָכִיר בֶּן-עַמִּיאֵל מִלֹּא דְבָר, וּבַרְזִלַּי הַגִּלְעָדִי, מֵרֹגְלִים.    27 And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
17.28 כח  מִשְׁכָּב וְסַפּוֹת וּכְלִי יוֹצֵר, וְחִטִּים וּשְׂעֹרִים וְקֶמַח וְקָלִי, וּפוֹל וַעֲדָשִׁים, וְקָלִי.    28 brought beds, and basins, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and meal, and parched corn, and beans, and lentils, and parched pulse,
17.29 כט  וּדְבַשׁ וְחֶמְאָה, וְצֹאן וּשְׁפוֹת בָּקָר, הִגִּישׁוּ לְדָוִד וְלָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, לֶאֱכוֹל:  כִּי אָמְרוּ--הָעָם רָעֵב וְעָיֵף וְצָמֵא, בַּמִּדְבָּר.  {ס}    29 and honey, and curd, and sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, and for the people that were with him, to eat; for they said: 'The people is hungry, and faint, and thirsty, in the wilderness.' {S}
18.1 א  וַיִּפְקֹד דָּוִד, אֶת-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ; וַיָּשֶׂם עֲלֵיהֶם, שָׂרֵי אֲלָפִים וְשָׂרֵי מֵאוֹת.    1 And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.
18.2 ב  וַיְשַׁלַּח דָּוִד אֶת-הָעָם, הַשְּׁלִשִׁית בְּיַד-יוֹאָב וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית בְּיַד אֲבִישַׁי בֶּן-צְרוּיָה אֲחִי יוֹאָב, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁת, בְּיַד אִתַּי הַגִּתִּי;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-הָעָם, יָצֹא אֵצֵא גַּם-אֲנִי עִמָּכֶם.    2 And David sent forth the people, a third part under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. {S} And the king said unto the people: 'I will surely go forth with you myself also.'
18.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר הָעָם לֹא תֵצֵא, כִּי אִם-נֹס נָנוּס לֹא-יָשִׂימוּ אֵלֵינוּ לֵב וְאִם-יָמֻתוּ חֶצְיֵנוּ לֹא-יָשִׂימוּ אֵלֵינוּ לֵב--כִּי-עַתָּה כָמֹנוּ, עֲשָׂרָה אֲלָפִים; וְעַתָּה טוֹב, כִּי-תִהְיֶה-לָּנוּ מֵעִיר לעזיר (לַעְזוֹר).  {ס}    3 But the people said: 'Thou shalt not go forth; for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us; but thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is better that thou be ready to succour us out of the city.' {S}
18.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר-יִיטַב בְּעֵינֵיכֶם אֶעֱשֶׂה; וַיַּעֲמֹד הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-יַד הַשַּׁעַר, וְכָל-הָעָם יָצְאוּ, לְמֵאוֹת וְלַאֲלָפִים.    4 And the king said unto them: 'What seemeth you best I will do.' And the king stood by the gate-side, and all the people went out by hundreds and by thousands.
18.5 ה  וַיְצַו הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-יוֹאָב וְאֶת-אֲבִישַׁי וְאֶת-אִתַּי, לֵאמֹר, לְאַט-לִי, לַנַּעַר לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם; וְכָל-הָעָם שָׁמְעוּ, בְּצַוֺּת הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-כָּל-הַשָּׂרִים--עַל-דְּבַר אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    5 And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying: 'Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom.' And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom.
18.6 ו  וַיֵּצֵא הָעָם הַשָּׂדֶה, לִקְרַאת יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַתְּהִי הַמִּלְחָמָה, בְּיַעַר אֶפְרָיִם.    6 So the people went out into the field against Israel; and the battle was in the forest of Ephraim.
18.7 ז  וַיִּנָּגְפוּ שָׁם עַם יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי עַבְדֵי דָוִד; וַתְּהִי-שָׁם הַמַּגֵּפָה גְדוֹלָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--עֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף.    7 And the people of Israel were smitten there before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter there that day of twenty thousand men.
18.8 ח  וַתְּהִי-שָׁם הַמִּלְחָמָה נפצות (נָפוֹצֶת), עַל-פְּנֵי כָל-הָאָרֶץ; וַיֶּרֶב הַיַּעַר לֶאֱכֹל בָּעָם, מֵאֲשֶׁר אָכְלָה הַחֶרֶב בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.    8 For the battle was there spread over the face of all the country; and the forest devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.
18.9 ט  וַיִּקָּרֵא, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, לִפְנֵי, עַבְדֵי דָוִד; וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם רֹכֵב עַל-הַפֶּרֶד, וַיָּבֹא הַפֶּרֶד תַּחַת שׂוֹבֶךְ הָאֵלָה הַגְּדוֹלָה וַיֶּחֱזַק רֹאשׁוֹ בָאֵלָה וַיֻּתַּן בֵּין הַשָּׁמַיִם וּבֵין הָאָרֶץ, וְהַפֶּרֶד אֲשֶׁר-תַּחְתָּיו, עָבָר.    9 And Absalom chanced to meet the servants of David. And Absalom was riding upon his mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great terebinth, and his head caught hold of the terebinth, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went on.
18.10 י  וַיַּרְא אִישׁ אֶחָד, וַיַּגֵּד לְיוֹאָב; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה רָאִיתִי אֶת-אַבְשָׁלֹם, תָּלוּי, בָּאֵלָה.    10 And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said: 'Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in a terebinth.'
18.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב, לָאִישׁ הַמַּגִּיד לוֹ, וְהִנֵּה רָאִיתָ, וּמַדּוּעַ לֹא-הִכִּיתוֹ שָׁם אָרְצָה; וְעָלַי, לָתֶת לְךָ עֲשָׂרָה כֶסֶף, וַחֲגֹרָה, אֶחָת.    11 And Joab said unto the man that told him: 'And, behold, thou sawest it, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have had to give thee ten pieces of silver, and a girdle.'
18.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר הָאִישׁ, אֶל-יוֹאָב, ולא (וְלוּא) אָנֹכִי שֹׁקֵל עַל-כַּפַּי אֶלֶף כֶּסֶף, לֹא-אֶשְׁלַח יָדִי אֶל-בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כִּי בְאָזְנֵינוּ צִוָּה הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֹתְךָ וְאֶת-אֲבִישַׁי וְאֶת-אִתַּי לֵאמֹר, שִׁמְרוּ-מִי, בַּנַּעַר בְּאַבְשָׁלוֹם.    12 And the man said unto Joab: 'Though I should receive a thousand pieces of silver in my hand, yet would I not put forth my hand against the king's son; for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying: Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.
18.13 יג  אוֹ-עָשִׂיתִי בנפשו (בְנַפְשִׁי) שֶׁקֶר, וְכָל-דָּבָר לֹא-יִכָּחֵד מִן-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְאַתָּה, תִּתְיַצֵּב מִנֶּגֶד.    13 Otherwise if I had dealt falsely against mine own life--and there is no matter hid from the king--then thou thyself wouldest have stood aloof.'
18.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב, לֹא-כֵן אֹחִילָה לְפָנֶיךָ; וַיִּקַּח שְׁלֹשָׁה שְׁבָטִים בְּכַפּוֹ, וַיִּתְקָעֵם בְּלֵב אַבְשָׁלוֹם--עוֹדֶנּוּ חַי, בְּלֵב הָאֵלָה.    14 Then said Joab: 'I may not tarry thus with thee.' And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the terebinth.
18.15 טו  וַיָּסֹבּוּ עֲשָׂרָה נְעָרִים, נֹשְׂאֵי כְּלֵי יוֹאָב; וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, וַיְמִתֻהוּ.    15 And ten young men that bore Joab's armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.
18.16 טז  וַיִּתְקַע יוֹאָב, בַּשֹּׁפָר, וַיָּשָׁב הָעָם, מִרְדֹף אַחֲרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי-חָשַׂךְ יוֹאָב, אֶת-הָעָם.    16 And Joab blew the horn, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel; for Joab held back the people.
18.17 יז  וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-אַבְשָׁלוֹם, וַיַּשְׁלִכוּ אֹתוֹ בַיַּעַר אֶל-הַפַּחַת הַגָּדוֹל, וַיַּצִּבוּ עָלָיו גַּל-אֲבָנִים, גָּדוֹל מְאֹד; וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--נָסוּ, אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָו.    17 And they took Absalom, and cast him into the great pit in the forest, and raised over him a very great heap of stones; and all Israel fled every one to his tent.--
18.18 יח  וְאַבְשָׁלֹם לָקַח, וַיַּצֶּב-לוֹ בְחַיָּו אֶת-מַצֶּבֶת אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵמֶק-הַמֶּלֶךְ--כִּי אָמַר אֵין-לִי בֵן, בַּעֲבוּר הַזְכִּיר שְׁמִי; וַיִּקְרָא לַמַּצֶּבֶת, עַל-שְׁמוֹ, וַיִּקָּרֵא לָהּ יַד אַבְשָׁלוֹם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}    18 Now Absalom in his life-time had taken and reared up for himself the pillar, which is in the king's dale; for he said: 'I have no son to keep my name in remembrance'; and he called the pillar after his own name; and it is called Absalom's monument unto this day. {S}
18.19 יט  וַאֲחִימַעַץ בֶּן-צָדוֹק, אָמַר, אָרוּצָה נָּא, וַאֲבַשְּׂרָה אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כִּי-שְׁפָטוֹ יְהוָה, מִיַּד אֹיְבָיו.    19 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok: 'Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the LORD hath avenged him of his enemies.'
18.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ יוֹאָב, לֹא אִישׁ בְּשֹׂרָה אַתָּה הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וּבִשַּׂרְתָּ, בְּיוֹם אַחֵר; וְהַיּוֹם הַזֶּה לֹא תְבַשֵּׂר, כִּי-עַל-   (כֵּן) בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ מֵת.    20 And Joab said unto him: 'Thou shalt not be the bearer of tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day; but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, forasmuch as the king's son is dead.'
18.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב לַכּוּשִׁי, לֵךְ הַגֵּד לַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתָה; וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ כוּשִׁי לְיוֹאָב, וַיָּרֹץ.    21 Then said Joab to the Cushite: 'Go tell the king what thou hast seen.' And the Cushite bowed down unto Joab, and ran.
18.22 כב  וַיֹּסֶף עוֹד אֲחִימַעַץ בֶּן-צָדוֹק, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-יוֹאָב, וִיהִי מָה, אָרֻצָה-נָּא גַם-אָנִי אַחֲרֵי הַכּוּשִׁי; וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב, לָמָּה-זֶּה אַתָּה רָץ בְּנִי, וּלְכָה, אֵין-בְּשׂוֹרָה מֹצֵאת.    22 Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab: 'But come what may, let me, I pray thee, also run after the Cushite.' And Joab said: 'Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou wilt have no reward for the tidings?'
18.23 כג  וִיהִי-מָה אָרוּץ, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ רוּץ; וַיָּרָץ אֲחִימַעַץ דֶּרֶךְ הַכִּכָּר, וַיַּעֲבֹר אֶת-הַכּוּשִׁי.    23 'But come what may, [said he,] I will run.' And he said unto him: 'Run.' Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Plain, and overran the Cushite.
18.24 כד  וְדָוִד יוֹשֵׁב, בֵּין-שְׁנֵי הַשְּׁעָרִים; וַיֵּלֶךְ הַצֹּפֶה אֶל-גַּג הַשַּׁעַר, אֶל-הַחוֹמָה, וַיִּשָּׂא אֶת-עֵינָיו וַיַּרְא, וְהִנֵּה-אִישׁ רָץ לְבַדּוֹ.    24 Now David sat between the two gates; and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone.
18.25 כה  וַיִּקְרָא הַצֹּפֶה, וַיַּגֵּד לַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אִם-לְבַדּוֹ בְּשׂוֹרָה בְּפִיו; וַיֵּלֶךְ הָלוֹךְ, וְקָרֵב.    25 And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said: 'If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth.' And he came apace, and drew near.
18.26 כו  וַיַּרְא הַצֹּפֶה, אִישׁ-אַחֵר רָץ, וַיִּקְרָא הַצֹּפֶה אֶל-הַשֹּׁעֵר, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה-אִישׁ רָץ לְבַדּוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, גַּם-זֶה מְבַשֵּׂר.    26 And the watchman saw another man running; and the watchman called unto the porter, and said: 'Behold another man running alone.' And the king said: 'He also bringeth tidings.'
18.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר, הַצֹּפֶה, אֲנִי רֹאֶה אֶת-מְרוּצַת הָרִאשׁוֹן, כִּמְרֻצַת אֲחִימַעַץ בֶּן-צָדוֹק; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אִישׁ-טוֹב זֶה, וְאֶל-בְּשׂוֹרָה טוֹבָה יָבוֹא.    27 And the watchman said: 'I think the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.' And the king said: 'He is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.'
18.28 כח  וַיִּקְרָא אֲחִימַעַץ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ שָׁלוֹם, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ לְאַפָּיו, אָרְצָה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר, בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר סִגַּר אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-נָשְׂאוּ אֶת-יָדָם בַּאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    28 And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king: 'All is well.' And he bowed down before the king with his face to the earth, {S} and said: 'Blessed be the LORD thy God, who hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king.' {S}
18.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, שָׁלוֹם לַנַּעַר לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲחִימַעַץ רָאִיתִי הֶהָמוֹן הַגָּדוֹל לִשְׁלֹחַ אֶת-עֶבֶד הַמֶּלֶךְ יוֹאָב, וְאֶת-עַבְדֶּךָ, וְלֹא יָדַעְתִּי, מָה.    29 And the king said: 'Is it well with the young man Absalom?' And Ahimaaz answered: 'When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.'
18.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, סֹב הִתְיַצֵּב כֹּה; וַיִּסֹּב, וַיַּעֲמֹד.    30 And the king said: 'Turn aside, and stand here.' And he turned aside, and stood still.
18.31 לא  וְהִנֵּה הַכּוּשִׁי, בָּא; וַיֹּאמֶר הַכּוּשִׁי, יִתְבַּשֵּׂר אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ--כִּי-שְׁפָטְךָ יְהוָה הַיּוֹם, מִיַּד כָּל-הַקָּמִים עָלֶיךָ.  {ס}    31 And, behold, the Cushite came; and the Cushite said: 'Tidings for my lord the king; for the LORD hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee.' {S}
18.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-הַכּוּשִׁי, הֲשָׁלוֹם לַנַּעַר לְאַבְשָׁלוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר הַכּוּשִׁי, יִהְיוּ כַנַּעַר אֹיְבֵי אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-קָמוּ עָלֶיךָ, לְרָעָה.  {ס}    32 And the king said unto the Cushite: 'Is it well with the young man Absalom?' And the Cushite answered: 'The enemies of my lord the king and all that rise up against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.' {S}
18.33 /
19.1 א  וַיִּרְגַּז הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּעַל עַל-עֲלִיַּת הַשַּׁעַר--וַיֵּבְךְּ; וְכֹה אָמַר בְּלֶכְתּוֹ, בְּנִי אַבְשָׁלוֹם בְּנִי בְנִי אַבְשָׁלוֹם, מִי-יִתֵּן מוּתִי אֲנִי תַחְתֶּיךָ, אַבְשָׁלוֹם בְּנִי בְנִי.    1 And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus he said: 'O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!'
19.2 ב  וַיֻּגַּד, לְיוֹאָב:  הִנֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ בֹּכֶה וַיִּתְאַבֵּל, עַל-אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    2 And it was told Joab: 'Behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for Absalom.'
19.3 ג  וַתְּהִי הַתְּשֻׁעָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, לְאֵבֶל--לְכָל-הָעָם:  כִּי-שָׁמַע הָעָם, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר, נֶעֱצַב הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-בְּנוֹ.    3 And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people; for the people heard say that day: 'The king grieveth for his son.'
19.4 ד  וַיִּתְגַּנֵּב הָעָם בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, לָבוֹא הָעִיר:  כַּאֲשֶׁר יִתְגַּנֵּב, הָעָם הַנִּכְלָמִים--בְּנוּסָם, בַּמִּלְחָמָה.    4 And the people got them by stealth that day into the city, as people that are ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.
19.5 ה  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ לָאַט אֶת-פָּנָיו, וַיִּזְעַק הַמֶּלֶךְ קוֹל גָּדוֹל:  בְּנִי, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, אַבְשָׁלוֹם, בְּנִי בְנִי.  {ס}    5 And the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice: 'O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!' {S}
19.6 ו  וַיָּבֹא יוֹאָב אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, הַבָּיִת; וַיֹּאמֶר הֹבַשְׁתָּ הַיּוֹם אֶת-פְּנֵי כָל-עֲבָדֶיךָ, הַמְמַלְּטִים אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ הַיּוֹם, וְאֵת נֶפֶשׁ בָּנֶיךָ וּבְנֹתֶיךָ, וְנֶפֶשׁ נָשֶׁיךָ וְנֶפֶשׁ פִּלַגְשֶׁיךָ.    6 And Joab came into the house to the king, and said: 'Thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, who this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;
19.7 ז  לְאַהֲבָה, אֶת-שֹׂנְאֶיךָ, וְלִשְׂנֹא, אֶת-אֹהֲבֶיךָ:  כִּי הִגַּדְתָּ הַיּוֹם, כִּי אֵין לְךָ שָׂרִים וַעֲבָדִים--כִּי יָדַעְתִּי הַיּוֹם כִּי לא (לוּא) אַבְשָׁלוֹם חַי וְכֻלָּנוּ הַיּוֹם מֵתִים, כִּי-אָז יָשָׁר בְּעֵינֶיךָ.    7 in that thou lovest them that hate thee, and hatest them that love thee. For thou hast declared this day, that princes and servants are nought unto thee; for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.
19.8 ח  וְעַתָּה קוּם צֵא, וְדַבֵּר עַל-לֵב עֲבָדֶיךָ:  {ס}  כִּי בַיהוָה נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי כִּי-אֵינְךָ יוֹצֵא, אִם-יָלִין אִישׁ אִתְּךָ הַלַּיְלָה, וְרָעָה לְךָ זֹאת מִכָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-בָּאָה עָלֶיךָ, מִנְּעֻרֶיךָ עַד-עָתָּה.  {ס}    8 Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak to the heart of thy servants; {S} for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not forth, there will not tarry a man with thee this night; and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that hath befallen thee from thy youth until now.' {S}
19.9 ט  וַיָּקָם הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיֵּשֶׁב בַּשָּׁעַר; וּלְכָל-הָעָם הִגִּידוּ לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה הַמֶּלֶךְ יוֹשֵׁב בַּשַּׁעַר, וַיָּבֹא כָל-הָעָם לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל נָס אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו.  {ס}    9 Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all the people, saying: 'Behold, the king doth sit in the gate'; and all the people came before the king. Now Israel had fled every man to his tent. {S}
19.10 י  וַיְהִי כָל-הָעָם נָדוֹן, בְּכָל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  הַמֶּלֶךְ הִצִּילָנוּ מִכַּף אֹיְבֵינוּ, וְהוּא מִלְּטָנוּ מִכַּף פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְעַתָּה בָּרַח מִן-הָאָרֶץ, מֵעַל אַבְשָׁלוֹם.    10 And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying: 'The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, and he saved us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the land from Absalom.
19.11 יא  וְאַבְשָׁלוֹם אֲשֶׁר מָשַׁחְנוּ עָלֵינוּ, מֵת בַּמִּלְחָמָה; וְעַתָּה, לָמָה אַתֶּם מַחֲרִשִׁים--לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    11 And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now, therefore, why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?' {S}
19.12 יב  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד, שָׁלַח אֶל-צָדוֹק וְאֶל-אֶבְיָתָר הַכֹּהֲנִים לֵאמֹר, דַּבְּרוּ אֶל-זִקְנֵי יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, לָמָּה תִהְיוּ אַחֲרֹנִים לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ; וּדְבַר, כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּא אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ.    12 And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying: 'Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying: Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house?--For the speech of all Israel was come to the king, to bring him to his house.--
19.13 יג  אַחַי אַתֶּם, עַצְמִי וּבְשָׂרִי אַתֶּם; וְלָמָּה תִהְיוּ אַחֲרֹנִים, לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ.    13 Ye are my brethren, ye are my bone and my flesh; wherefore then should ye be the last to bring back the king?
19.14 יד  וְלַעֲמָשָׂא, תֹּמְרוּ, הֲלוֹא עַצְמִי וּבְשָׂרִי, אָתָּה; כֹּה יַעֲשֶׂה-לִּי אֱלֹהִים, וְכֹה יוֹסִיף, אִם-לֹא שַׂר-צָבָא תִּהְיֶה לְפָנַי כָּל-הַיָּמִים, תַּחַת יוֹאָב.    14 And say ye to Amasa: Art thou not my bone and my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab.'
19.15 טו  וַיַּט אֶת-לְבַב כָּל-אִישׁ-יְהוּדָה, כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד; וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, שׁוּב אַתָּה, וְכָל-עֲבָדֶיךָ.    15 And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that they sent unto the king: 'Return thou, and all thy servants.'
19.16 טז  וַיָּשָׁב הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיָּבֹא עַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן; וִיהוּדָה בָּא הַגִּלְגָּלָה, לָלֶכֶת לִקְרַאת הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְהַעֲבִיר אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן.    16 So the king returned, and came to the Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to bring the king over the Jordan.
19.17 יז  וַיְמַהֵר, שִׁמְעִי בֶן-גֵּרָא בֶּן-הַיְמִינִי, אֲשֶׁר, מִבַּחוּרִים; וַיֵּרֶד עִם-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, לִקְרַאת הַמֶּלֶךְ דָּוִד.    17 And Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, who was of Bahurim, made haste and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.
19.18 יח  וְאֶלֶף אִישׁ עִמּוֹ, מִבִּנְיָמִן, וְצִיבָא נַעַר בֵּית שָׁאוּל, וַחֲמֵשֶׁת עָשָׂר בָּנָיו וְעֶשְׂרִים עֲבָדָיו אִתּוֹ; וְצָלְחוּ הַיַּרְדֵּן, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    18 And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him. And they rushed into the Jordan before the king.
19.19 יט  וְעָבְרָה הָעֲבָרָה, לַעֲבִיר אֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְלַעֲשׂוֹת הַטּוֹב, בְּעֵינָו; וְשִׁמְעִי בֶן-גֵּרָא, נָפַל לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּעָבְרוֹ, בַּיַּרְדֵּן.    19 And the ferryboat passed to and fro to bring over the king's household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, when he would go over the Jordan.
19.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַל-יַחֲשָׁב-לִי אֲדֹנִי עָוֺן, וְאַל-תִּזְכֹּר אֵת אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱוָה עַבְדְּךָ, בַּיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר-יָצָא אֲדֹנִי-הַמֶּלֶךְ מִירוּשָׁלִָם--לָשׂוּם הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-לִבּוֹ.    20 And he said unto the king: 'Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did iniquitously the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart.
19.21 כא  כִּי יָדַע עַבְדְּךָ, כִּי אֲנִי חָטָאתִי; וְהִנֵּה-בָאתִי הַיּוֹם, רִאשׁוֹן לְכָל-בֵּית יוֹסֵף, לָרֶדֶת, לִקְרַאת אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    21 For thy servant doth know that I have sinned; therefore, behold, I am come this day the first of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.' {S}
19.22 כב  וַיַּעַן אֲבִישַׁי בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲתַחַת זֹאת, לֹא יוּמַת שִׁמְעִי:  כִּי קִלֵּל, אֶת-מְשִׁיחַ יְהוָה.  {ס}    22 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said: 'Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD'S anointed?' {S}
19.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, מַה-לִּי וְלָכֶם בְּנֵי צְרוּיָה--כִּי-תִהְיוּ-לִי הַיּוֹם, לְשָׂטָן; הַיּוֹם, יוּמַת אִישׁ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי הֲלוֹא יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי הַיּוֹם אֲנִי-מֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    23 And David said: 'What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I am this day king over Israel?'
19.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-שִׁמְעִי, לֹא תָמוּת; וַיִּשָּׁבַע לוֹ, הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    24 And the king said unto Shimei: 'Thou shalt not die.' And the king swore unto him. {S}
19.25 כה  וּמְפִבֹשֶׁת, בֶּן-שָׁאוּל, יָרַד, לִקְרַאת הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְלֹא-עָשָׂה רַגְלָיו וְלֹא-עָשָׂה שְׂפָמוֹ, וְאֶת-בְּגָדָיו לֹא כִבֵּס, לְמִן-הַיּוֹם לֶכֶת הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַד-הַיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר-בָּא בְשָׁלוֹם.    25 And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king; and he had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came home in peace.
19.26 כו  וַיְהִי כִּי-בָא יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לִקְרַאת הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָמָּה לֹא-הָלַכְתָּ עִמִּי מְפִיבֹשֶׁת.    26 And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said unto him: 'Wherefore wentest not thou with me, Mephibosheth?'
19.27 כז  וַיֹּאמַר, אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ עַבְדִּי רִמָּנִי:  כִּי-אָמַר עַבְדְּךָ אֶחְבְּשָׁה-לִּי הַחֲמוֹר וְאֶרְכַּב עָלֶיהָ, וְאֵלֵךְ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ--כִּי פִסֵּחַ, עַבְדֶּךָ.    27 And he answered: 'My lord, O king, my servant deceived me; for thy servant said: I will saddle me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and go with the king; because thy servant is lame.
19.28 כח  וַיְרַגֵּל בְּעַבְדְּךָ, אֶל-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ כְּמַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים, וַעֲשֵׂה הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ.    28 And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God; do therefore what is good in thine eyes.
19.29 כט  כִּי לֹא הָיָה כָּל-בֵּית אָבִי, כִּי אִם-אַנְשֵׁי-מָוֶת לַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַתָּשֶׁת אֶת-עַבְדְּךָ, בְּאֹכְלֵי שֻׁלְחָנֶךָ; וּמַה-יֶּשׁ-לִי עוֹד צְדָקָה, וְלִזְעֹק עוֹד אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {פ}    29 For all my father's house were deserving of death at the hand of my lord the king; yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet? or why should I cry any more unto the king?' {P}
19.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָמָּה תְּדַבֵּר עוֹד דְּבָרֶיךָ; אָמַרְתִּי--אַתָּה וְצִיבָא, תַּחְלְקוּ אֶת-הַשָּׂדֶה.    30 And the king said unto him: 'Why speakest thou any more of thy matters? I say: Thou and Ziba divide the land.'
19.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר מְפִיבֹשֶׁת אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, גַּם אֶת-הַכֹּל יִקָּח:  אַחֲרֵי אֲשֶׁר-בָּא אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּשָׁלוֹם--אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ.  {ס}    31 And Mephibosheth said unto the king: 'Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come in peace unto his own house.' {S}
19.32 לב  וּבַרְזִלַּי, הַגִּלְעָדִי, יָרַד, מֵרֹגְלִים; וַיַּעֲבֹר אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן, לְשַׁלְּחוֹ אֶת-בירדן (הַיַּרְדֵּן).    32 And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim; and he passed on to Jordan with the king, to bring him on the way over the Jordan.
19.33 לג  וּבַרְזִלַּי זָקֵן מְאֹד, בֶּן-שְׁמֹנִים שָׁנָה; וְהוּא-כִלְכַּל אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ בְשִׁיבָתוֹ בְמַחֲנַיִם, כִּי-אִישׁ גָּדוֹל הוּא מְאֹד.    33 Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old; and he had provided the king with sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man.
19.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶל-בַּרְזִלָּי:  אַתָּה עֲבֹר אִתִּי, וְכִלְכַּלְתִּי אֹתְךָ עִמָּדִי בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    34 And the king said unto Barzillai: 'Come thou over with me, and I will sustain thee with me in Jerusalem.'
19.35 לה  וַיֹּאמֶר בַּרְזִלַּי, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ:  כַּמָּה, יְמֵי שְׁנֵי חַיַּי, כִּי-אֶעֱלֶה אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    35 And Barzillai said unto the king: 'How many are the days of the years of my life, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?
19.36 לו  בֶּן-שְׁמֹנִים שָׁנָה אָנֹכִי הַיּוֹם הַאֵדַע בֵּין-טוֹב לְרָע, אִם-יִטְעַם עַבְדְּךָ אֶת-אֲשֶׁר אֹכַל וְאֶת-אֲשֶׁר אֶשְׁתֶּה, אִם-אֶשְׁמַע עוֹד, בְּקוֹל שָׁרִים וְשָׁרוֹת; וְלָמָּה יִהְיֶה עַבְדְּךָ עוֹד לְמַשָּׂא, אֶל-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ.    36 I am this day fourscore years old; can I discern between good and bad? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?
19.37 לז  כִּמְעַט יַעֲבֹר עַבְדְּךָ, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן--אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְלָמָּה יִגְמְלֵנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, הַגְּמוּלָה הַזֹּאת.    37 Thy servant would but just go over the Jordan with the king; and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?
19.38 לח  יָשָׁב-נָא עַבְדְּךָ וְאָמֻת בְּעִירִי, עִם קֶבֶר אָבִי וְאִמִּי; וְהִנֵּה עַבְדְּךָ כִמְהָם, יַעֲבֹר עִם-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַעֲשֵׂה-לוֹ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-טוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ.  {ס}    38 Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back, that I may die in mine own city, by the grave of my father and my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what shall seem good unto thee.' {S}
19.39 לט  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אִתִּי יַעֲבֹר כִּמְהָם, וַאֲנִי אֶעֱשֶׂה-לּוֹ, אֶת-הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ; וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תִּבְחַר עָלַי, אֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ.    39 And the king answered: 'Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee; and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.'
19.40 מ  וַיַּעֲבֹר כָּל-הָעָם אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ עָבָר; וַיִּשַּׁק הַמֶּלֶךְ לְבַרְזִלַּי וַיְבָרְכֵהוּ, וַיָּשָׁב לִמְקֹמוֹ.  {ס}    40 And all the people went over the Jordan, and the king went over; and the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto his own place. {S}
19.41 מא  וַיַּעֲבֹר הַמֶּלֶךְ הַגִּלְגָּלָה, וְכִמְהָן עָבַר עִמּוֹ; וְכָל-עַם יְהוּדָה, ויעברו (הֶעֱבִרוּ) אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְגַם, חֲצִי עַם יִשְׂרָאֵל.    41 So the king went over to Gilgal, and Chimham went over with him; and all the people of Judah brought the king over, and also half the people of Israel.
19.42 מב  וְהִנֵּה כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּאִים אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ מַדּוּעַ גְּנָבוּךָ אַחֵינוּ אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וַיַּעֲבִרוּ אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-בֵּיתוֹ אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי דָוִד, עִמּוֹ.  {ס}    42 And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto the king: 'Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, and brought the king, and his household, over the Jordan, and all David's men with him?' {S}
19.43 מג  וַיַּעַן כָּל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה עַל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי-קָרוֹב הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵלַי, וְלָמָּה זֶּה חָרָה לְךָ, עַל-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה:  הֶאָכוֹל אָכַלְנוּ מִן-הַמֶּלֶךְ, אִם-נִשֵּׂאת נִשָּׂא לָנוּ.  {ס} וַיַּעַן אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה וַיֹּאמֶר, עֶשֶׂר-יָדוֹת לִי בַמֶּלֶךְ וְגַם-בְּדָוִד אֲנִי מִמְּךָ, וּמַדּוּעַ הֱקִלֹּתַנִי, וְלֹא-הָיָה דְבָרִי רִאשׁוֹן לִי לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-מַלְכִּי; וַיִּקֶשׁ דְּבַר-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, מִדְּבַר אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    43 And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel: 'Because the king is near of kin to us; wherefore then are ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king's cost? or hath any gift been given us?' {S} And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said: 'We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye; why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king?' And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel. {S}
20.1 א  וְשָׁם נִקְרָא אִישׁ בְּלִיַּעַל, וּשְׁמוֹ שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי--אִישׁ יְמִינִי; וַיִּתְקַע בַּשֹּׁפָר, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵין-לָנוּ חֵלֶק בְּדָוִד וְלֹא נַחֲלָה-לָנוּ בְּבֶן-יִשַׁי--אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו, יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 Now there happened to be there a base fellow, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite; and he blew the horn, and said: 'We have no portion in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse; every man to his tents, O Israel.'
20.2 ב  וַיַּעַל כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאַחֲרֵי דָוִד, אַחֲרֵי, שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי; וְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה דָּבְקוּ בְמַלְכָּם, מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן וְעַד-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    2 So all the men of Israel went up from following David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri; but the men of Judah did cleave unto their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem.
20.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא דָוִד אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּקַּח הַמֶּלֶךְ אֵת עֶשֶׂר-נָשִׁים פִּלַגְשִׁים אֲשֶׁר הִנִּיחַ לִשְׁמֹר הַבַּיִת וַיִּתְּנֵם בֵּית-מִשְׁמֶרֶת וַיְכַלְכְּלֵם, וַאֲלֵיהֶם לֹא-בָא; וַתִּהְיֶינָה צְרֻרוֹת עַד-יוֹם מֻתָן, אַלְמְנוּת חַיּוּת.  {ס}    3 And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and provided them with sustenance, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day of their death, in widowhood, with their husband alive. {S}
20.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-עֲמָשָׂא, הַזְעֶק-לִי אֶת-אִישׁ-יְהוּדָה שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים; וְאַתָּה, פֹּה עֲמֹד.    4 Then said the king to Amasa: 'Call me the men of Judah together within three days, and be thou here present.'
20.5 ה  וַיֵּלֶךְ עֲמָשָׂא, לְהַזְעִיק אֶת-יְהוּדָה; וייחר (וַיּוֹחֶר), מִן-הַמּוֹעֵד אֲשֶׁר יְעָדוֹ.  {ס}    5 So Amasa went to call the men of Judah together; but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed him. {S}
20.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד, אֶל-אֲבִישַׁי, עַתָּה יֵרַע לָנוּ שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי, מִן-אַבְשָׁלוֹם; אַתָּה קַח אֶת-עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנֶיךָ, וּרְדֹף אַחֲרָיו--פֶּן-מָצָא לוֹ עָרִים בְּצֻרוֹת, וְהִצִּיל עֵינֵנוּ.    6 And David said to Abishai: 'Now will Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom; take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fortified cities, and escape out of our sight.'
20.7 ז  וַיֵּצְאוּ אַחֲרָיו אַנְשֵׁי יוֹאָב, וְהַכְּרֵתִי וְהַפְּלֵתִי וְכָל-הַגִּבֹּרִים; וַיֵּצְאוּ, מִירוּשָׁלִַם, לִרְדֹּף, אַחֲרֵי שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי.    7 And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men; and they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
20.8 ח  הֵם, עִם-הָאֶבֶן הַגְּדוֹלָה אֲשֶׁר בְּגִבְעוֹן, וַעֲמָשָׂא, בָּא לִפְנֵיהֶם; וְיוֹאָב חָגוּר מִדּוֹ לְבֻשׁוֹ, וְעָלָו חֲגוֹר חֶרֶב מְצֻמֶּדֶת עַל-מָתְנָיו בְּתַעְרָהּ, וְהוּא יָצָא, וַתִּפֹּל.  {ס}    8 When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. And Joab was girded with his apparel of war that he had put on, and thereon was a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out. {S}
20.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב לַעֲמָשָׂא, הֲשָׁלוֹם אַתָּה אָחִי; וַתֹּחֶז יַד-יְמִין יוֹאָב, בִּזְקַן עֲמָשָׂא--לִנְשָׁק-לוֹ.    9 And Joab said to Amasa: 'Is it well with thee, my brother?' And Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss him.
20.10 י  וַעֲמָשָׂא לֹא-נִשְׁמַר בַּחֶרֶב אֲשֶׁר בְּיַד-יוֹאָב, וַיַּכֵּהוּ בָהּ אֶל-הַחֹמֶשׁ וַיִּשְׁפֹּךְ מֵעָיו אַרְצָה וְלֹא-שָׁנָה לוֹ--וַיָּמֹת; וְיוֹאָב, וַאֲבִישַׁי אָחִיו, רָדַף, אַחֲרֵי שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי.    10 But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand; so he smote him therewith in the groin, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. And Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.
20.11 יא  וְאִישׁ עָמַד עָלָיו, מִנַּעֲרֵי יוֹאָב; וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי אֲשֶׁר חָפֵץ בְּיוֹאָב וּמִי אֲשֶׁר-לְדָוִד--אַחֲרֵי יוֹאָב.    11 And there stood by him one of Joab's young men, and said: 'He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David let him follow Joab.'
20.12 יב  וַעֲמָשָׂא מִתְגֹּלֵל בַּדָּם, בְּתוֹךְ הַמְסִלָּה; וַיַּרְא הָאִישׁ כִּי-עָמַד כָּל-הָעָם, וַיַּסֵּב אֶת-עֲמָשָׂא מִן-הַמְסִלָּה הַשָּׂדֶה וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ עָלָיו בֶּגֶד, כַּאֲשֶׁר רָאָה, כָּל-הַבָּא עָלָיו וְעָמָד.    12 And Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he carried Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a garment over him, when he saw that every one that came by him stood still.
20.13 יג  כַּאֲשֶׁר הֹגָה, מִן-הַמְסִלָּה--עָבַר כָּל-אִישׁ, אַחֲרֵי יוֹאָב, לִרְדֹּף, אַחֲרֵי שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי.    13 When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
20.14 יד  וַיַּעֲבֹר בְּכָל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָבֵלָה וּבֵית מַעֲכָה--וְכָל-הַבֵּרִים;  {ס}  ויקלהו (וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ), וַיָּבֹאוּ אַף-אַחֲרָיו.    14 And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Beth-maacah, and all the Berites; {S} and they were gathered together, and went in also after him.
20.15 טו  וַיָּבֹאוּ וַיָּצֻרוּ עָלָיו, בְּאָבֵלָה בֵּית הַמַּעֲכָה, וַיִּשְׁפְּכוּ סֹלְלָה אֶל-הָעִיר, וַתַּעֲמֹד בַּחֵל; וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אֶת-יוֹאָב, מַשְׁחִיתִם לְהַפִּיל הַחוֹמָה.    15 And they came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maacah, and they cast up a mound against the city, and it stood in the moat; and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.
20.16 טז  וַתִּקְרָא אִשָּׁה חֲכָמָה, מִן-הָעִיר; שִׁמְעוּ שִׁמְעוּ, אִמְרוּ-נָא אֶל-יוֹאָב, קְרַב עַד-הֵנָּה, וַאֲדַבְּרָה אֵלֶיךָ.    16 Then cried a wise woman out of the city: 'Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab: Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.'
20.17 יז  וַיִּקְרַב אֵלֶיהָ, וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה הַאַתָּה יוֹאָב וַיֹּאמֶר אָנִי; וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ, שְׁמַע דִּבְרֵי אֲמָתֶךָ, וַיֹּאמֶר, שֹׁמֵעַ אָנֹכִי.    17 And he came near unto her; and the woman said: 'Art thou Joab?' And he answered: 'I am.' Then she said unto him: 'Hear the words of thy handmaid.' And he answered: 'I do hear.'
20.18 יח  וַתֹּאמֶר, לֵאמֹר:  דַּבֵּר יְדַבְּרוּ בָרִאשֹׁנָה לֵאמֹר, שָׁאוֹל יְשָׁאֲלוּ בְּאָבֵל וְכֵן הֵתַמּוּ.    18 Then she spoke, saying: 'They were wont to speak in old time, saying: They shall surely ask counsel at Abel; and so they ended the matter.
20.19 יט  אָנֹכִי, שְׁלֻמֵי אֱמוּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; אַתָּה מְבַקֵּשׁ, לְהָמִית עִיר וְאֵם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--לָמָּה תְבַלַּע, נַחֲלַת יְהוָה.  {פ}    19 We are of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel; seekest thou to destroy a city and a mother in Israel? why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the LORD?' {P}
20.20 כ  וַיַּעַן יוֹאָב, וַיֹּאמַר:  חָלִילָה חָלִילָה לִי, אִם-אֲבַלַּע וְאִם-אַשְׁחִית.    20 And Joab answered and said: 'Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.
20.21 כא  לֹא-כֵן הַדָּבָר, כִּי אִישׁ מֵהַר אֶפְרַיִם שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי שְׁמוֹ נָשָׂא יָדוֹ בַּמֶּלֶךְ בְּדָוִד--תְּנוּ-אֹתוֹ לְבַדּוֹ, וְאֵלְכָה מֵעַל הָעִיר; וַתֹּאמֶר הָאִשָּׁה אֶל-יוֹאָב, הִנֵּה רֹאשׁוֹ מֻשְׁלָךְ אֵלֶיךָ בְּעַד הַחוֹמָה.    21 The matter is not so; but a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even against David; deliver him only, and I will depart from the city.' And the woman said unto Joab: 'Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.'
20.22 כב  וַתָּבוֹא הָאִשָּׁה אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם בְּחָכְמָתָהּ, וַיִּכְרְתוּ אֶת-רֹאשׁ שֶׁבַע בֶּן-בִּכְרִי וַיַּשְׁלִכוּ אֶל-יוֹאָב, וַיִּתְקַע בַּשֹּׁפָר, וַיָּפֻצוּ מֵעַל-הָעִיר אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו; וְיוֹאָב שָׁב יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ.  {ס}    22 Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and threw it out to Joab. And he blew the horn, and they were dispersed from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king. {S}
20.23 כג  וְיוֹאָב, אֶל כָּל-הַצָּבָא יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבְנָיָה, בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע, עַל-הכרי (הַכְּרֵתִי), וְעַל-הַפְּלֵתִי.    23 Now Joab was over all the host of Israel; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites;
20.24 כד  וַאֲדֹרָם, עַל-הַמַּס; וִיהוֹשָׁפָט בֶּן-אֲחִילוּד, הַמַּזְכִּיר.    24 and Adoram was over the levy; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder;
20.25 כה  ושיא (וּשְׁוָא), סֹפֵר; וְצָדוֹק וְאֶבְיָתָר, כֹּהֲנִים.    25 and Sheva was scribe; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
20.26 כו  וְגַם, עִירָא הַיָּאִרִי, הָיָה כֹהֵן, לְדָוִד.  {ס}    26 and Ira also the Jairite was chief minister unto David. {S}
21.1 א  וַיְהִי רָעָב בִּימֵי דָוִד שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים, שָׁנָה אַחֲרֵי שָׁנָה, וַיְבַקֵּשׁ דָּוִד, אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-שָׁאוּל וְאֶל-בֵּית הַדָּמִים, עַל אֲשֶׁר-הֵמִית, אֶת-הַגִּבְעֹנִים.    1 And there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David sought the face of the LORD. {S} And the LORD said: 'It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he put to death the Gibeonites.'
21.2 ב  וַיִּקְרָא הַמֶּלֶךְ לַגִּבְעֹנִים, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם:  וְהַגִּבְעֹנִים לֹא מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הֵמָּה, כִּי אִם-מִיֶּתֶר הָאֱמֹרִי, וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל נִשְׁבְּעוּ לָהֶם, וַיְבַקֵּשׁ שָׁאוּל לְהַכֹּתָם בְּקַנֹּאתוֹ לִבְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה.    2 And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them--now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them; and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal for the children of Israel and Judah--
21.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-הַגִּבְעֹנִים, מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה לָכֶם; וּבַמָּה אֲכַפֵּר, וּבָרְכוּ אֶת-נַחֲלַת יְהוָה.    3 and David said unto the Gibeonites: 'What shall I do for you? and wherewith shall I make atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the LORD?'
21.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ הַגִּבְעֹנִים, אֵין-לי (לָנוּ) כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב עִם-שָׁאוּל וְעִם-בֵּיתוֹ, וְאֵין-לָנוּ אִישׁ, לְהָמִית בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר מָה-אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, אֶעֱשֶׂה לָכֶם.    4 And the Gibeonites said unto him: 'It is no matter of silver or gold between us and Saul, or his house; neither is it for us to put any man to death in Israel.' And he said: 'What say ye that I should do for you?'
21.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר כִּלָּנוּ, וַאֲשֶׁר דִּמָּה-לָנוּ; נִשְׁמַדְנוּ, מֵהִתְיַצֵּב בְּכָל-גְּבֻל יִשְׂרָאֵל.    5 And they said unto the king: 'The man that consumed us, and that devised against us, so that we have been destroyed from remaining in any of the borders of Israel,
21.6 ו  ינתן- (יֻתַּן-) לָנוּ שִׁבְעָה אֲנָשִׁים, מִבָּנָיו, וְהוֹקַעֲנוּם לַיהוָה, בְּגִבְעַת שָׁאוּל בְּחִיר יְהוָה;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲנִי אֶתֵּן.    6 let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of the LORD.' {P} And the king said: 'I will deliver them.'
21.7 ז  וַיַּחְמֹל הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-מְפִיבֹשֶׁת בֶּן-יְהוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שָׁאוּל; עַל-שְׁבֻעַת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר בֵּינֹתָם--בֵּין דָּוִד, וּבֵין יְהוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שָׁאוּל.    7 But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the LORD'S oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.
21.8 ח  וַיִּקַּח הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-שְׁנֵי בְּנֵי רִצְפָּה בַת-אַיָּה, אֲשֶׁר יָלְדָה לְשָׁאוּל, אֶת-אַרְמֹנִי, וְאֶת-מְפִבֹשֶׁת; וְאֶת-חֲמֵשֶׁת, בְּנֵי מִיכַל בַּת-שָׁאוּל, אֲשֶׁר יָלְדָה לְעַדְרִיאֵל בֶּן-בַּרְזִלַּי, הַמְּחֹלָתִי.    8 But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bore unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite;
21.9 ט  וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּיַד הַגִּבְעֹנִים, וַיֹּקִיעֻם בָּהָר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיִּפְּלוּ שבעתים (שְׁבַעְתָּם), יָחַד; והם (וְהֵמָּה) הֻמְתוּ בִּימֵי קָצִיר, בָּרִאשֹׁנִים, תחלת (בִּתְחִלַּת), קְצִיר שְׂעֹרִים.    9 and he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the mountain before the LORD, and they fell all seven together; and they were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, at the beginning of barley harvest.
21.10 י  וַתִּקַּח רִצְפָּה בַת-אַיָּה אֶת-הַשַּׂק וַתַּטֵּהוּ לָהּ אֶל-הַצּוּר, מִתְּחִלַּת קָצִיר, עַד נִתַּךְ-מַיִם עֲלֵיהֶם, מִן-הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְלֹא-נָתְנָה עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם לָנוּחַ עֲלֵיהֶם, יוֹמָם, וְאֶת-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, לָיְלָה.    10 And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water was poured upon them from heaven; and she suffered neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
21.11 יא  וַיֻּגַּד, לְדָוִד, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשְׂתָה רִצְפָּה בַת-אַיָּה, פִּלֶגֶשׁ שָׁאוּל.    11 And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.
21.12 יב  וַיֵּלֶךְ דָּוִד, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-עַצְמוֹת שָׁאוּל וְאֶת-עַצְמוֹת יְהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ, מֵאֵת, בַּעֲלֵי יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד--אֲשֶׁר גָּנְבוּ אֹתָם מֵרְחֹב בֵּית-שַׁן, אֲשֶׁר תלום (תְּלָאוּם) שם הפלשתים (שָׁמָּה פְּלִשְׁתִּים), בְּיוֹם הַכּוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים אֶת-שָׁאוּל, בַּגִּלְבֹּעַ.    12 And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from the broad place of Beth-shan, where the Philistines had hanged them, in the day that the Philistines slew Saul in Gilboa;
21.13 יג  וַיַּעַל מִשָּׁם אֶת-עַצְמוֹת שָׁאוּל, וְאֶת-עַצְמוֹת יְהוֹנָתָן בְּנוֹ; וַיַּאַסְפוּ, אֶת-עַצְמוֹת הַמּוּקָעִים.    13 and he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.
21.14 יד  וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֶת-עַצְמוֹת-שָׁאוּל וִיהוֹנָתָן-בְּנוֹ בְּאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן בְּצֵלָע, בְּקֶבֶר קִישׁ אָבִיו, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֵּעָתֵר אֱלֹהִים לָאָרֶץ, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן.  {פ}    14 And they buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son in the country of Benjamin in Zela, in the sepulchre of Kish his father; and they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was entreated for the land. {P}
21.15 טו  וַתְּהִי-עוֹד מִלְחָמָה לַפְּלִשְׁתִּים, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּרֶד דָּוִד וַעֲבָדָיו עִמּוֹ, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים--וַיָּעַף דָּוִד.    15 And the Philistines had war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines; and David waxed faint.
21.16 טז  וישבו (וְיִשְׁבִּי) בְּנֹב אֲשֶׁר בִּילִידֵי הָרָפָה, וּמִשְׁקַל קֵינוֹ שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת מִשְׁקַל נְחֹשֶׁת, וְהוּא, חָגוּר חֲדָשָׁה; וַיֹּאמֶר, לְהַכּוֹת אֶת-דָּוִד.    16 And Ishbibenob, who was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with new armour, thought to have slain David.
21.17 יז  וַיַּעֲזָר-לוֹ אֲבִישַׁי בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַפְּלִשְׁתִּי וַיְמִתֵהוּ; אָז נִשְׁבְּעוּ אַנְשֵׁי-דָוִד לוֹ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-תֵצֵא עוֹד אִתָּנוּ לַמִּלְחָמָה, וְלֹא תְכַבֶּה, אֶת-נֵר יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    17 But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David swore unto him, saying: 'Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the lamp of Israel.' {P}
21.18 יח  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַתְּהִי-עוֹד הַמִּלְחָמָה בְּגוֹב, עִם-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; אָז הִכָּה, סִבְּכַי הַחֻשָׁתִי, אֶת-סַף, אֲשֶׁר בִּילִדֵי הָרָפָה.  {ס}    18 And it came to pass after this, that there was again war with the Philistines at Gob; then Sibbecai the Hushathite slew Saph, who was of the sons of the giant. {S}
21.19 יט  וַתְּהִי-עוֹד הַמִּלְחָמָה בְּגוֹב, עִם-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּךְ אֶלְחָנָן בֶּן-יַעְרֵי אֹרְגִים בֵּית הַלַּחְמִי, אֵת גָּלְיָת הַגִּתִּי, וְעֵץ חֲנִיתוֹ, כִּמְנוֹר אֹרְגִים.  {ס}    19 And there was again war with the Philistines at Gob; and Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim the Beth-lehemite slew Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam. {S}
21.20 כ  וַתְּהִי-עוֹד מִלְחָמָה, בְּגַת; וַיְהִי אִישׁ מדין (מָדוֹן), וְאֶצְבְּעֹת יָדָיו וְאֶצְבְּעֹת רַגְלָיו שֵׁשׁ וָשֵׁשׁ עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבַּע מִסְפָּר, וְגַם-הוּא, יֻלַּד לְהָרָפָה.    20 And there was again war at Gath, where was a champion, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.
21.21 כא  וַיְחָרֵף, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּכֵּהוּ, יְהוֹנָתָן, בֶּן-שמעי (שִׁמְעָה), אֲחִי דָוִד.    21 And when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother slew him.
21.22 כב  אֶת-אַרְבַּעַת אֵלֶּה יֻלְּדוּ לְהָרָפָה, בְּגַת; וַיִּפְּלוּ בְיַד-דָּוִד, וּבְיַד עֲבָדָיו.  {ש}    22 These four were born to the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants. {P}
22.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר דָּוִד לַיהוָה, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַשִּׁירָה הַזֹּאת,  {ס}  בְּיוֹם הִצִּיל יְהוָה אֹתוֹ  {ר}  מִכַּף כָּל-אֹיְבָיו, וּמִכַּף שָׁאוּל.  {ס}    1 And David spoke unto the LORD the words of this song in the day that the LORD delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul;
22.2 ב  וַיֹּאמַר:  יְהוָה סַלְעִי וּמְצֻדָתִי,  {ר}  וּמְפַלְטִי-לִי.    2 and he said: The LORD is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;
22.3 ג  אֱלֹהֵי צוּרִי, אֶחֱסֶה-בּוֹ;  {ס}  מָגִנִּי וְקֶרֶן יִשְׁעִי,  {ר}  מִשְׂגַּבִּי וּמְנוּסִי,  {ס}  מֹשִׁעִי, מֵחָמָס תֹּשִׁעֵנִי.  {ר}    3 The God who is my rock, in Him I take refuge; my shield, and my horn of salvation, my high tower, and my refuge; my saviour, Thou savest me from violence.
22.4 ד  מְהֻלָּל, אֶקְרָא יְהוָה;  {ס}  וּמֵאֹיְבַי, אִוָּשֵׁעַ.  {ר}    4 Praised, I cry, is the LORD, and I am saved from mine enemies.
22.5 ה  כִּי אֲפָפֻנִי, מִשְׁבְּרֵי-מָוֶת;  {ס}  נַחֲלֵי בְלִיַּעַל, יְבַעֲתֻנִי.  {ר}    5 For the waves of Death compassed me. The floods of Belial assailed me.
22.6 ו  חֶבְלֵי שְׁאוֹל, סַבֻּנִי;  {ס}  קִדְּמֻנִי, מֹקְשֵׁי-מָוֶת.  {ר}    6 The cords of Sheol surrounded me; the snares of Death confronted me.
22.7 ז  בַּצַּר-לִי אֶקְרָא יְהוָה, וְאֶל-אֱלֹהַי אֶקְרָא;  {ס}  וַיִּשְׁמַע מֵהֵיכָלוֹ קוֹלִי, וְשַׁוְעָתִי בְּאָזְנָיו.  {ר}    7 In my distress I called upon the LORD, yea, I called unto my God; and out of His temple He heard my voice, and my cry did enter into His ears.
22.8 ח  ותגעש (וַיִּתְגָּעַשׁ) וַתִּרְעַשׁ הָאָרֶץ,  {ס}  מוֹסְדוֹת הַשָּׁמַיִם יִרְגָּזוּ; וַיִּתְגָּעֲשׁוּ, כִּי-חָרָה לוֹ.  {ר}    8 Then the earth did shake and quake, the foundations of heaven did tremble; they were shaken, because He was wroth.
22.9 ט  עָלָה עָשָׁן בְּאַפּוֹ, וְאֵשׁ מִפִּיו תֹּאכֵל;  {ס}  גֶּחָלִים, בָּעֲרוּ מִמֶּנּוּ.  {ר}    9 Smoke arose up in His nostrils, and fire out of His mouth did devour; coals flamed forth from Him.
22.10 י  וַיֵּט שָׁמַיִם, וַיֵּרַד;  {ס}  וַעֲרָפֶל, תַּחַת רַגְלָיו.  {ר}    10 He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and thick darkness was under His feet.
22.11 יא  וַיִּרְכַּב עַל-כְּרוּב, וַיָּעֹף;  {ס}  וַיֵּרָא, עַל-כַּנְפֵי-רוּחַ.  {ר}    11 And He rode upon a cherub, and did fly; yea, He was seen upon the wings of the wind.
22.12 יב  וַיָּשֶׁת חֹשֶׁךְ סְבִיבֹתָיו, סֻכּוֹת;  {ס}  חַשְׁרַת-מַיִם, עָבֵי שְׁחָקִים.  {ר}    12 And He made darkness pavilions round about Him, gathering of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
22.13 יג  מִנֹּגַהּ, נֶגְדּוֹ; בָּעֲרוּ, גַּחֲלֵי-אֵשׁ.  {ס}    13 At the brightness before Him coals of fire flamed forth.
22.14 יד  יַרְעֵם מִן-שָׁמַיִם, יְהוָה;  {ר}  וְעֶלְיוֹן, יִתֵּן קוֹלוֹ.  {ס}    14 The LORD thundered from heaven, and the Most High gave forth His voice.
22.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁלַח חִצִּים, וַיְפִיצֵם; בָּרָק, ויהמם (וַיָּהֹם).  {ר}    15 And He sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and discomfited them.
22.16 טז  וַיֵּרָאוּ אֲפִקֵי יָם, יִגָּלוּ מֹסְדוֹת תֵּבֵל;  {ס}  בְּגַעֲרַת יְהוָה, מִנִּשְׁמַת רוּחַ אַפּוֹ.  {ר}    16 And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world were laid bare by the rebuke of the LORD, at the blast of the breath of His nostrils.
22.17 יז  יִשְׁלַח מִמָּרוֹם, יִקָּחֵנִי;  {ס}  יַמְשֵׁנִי, מִמַּיִם רַבִּים.  {ר}    17 He sent from on high, He took me; He drew me out of many waters;
22.18 יח  יַצִּילֵנִי, מֵאֹיְבִי עָז;  {ס}  מִשֹּׂנְאַי, כִּי אָמְצוּ מִמֶּנִּי.  {ר}    18 He delivered me from mine enemy most strong, from them that hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
22.19 יט  יְקַדְּמֻנִי, בְּיוֹם אֵידִי; וַיְהִי יְהוָה מִשְׁעָן, לִי.  {ס}    19 They confronted me in the day of my calamity; but the LORD was a stay unto me.
22.20 כ  וַיֹּצֵא לַמֶּרְחָב, אֹתִי;  {ר}  יְחַלְּצֵנִי, כִּי-חָפֵץ בִּי.  {ס}    20 He brought me forth also into a large place; He delivered me, because He delighted in me.
22.21 כא  יִגְמְלֵנִי יְהוָה, כְּצִדְקָתִי;  {ר}  כְּבֹר יָדַי, יָשִׁיב לִי.  {ס}    21 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands hath He recompensed me.
22.22 כב  כִּי שָׁמַרְתִּי, דַּרְכֵי יְהוָה;  {ר}  וְלֹא רָשַׁעְתִּי, מֵאֱלֹהָי.  {ס}    22 For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
22.23 כג  כִּי כָל-מִשְׁפָּטָו, לְנֶגְדִּי; וְחֻקֹּתָיו, לֹא-אָסוּר מִמֶּנָּה.  {ר}    23 For all His ordinances were before me; and as for His statutes, I did not depart from them.
22.24 כד  וָאֶהְיֶה תָמִים, לוֹ;  {ס}  וָאֶשְׁתַּמְּרָה, מֵעֲוֺנִי.  {ר}    24 And I was single-hearted toward Him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity.
22.25 כה  וַיָּשֶׁב יְהוָה לִי, כְּצִדְקָתִי;  {ס}  כְּבֹרִי, לְנֶגֶד עֵינָיו.  {ר}    25 Therefore hath the LORD recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to my cleanness in His eyes.
22.26 כו  עִם-חָסִיד, תִּתְחַסָּד;  {ס}  עִם-גִּבּוֹר תָּמִים, תִּתַּמָּם.  {ר}    26 With the merciful Thou dost show Thyself merciful, with the upright man Thou dost show Thyself upright,
22.27 כז  עִם-נָבָר, תִּתָּבָר;  {ס}  וְעִם-עִקֵּשׁ, תִּתַּפָּל.  {ר}    27 With the pure Thou dost show Thyself pure; and with the crooked Thou dost show Thyself subtle.
22.28 כח  וְאֶת-עַם עָנִי, תּוֹשִׁיעַ;  {ס}  וְעֵינֶיךָ עַל-רָמִים, תַּשְׁפִּיל.  {ר}    28 And the afflicted people Thou dost save; but Thine eyes are upon the haughty, that Thou mayest humble them.
22.29 כט  כִּי-אַתָּה נֵירִי, יְהוָה;  {ס}  וַיהוָה, יַגִּיהַּ חָשְׁכִּי.  {ר}    29 For Thou art my lamp, O LORD; and the LORD doth lighten my darkness.
22.30 ל  כִּי בְכָה, אָרוּץ גְּדוּד;  {ס}  בֵּאלֹהַי, אֲדַלֶּג-שׁוּר.  {ר}    30 For by Thee I run upon a troop; by my God do I scale a wall.
22.31 לא  הָאֵל, תָּמִים דַּרְכּוֹ; אִמְרַת יְהוָה, צְרוּפָה--  {ס}  מָגֵן הוּא, לְכֹל הַחֹסִים בּוֹ.  {ר}    31 As for God, His way is perfect; the word of the LORD is tried; He is a shield unto all them that take refuge in Him.
22.32 לב  כִּי מִי-אֵל, מִבַּלְעֲדֵי יְהוָה;  {ס}  וּמִי צוּר, מִבַּלְעֲדֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {ר}    32 For who is God, save the LORD? and who is a Rock, save our God?
22.33 לג  הָאֵל מָעוּזִּי, חָיִל;  {ס}  וַיַּתֵּר תָּמִים, דרכו (דַּרְכִּי).  {ר}    33 The God who is my strong fortress, and who letteth my way go forth straight;
22.34 לד  מְשַׁוֶּה רגליו (רַגְלַי), כָּאַיָּלוֹת;  {ס}  וְעַל בָּמֹתַי, יַעֲמִדֵנִי.  {ר}    34 Who maketh my feet like hinds', and setteth me upon my high places;
22.35 לה  מְלַמֵּד יָדַי, לַמִּלְחָמָה;  {ס}  וְנִחַת קֶשֶׁת-נְחוּשָׁה, זְרֹעֹתָי.  {ר}    35 Who traineth my hands for war, so that mine arms do bend a bow of brass.
22.36 לו  וַתִּתֶּן-לִי, מָגֵן יִשְׁעֶךָ; וַעֲנֹתְךָ, תַּרְבֵּנִי.  {ס}    36 Thou hast also given me Thy shield of salvation; and Thy condescension hath made me great.
22.37 לז  תַּרְחִיב צַעֲדִי, תַּחְתֵּנִי; וְלֹא מָעֲדוּ, קַרְסֻלָּי.  {ר}    37 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, and my feet have not slipped.
22.38 לח  אֶרְדְּפָה אֹיְבַי, וָאַשְׁמִידֵם;  {ס}  וְלֹא אָשׁוּב, עַד-כַּלּוֹתָם.  {ר}    38 I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; neither did I turn back till they were consumed.
22.39 לט  וָאֲכַלֵּם וָאֶמְחָצֵם, וְלֹא יְקוּמוּן;  {ס}  וַיִּפְּלוּ, תַּחַת רַגְלָי.  {ר}    39 And I have consumed them, and smitten them through, that they cannot arise; yea, they are fallen under my feet.
22.40 מ  וַתַּזְרֵנִי חַיִל, לַמִּלְחָמָה;  {ס}  תַּכְרִיעַ קָמַי, תַּחְתֵּנִי.  {ר}    40 For Thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle; Thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.
22.41 מא  וְאֹיְבַי, תַּתָּה לִּי עֹרֶף; מְשַׂנְאַי, וָאַצְמִיתֵם.  {ס}    41 Thou hast also made mine enemies turn their backs unto me; yea, them that hate me, that I might cut them off.
22.42 מב  יִשְׁעוּ, וְאֵין מֹשִׁיעַ; אֶל-יְהוָה, וְלֹא עָנָם.  {ר}    42 They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but He answered them not.
22.43 מג  וְאֶשְׁחָקֵם, כַּעֲפַר-אָרֶץ;  {ס}  כְּטִיט-חוּצוֹת אֲדִקֵּם, אֶרְקָעֵם.  {ר}    43 Then did I beat them small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp them as the mire of the streets, and did tread them down.
22.44 מד  וַתְּפַלְּטֵנִי, מֵרִיבֵי עַמִּי; תִּשְׁמְרֵנִי לְרֹאשׁ גּוֹיִם,  {ס}  עַם לֹא-יָדַעְתִּי יַעַבְדֻנִי.  {ר}    44 Thou also hast delivered me from the contentions of my people; Thou hast kept me to be the head of the nations; a people whom I have not known serve me.
22.45 מה  בְּנֵי נֵכָר, יִתְכַּחֲשׁוּ-לִי; לִשְׁמוֹעַ אֹזֶן, יִשָּׁמְעוּ לִי.  {ס}    45 The sons of the stranger dwindle away before me; as soon as they hear of me, they obey me.
22.46 מו  בְּנֵי נֵכָר, יִבֹּלוּ; וְיַחְגְּרוּ, מִמִּסְגְּרוֹתָם.  {ר}    46 The sons of the stranger fade away, and come halting out of their close places.
22.47 מז  חַי-יְהוָה, וּבָרוּךְ צוּרִי;  {ס}  וְיָרֻם, אֱלֹהֵי צוּר יִשְׁעִי.  {ר}    47 The LORD liveth, and blessed be my Rock; and exalted be the God, my Rock of salvation;
22.48 מח  הָאֵל, הַנֹּתֵן נְקָמֹת לִי;  {ס}  וּמֹרִיד עַמִּים, תַּחְתֵּנִי.  {ר}    48 Even the God that executeth vengeance for me, and bringeth down peoples under me,
22.49 מט  וּמוֹצִיאִי, מֵאֹיְבָי; וּמִקָּמַי, תְּרוֹמְמֵנִי,  {ס}  מֵאִישׁ חֲמָסִים, תַּצִּילֵנִי.  {ר}    49 And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies; yea, Thou liftest me up above them that rise up against me; Thou deliverest me from the violent man.
22.50 נ  עַל-כֵּן אוֹדְךָ יְהוָה, בַּגּוֹיִם;  {ס}  וּלְשִׁמְךָ, אֲזַמֵּר.  {ר}    50 Therefore I will give thanks unto Thee, O LORD, among the nations, and will sing praises unto Thy name.
22.51 נא  מגדיל (מִגְדּוֹל), יְשׁוּעוֹת מַלְכּוֹ; וְעֹשֶׂה-חֶסֶד לִמְשִׁיחוֹ  {ס}  לְדָוִד וּלְזַרְעוֹ, עַד-עוֹלָם.  {ר}  {ש}    51 A tower of salvation is He to His king; and showeth mercy to His anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore. {P}
23.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה דִּבְרֵי דָוִד, הָאַחֲרֹנִים:  נְאֻם דָּוִד בֶּן-יִשַׁי, וּנְאֻם הַגֶּבֶר הֻקַם עָל--מְשִׁיחַ אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב, וּנְעִים זְמִרוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 Now these are the last words of David: The saying of David the son of Jesse, and the saying of the man raised on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet singer of Israel:
23.2 ב  רוּחַ יְהוָה, דִּבֶּר-בִּי; וּמִלָּתוֹ, עַל-לְשׁוֹנִי.    2 The spirit of the LORD spoke by me, and His word was upon my tongue.
23.3 ג  אָמַר אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִי דִבֶּר צוּר יִשְׂרָאֵל:  מוֹשֵׁל, בָּאָדָם--צַדִּיק, מוֹשֵׁל יִרְאַת אֱלֹהִים.    3 The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me: 'Ruler over men shall be the righteous, even he that ruleth in the fear of God,
23.4 ד  וּכְאוֹר בֹּקֶר, יִזְרַח-שָׁמֶשׁ; בֹּקֶר לֹא עָבוֹת, מִנֹּגַהּ מִמָּטָר דֶּשֶׁא מֵאָרֶץ.    4 And as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, a morning without clouds; when through clear shining after rain, the tender grass springeth out of the earth.'
23.5 ה  כִּי-לֹא-כֵן בֵּיתִי, עִם-אֵל:  כִּי בְרִית עוֹלָם שָׂם לִי, עֲרוּכָה בַכֹּל וּשְׁמֻרָה--כִּי-כָל-יִשְׁעִי וְכָל-חֵפֶץ, כִּי-לֹא יַצְמִיחַ.    5 For is not my house established with God? for an everlasting covenant He hath made with me, ordered in all things, and sure; for all my salvation, and all my desire, will he not make it to grow?
23.6 ו  וּבְלִיַּעַל, כְּקוֹץ מֻנָד כֻּלָּהַם:  כִּי-לֹא בְיָד, יִקָּחוּ.    6 But the ungodly, they are as thorns thrust away, all of them, for they cannot be taken with the hand;
23.7 ז  וְאִישׁ יִגַּע בָּהֶם, יִמָּלֵא בַרְזֶל וְעֵץ חֲנִית; וּבָאֵשׁ, שָׂרוֹף יִשָּׂרְפוּ בַּשָּׁבֶת.  {פ}    7 But the man that toucheth them must be armed with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in their place. {P}
23.8 ח  אֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת הַגִּבֹּרִים, אֲשֶׁר לְדָוִד:  יֹשֵׁב בַּשֶּׁבֶת תַּחְכְּמֹנִי רֹאשׁ הַשָּׁלִשִׁי, הוּא עֲדִינוֹ העצנו (הָעֶצְנִי)--עַל-שְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת חָלָל, בְּפַעַם אחד (אֶחָת).  {ס}    8 These are the names of the mighty men whom David had: Josheb-basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief of the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite; [he lifted up his spear] against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time. {S}
23.9 ט  וְאַחֲרָו אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-דדי (דֹּדוֹ), בֶּן-אֲחֹחִי; בִּשְׁלֹשָׁה גברים (הַגִּבֹּרִים) עִם-דָּוִד, בְּחָרְפָם בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים נֶאֶסְפוּ-שָׁם לַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיַּעֲלוּ, אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    9 And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the son of an Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they jeoparded their lives against the Philistines that were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone away;
23.10 י  הוּא קָם וַיַּךְ בַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים עַד כִּי-יָגְעָה יָדוֹ, וַתִּדְבַּק יָדוֹ אֶל-הַחֶרֶב, וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה תְּשׁוּעָה גְדוֹלָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וְהָעָם יָשֻׁבוּ אַחֲרָיו, אַךְ-לְפַשֵּׁט.  {ס}    10 he stood firm, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand did cleave unto the sword; and the LORD wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to strip the slain. {S}
23.11 יא  וְאַחֲרָיו שַׁמָּה בֶן-אָגֵא, הָרָרִי; וַיֵּאָסְפוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים לַחַיָּה, וַתְּהִי-שָׁם חֶלְקַת הַשָּׂדֶה מְלֵאָה עֲדָשִׁים, וְהָעָם נָס, מִפְּנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים.    11 And after him was Shammah the son of Age the Ararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a plot of ground full of lentils; and the people fled from the Philistines.
23.12 יב  וַיִּתְיַצֵּב בְּתוֹךְ-הַחֶלְקָה וַיַּצִּילֶהָ, וַיַּךְ אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה, תְּשׁוּעָה גְדוֹלָה.  {ס}    12 But he stood in the midst of the plot, and defended it, and slew the Philistines; and the LORD wrought a great victory. {S}
23.13 יג  וַיֵּרְדוּ שלשים (שְׁלֹשָׁה) מֵהַשְּׁלֹשִׁים רֹאשׁ, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-קָצִיר אֶל-דָּוִד--אֶל-מְעָרַת, עֲדֻלָּם; וְחַיַּת פְּלִשְׁתִּים, חֹנָה בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים.    13 And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam; and the troop of the Philistines were encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
23.14 יד  וְדָוִד, אָז בַּמְּצוּדָה; וּמַצַּב פְּלִשְׁתִּים, אָז בֵּית לָחֶם.    14 And David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Beth-lehem.
23.15 טו  וַיִּתְאַוֶּה דָוִד, וַיֹּאמַר:  מִי יַשְׁקֵנִי מַיִם, מִבֹּאר בֵּית-לֶחֶם אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׁעַר.  {ס}    15 And David longed, and said: 'Oh that one would give me water to drink of the well of Beth-lehem, which is by the gate!' {S}
23.16 טז  וַיִּבְקְעוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת הַגִּבֹּרִים בְּמַחֲנֵה פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּשְׁאֲבוּ-מַיִם מִבֹּאר בֵּית-לֶחֶם אֲשֶׁר בַּשַּׁעַר, וַיִּשְׂאוּ, וַיָּבִאוּ אֶל-דָּוִד; וְלֹא אָבָה לִשְׁתּוֹתָם, וַיַּסֵּךְ אֹתָם לַיהוָה.    16 And the three mighty men broke through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David; but he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD.
23.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר חָלִילָה לִּי יְהוָה מֵעֲשֹׂתִי זֹאת, הֲדַם הָאֲנָשִׁים הַהֹלְכִים בְּנַפְשׁוֹתָם, וְלֹא אָבָה, לִשְׁתּוֹתָם; אֵלֶּה עָשׂוּ, שְׁלֹשֶׁת הַגִּבֹּרִים.  {ס}    17 And he said: 'Be it far from me, O LORD, that I should do this; shall I drink the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?' therefore he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men. {S}
23.18 יח  וַאֲבִישַׁי אֲחִי יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרוּיָה, הוּא רֹאשׁ השלשי (הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה), וְהוּא עוֹרֵר אֶת-חֲנִיתוֹ, עַל-שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת חָלָל; וְלוֹ-שֵׁם, בַּשְּׁלֹשָׁה.    18 And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred and slew them, and had a name among the three.
23.19 יט  מִן-הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה הֲכִי נִכְבָּד, וַיְהִי לָהֶם לְשָׂר; וְעַד-הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה, לֹא-בָא.  {ס}    19 He was most honourable of the three; therefore he was made their captain; howbeit he attained not unto the first three. {S}
23.20 כ  וּבְנָיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָדָע בֶּן-אִישׁ-חי (חַיִל) רַב-פְּעָלִים, מִקַּבְצְאֵל; הוּא הִכָּה, אֵת שְׁנֵי אֲרִאֵל מוֹאָב, וְהוּא יָרַד וְהִכָּה אֶת-האריה (הָאֲרִי) בְּתוֹךְ הַבֹּאר, בְּיוֹם הַשָּׁלֶג.    20 And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he smote the two altar-hearths of Moab; he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow;
23.21 כא  וְהוּא-הִכָּה אֶת-אִישׁ מִצְרִי אשר (אִישׁ) מַרְאֶה, וּבְיַד הַמִּצְרִי חֲנִית, וַיֵּרֶד אֵלָיו, בַּשָּׁבֶט; וַיִּגְזֹל אֶת-הַחֲנִית מִיַּד הַמִּצְרִי, וַיַּהַרְגֵהוּ בַּחֲנִיתוֹ.    21 and he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man; and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.
23.22 כב  אֵלֶּה עָשָׂה, בְּנָיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹיָדָע; וְלוֹ-שֵׁם, בִּשְׁלֹשָׁה הַגִּבֹּרִים.    22 These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had a name among the three mighty men.
23.23 כג  מִן-הַשְּׁלֹשִׁים נִכְבָּד, וְאֶל-הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה לֹא-בָא; וַיְשִׂמֵהוּ דָוִד,  {ר}  אֶל-מִשְׁמַעְתּוֹ.  {ס}    23 He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the first three. And David set him over his guard.
23.24 כד  עֲשָׂהאֵל אֲחִי-יוֹאָב, בַּשְּׁלֹשִׁים; אֶלְחָנָן בֶּן-דֹּדוֹ,  {ר}  בֵּית לָחֶם.  {ס}    24 Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem;
23.25 כה  שַׁמָּה, הַחֲרֹדִי,  {ס}  אֱלִיקָא,  {ר}  הַחֲרֹדִי.  {ס}    25 Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite;
23.26 כו  חֶלֶץ, הַפַּלְטִי,  {ס}  עִירָא  {ר}  בֶן-עִקֵּשׁ,  {ס}  הַתְּקוֹעִי.  {ס}    26 Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite;
23.27 כז  אֲבִיעֶזֶר,  {ר}  הָעַנְּתֹתִי,  {ס}  מְבֻנַּי, הַחֻשָׁתִי.  {ס}    27 Abiezer the Anathothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite;
23.28 כח  צַלְמוֹן,  {ר}  הָאֲחֹחִי,  {ס}  מַהְרַי, הַנְּטֹפָתִי.  {ס}    28 Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite;
23.29 כט  חֵלֶב בֶּן-בַּעֲנָה,  {ר}  הַנְּטֹפָתִי;  {ס}  אִתַּי, בֶּן-רִיבַי, מִגִּבְעַת, בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן.  {ס}    29 Heleb the son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin;
23.30 ל  בְּנָיָהוּ,  {ר}  פִּרְעָתֹנִי,  {ס}  הִדַּי, מִנַּחֲלֵי גָעַשׁ.  {ס}    30 Benaiah a Pirathonite, Hiddai of Nahale-gaash;
23.31 לא  אֲבִי-עַלְבוֹן,  {ר}  הָעַרְבָתִי,  {ס}  עַזְמָוֶת, הַבַּרְחֻמִי.  {ס}    31 Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite;
23.32 לב  אֶלְיַחְבָּא,  {ר}  הַשַּׁעַלְבֹנִי,  {ס}  בְּנֵי יָשֵׁן, יְהוֹנָתָן.  {ס}    32 Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan;
23.33 לג  שַׁמָּה,  {ר}  הַהֲרָרִי,  {ס}  אֲחִיאָם בֶּן-שָׁרָר, הָארָרִי.  {ס}    33 Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Ararite;
23.34 לד  אֱלִיפֶלֶט  {ר}  בֶּן-אֲחַסְבַּי, בֶּן-הַמַּעֲכָתִי;  {ס}  אֱלִיעָם בֶּן-אֲחִיתֹפֶל,  {ר}  הַגִּלֹנִי.  {ס}    34 Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maacathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite;
23.35 לה  חצרו (חֶצְרַי), הַכַּרְמְלִי,  {ס}  פַּעֲרַי,  {ר}  הָאַרְבִּי.  {ס}    35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite;
23.36 לו  יִגְאָל בֶּן-נָתָן מִצֹּבָה,  {ס}  בָּנִי  {ר}  הַגָּדִי.  {ס}    36 Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite;
23.37 לז  צֶלֶק, הָעַמֹּנִי;  {ס}  נַחְרַי,  {ר}  הַבְּאֵרֹתִי--נשאי (נֹשֵׂא), כְּלֵי יוֹאָב בֶּן-צְרֻיָה.  {ס}    37 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armour-bearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah;
23.38 לח  עִירָא,  {ר}  הַיִּתְרִי,  {ס}  גָּרֵב, הַיִּתְרִי.  {ס}    38 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite;
23.39 לט  אוּרִיָּה,  {ר}  הַחִתִּי--כֹּל, שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁבְעָה.  {פ}    39 Uriah the Hittite. Thirty and seven in all. {P}
24.1 א  וַיֹּסֶף, אַף-יְהוָה, לַחֲרוֹת, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּסֶת אֶת-דָּוִד בָּהֶם לֵאמֹר, לֵךְ מְנֵה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאֶת-יְהוּדָה.    1 And again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He moved David against them, saying: 'Go, number Israel and Judah.'
24.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-יוֹאָב שַׂר-הַחַיִל אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, שׁוּט-נָא בְּכָל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מִדָּן וְעַד-בְּאֵר שֶׁבַע, וּפִקְדוּ, אֶת-הָעָם; וְיָדַעְתִּי, אֵת מִסְפַּר הָעָם.  {ס}    2 And the king said to Joab the captain of the host that was with him: 'Go now to and fro through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the sum of the people.' {S}
24.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָב אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְיוֹסֵף יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֶל-הָעָם כָּהֵם וְכָהֵם מֵאָה פְעָמִים, וְעֵינֵי אֲדֹנִי-הַמֶּלֶךְ, רֹאוֹת; וַאדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לָמָּה חָפֵץ בַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    3 And Joab said unto the king: 'Now the LORD thy God add unto the people, how many soever they may be, a hundredfold, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it; but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing?'
24.4 ד  וַיֶּחֱזַק דְּבַר-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-יוֹאָב, וְעַל שָׂרֵי הֶחָיִל; וַיֵּצֵא יוֹאָב וְשָׂרֵי הַחַיִל, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לִפְקֹד אֶת-הָעָם, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    4 Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.
24.5 ה  וַיַּעַבְרוּ, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן; וַיַּחֲנוּ בַעֲרוֹעֵר, יְמִין הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹךְ-הַנַּחַל הַגָּד--וְאֶל-יַעְזֵר.    5 And they passed over the Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side of the city that is in the middle of the valley of Gad, and unto Jazer;
24.6 ו  וַיָּבֹאוּ, הַגִּלְעָדָה, וְאֶל-אֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּים, חָדְשִׁי; וַיָּבֹאוּ דָּנָה יַּעַן, וְסָבִיב אֶל-צִידוֹן.    6 then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtim-hodshi; and they came to Dan-jaan, and round about to Zidon,
24.7 ז  וַיָּבֹאוּ, מִבְצַר-צֹר, וְכָל-עָרֵי הַחִוִּי, וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי; וַיֵּצְאוּ אֶל-נֶגֶב יְהוּדָה, בְּאֵר שָׁבַע.    7 and came to the stronghold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites; and they went out to the south of Judah, at Beer-sheba.
24.8 ח  וַיָּשֻׁטוּ, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ; וַיָּבֹאוּ מִקְצֵה תִשְׁעָה חֳדָשִׁים, וְעֶשְׂרִים יוֹם--יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    8 So when they had gone to and fro through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.
24.9 ט  וַיִּתֵּן יוֹאָב אֶת-מִסְפַּר מִפְקַד-הָעָם, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַתְּהִי יִשְׂרָאֵל שְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף אִישׁ-חַיִל, שֹׁלֵף חֶרֶב, וְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה, חֲמֵשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף אִישׁ.    9 And Joab gave up the sum of the numbering of the people unto the king; and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.
24.10 י  וַיַּךְ לֵב-דָּוִד אֹתוֹ, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן סָפַר אֶת-הָעָם;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-יְהוָה, חָטָאתִי מְאֹד אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי, וְעַתָּה יְהוָה הַעֲבֶר-נָא אֶת-עֲוֺן עַבְדְּךָ, כִּי נִסְכַּלְתִּי מְאֹד.    10 And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. {P} And David said unto the LORD: 'I have sinned greatly in what I have done; but now, O LORD, put away, I beseech Thee, the iniquity of Thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.'
24.11 יא  וַיָּקָם דָּוִד, בַּבֹּקֶר;  {פ} וּדְבַר-יְהוָה, הָיָה אֶל-גָּד הַנָּבִיא, חֹזֵה דָוִד, לֵאמֹר.    11 And when David rose up in the morning, {P} the word of the LORD came unto the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying:
24.12 יב  הָלוֹךְ וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֶל-דָּוִד, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה--שָׁלֹשׁ, אָנֹכִי נוֹטֵל עָלֶיךָ:  בְּחַר-לְךָ אַחַת-מֵהֶם, וְאֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ.    12 'Go and speak unto David: Thus saith the LORD: I lay upon thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.'
24.13 יג  וַיָּבֹא-גָד אֶל-דָּוִד, וַיַּגֶּד-לוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הֲתָבוֹא לְךָ שֶׁבַע-שָׁנִים רָעָב בְּאַרְצֶךָ אִם-שְׁלֹשָׁה חֳדָשִׁים נֻסְךָ לִפְנֵי-צָרֶיךָ וְהוּא רֹדְפֶךָ, וְאִם-הֱיוֹת שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים דֶּבֶר בְּאַרְצֶךָ--עַתָּה דַּע וּרְאֵה, מָה-אָשִׁיב שֹׁלְחִי דָּבָר.  {ס}    13 So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him: 'Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee three months before thy foes while they pursue thee? or shall there be three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise thee, and consider what answer I shall return to Him that sent Me.' {S}
24.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-גָּד, צַר-לִי מְאֹד; נִפְּלָה-נָּא בְיַד-יְהוָה כִּי-רַבִּים רַחֲמָו, וּבְיַד-אָדָם אַל-אֶפֹּלָה.    14 And David said unto Gad: 'I am in a great strait; let us fall now into the hand of the LORD; for His mercies are great; and let me not fall into the hand of man.'
24.15 טו  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה דֶּבֶר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵהַבֹּקֶר וְעַד-עֵת מוֹעֵד; וַיָּמָת מִן-הָעָם, מִדָּן וְעַד-בְּאֵר שֶׁבַע, שִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, אִישׁ.    15 So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed; and there died of the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba seventy thousand men.
24.16 טז  וַיִּשְׁלַח יָדוֹ הַמַּלְאָךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לְשַׁחֲתָהּ, וַיִּנָּחֶם יְהוָה אֶל-הָרָעָה, וַיֹּאמֶר לַמַּלְאָךְ הַמַּשְׁחִית בָּעָם רַב עַתָּה הֶרֶף יָדֶךָ; וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה הָיָה, עִם-גֹּרֶן האורנה (הָאֲרַוְנָה) הַיְבֻסִי.  {ס}    16 And when the angel stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented Him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people: 'It is enough; now stay thy hand.' And the angel of the LORD was by the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite. {S}
24.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד אֶל-יְהוָה בִּרְאֹתוֹ אֶת-הַמַּלְאָךְ הַמַּכֶּה בָעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי חָטָאתִי וְאָנֹכִי הֶעֱוֵיתִי, וְאֵלֶּה הַצֹּאן, מֶה עָשׂוּ:  תְּהִי נָא יָדְךָ בִּי, וּבְבֵית אָבִי.  {פ}    17 And David spoke unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said: 'Lo, I have sinned, and I have done iniquitously; but these sheep, what have they done? let Thy hand, I pray Thee, be against me, and against my father's house.' {P}
24.18 יח  וַיָּבֹא-גָד אֶל-דָּוִד, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, עֲלֵה הָקֵם לַיהוָה מִזְבֵּחַ, בְּגֹרֶן, ארניה (אֲרַוְנָה) הַיְבֻסִי.    18 And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him: 'Go up, rear an altar unto the LORD in the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.'
24.19 יט  וַיַּעַל דָּוִד כִּדְבַר-גָּד, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה.    19 And David went up according to the saying of Gad, as the LORD commanded.
24.20 כ  וַיַּשְׁקֵף אֲרַוְנָה, וַיַּרְא אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-עֲבָדָיו, עֹבְרִים, עָלָיו; וַיֵּצֵא אֲרַוְנָה, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ אַפָּיו אָרְצָה.    20 And Araunah looked forth, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him; and Araunah went out, and bowed down before the king with his face to the ground.
24.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲרַוְנָה, מַדּוּעַ בָּא אֲדֹנִי-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-עַבְדּוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר דָּוִד לִקְנוֹת מֵעִמְּךָ אֶת-הַגֹּרֶן, לִבְנוֹת מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה, וְתֵעָצַר הַמַּגֵּפָה, מֵעַל הָעָם.    21 And Araunah said: 'Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant?' And David said: 'To buy the threshing-floor of thee, to build an altar unto the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from the people.'
24.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲרַוְנָה אֶל-דָּוִד, יִקַּח וְיַעַל אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינָו; רְאֵה הַבָּקָר לָעֹלָה, וְהַמֹּרִגִּים וּכְלֵי הַבָּקָר לָעֵצִים.    22 And Araunah said unto David: 'Let my lord the king take and offer up what seemeth good unto him; behold the oxen for the burnt-offering, and the threshing-instruments and the furniture of the oxen for the wood.'
24.23 כג  הַכֹּל, נָתַן אֲרַוְנָה הַמֶּלֶךְ--לַמֶּלֶךְ;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲרַוְנָה אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ יִרְצֶךָ.    23 All this did Araunah the king give unto the king. {S} And Araunah said unto the king: 'The LORD thy God accept thee.'
24.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-אֲרַוְנָה, לֹא כִּי-קָנוֹ אֶקְנֶה מֵאוֹתְךָ בִּמְחִיר, וְלֹא אַעֲלֶה לַיהוָה אֱלֹהַי, עֹלוֹת חִנָּם; וַיִּקֶן דָּוִד אֶת-הַגֹּרֶן וְאֶת-הַבָּקָר, בְּכֶסֶף שְׁקָלִים חֲמִשִּׁים.    24 And the king said unto Araunah: 'Nay; but I will verily buy it of thee at a price; neither will I offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD my God which cost me nothing.' So David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
24.25 כה  וַיִּבֶן שָׁם דָּוִד מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה, וַיַּעַל עֹלוֹת וּשְׁלָמִים; וַיֵּעָתֵר יְהוָה לָאָרֶץ, וַתֵּעָצַר הַמַּגֵּפָה מֵעַל יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ש}    25 And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. So the LORD was entreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel. {P}
