1.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַבָּאִים, מִצְרָיְמָה:  אֵת יַעֲקֹב, אִישׁ וּבֵיתוֹ בָּאוּ.	1 Now these are the names of the sons of Israel, who came into Egypt with Jacob; every man came with his household:
1.2 ב  רְאוּבֵן שִׁמְעוֹן, לֵוִי וִיהוּדָה.	2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah;
1.3 ג  יִשָּׂשכָר זְבוּלֻן, וּבִנְיָמִן.	3 Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin;
1.4 ד  דָּן וְנַפְתָּלִי, גָּד וְאָשֵׁר.	4 Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
1.5 ה  וַיְהִי, כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ יֹצְאֵי יֶרֶךְ-יַעֲקֹב--שִׁבְעִים נָפֶשׁ; וְיוֹסֵף, הָיָה בְמִצְרָיִם.	5 And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls; and Joseph was in Egypt already.
1.6 ו  וַיָּמָת יוֹסֵף וְכָל-אֶחָיו, וְכֹל הַדּוֹר הַהוּא.	6 And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.
1.7 ז  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, פָּרוּ וַיִּשְׁרְצוּ וַיִּרְבּוּ וַיַּעַצְמוּ--בִּמְאֹד מְאֹד; וַתִּמָּלֵא הָאָרֶץ, אֹתָם.  {פ}	7 And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them. {P}
1.8 ח  וַיָּקָם מֶלֶךְ-חָדָשׁ, עַל-מִצְרָיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדַע, אֶת-יוֹסֵף.	8 Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who knew not Joseph.
1.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-עַמּוֹ:  הִנֵּה, עַם בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--רַב וְעָצוּם, מִמֶּנּוּ.	9 And he said unto his people: 'Behold, the people of the children of Israel are too many and too mighty for us;
1.10 י  הָבָה נִתְחַכְּמָה, לוֹ:  פֶּן-יִרְבֶּה, וְהָיָה כִּי-תִקְרֶאנָה מִלְחָמָה וְנוֹסַף גַּם-הוּא עַל-שֹׂנְאֵינוּ, וְנִלְחַם-בָּנוּ, וְעָלָה מִן-הָאָרֶץ.	10 come, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there befalleth us any war, they also join themselves unto our enemies, and fight against us, and get them up out of the land.'
1.11 יא  וַיָּשִׂימוּ עָלָיו שָׂרֵי מִסִּים, לְמַעַן עַנֹּתוֹ בְּסִבְלֹתָם; וַיִּבֶן עָרֵי מִסְכְּנוֹת, לְפַרְעֹה--אֶת-פִּתֹם, וְאֶת-רַעַמְסֵס.	11 Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh store-cities, Pithom and Raamses.
1.12 יב  וְכַאֲשֶׁר יְעַנּוּ אֹתוֹ, כֵּן יִרְבֶּה וְכֵן יִפְרֹץ; וַיָּקֻצוּ, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	12 But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and the more they spread abroad. And they were adread because of the children of Israel.
1.13 יג  וַיַּעֲבִדוּ מִצְרַיִם אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּפָרֶךְ.	13 And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour.
1.14 יד  וַיְמָרְרוּ אֶת-חַיֵּיהֶם בַּעֲבֹדָה קָשָׁה, בְּחֹמֶר וּבִלְבֵנִים, וּבְכָל-עֲבֹדָה, בַּשָּׂדֶה--אֵת, כָּל-עֲבֹדָתָם, אֲשֶׁר-עָבְדוּ בָהֶם, בְּפָרֶךְ.	14 And they made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field; in all their service, wherein they made them serve with rigour.
1.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, לַמְיַלְּדֹת הָעִבְרִיֹּת, אֲשֶׁר שֵׁם הָאַחַת שִׁפְרָה, וְשֵׁם הַשֵּׁנִית פּוּעָה.	15 And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah;
1.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, בְּיַלֶּדְכֶן אֶת-הָעִבְרִיּוֹת, וּרְאִיתֶן, עַל-הָאָבְנָיִם:  אִם-בֵּן הוּא וַהֲמִתֶּן אֹתוֹ, וְאִם-בַּת הִוא וָחָיָה.	16 and he said: 'When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, ye shall look upon the birthstool: if it be a son, then ye shall kill him; but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.'
1.17 יז  וַתִּירֶאןָ הַמְיַלְּדֹת, אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים, וְלֹא עָשׂוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֲלֵיהֶן מֶלֶךְ מִצְרָיִם; וַתְּחַיֶּיןָ, אֶת-הַיְלָדִים.	17 But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men-children alive.
1.18 יח  וַיִּקְרָא מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, לַמְיַלְּדֹת, וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶן, מַדּוּעַ עֲשִׂיתֶן הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַתְּחַיֶּיןָ, אֶת-הַיְלָדִים.	18 And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them: 'Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men-children alive?'
1.19 יט  וַתֹּאמַרְןָ הַמְיַלְּדֹת אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, כִּי לֹא כַנָּשִׁים הַמִּצְרִיֹּת הָעִבְרִיֹּת:  כִּי-חָיוֹת הֵנָּה, בְּטֶרֶם תָּבוֹא אֲלֵהֶן הַמְיַלֶּדֶת וְיָלָדוּ.	19 And the midwives said unto Pharaoh: 'Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwife come unto them.'
1.20 כ  וַיֵּיטֶב אֱלֹהִים, לַמְיַלְּדֹת; וַיִּרֶב הָעָם וַיַּעַצְמוּ, מְאֹד.	20 And God dealt well with the midwives; and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.
1.21 כא  וַיְהִי, כִּי-יָרְאוּ הַמְיַלְּדֹת אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיַּעַשׂ לָהֶם, בָּתִּים.	21 And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that He made them houses.
1.22 כב  וַיְצַו פַּרְעֹה, לְכָל-עַמּוֹ לֵאמֹר:  כָּל-הַבֵּן הַיִּלּוֹד, הַיְאֹרָה תַּשְׁלִיכֻהוּ, וְכָל-הַבַּת, תְּחַיּוּן.  {פ}	22 And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying: 'Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.' {P}
2.1 א  וַיֵּלֶךְ אִישׁ, מִבֵּית לֵוִי; וַיִּקַּח, אֶת-בַּת-לֵוִי.	1 And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.
2.2 ב  וַתַּהַר הָאִשָּׁה, וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן; וַתֵּרֶא אֹתוֹ כִּי-טוֹב הוּא, וַתִּצְפְּנֵהוּ שְׁלֹשָׁה יְרָחִים.	2 And the woman conceived, and bore a son; and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.
2.3 ג  וְלֹא-יָכְלָה עוֹד, הַצְּפִינוֹ, וַתִּקַּח-לוֹ תֵּבַת גֹּמֶא, וַתַּחְמְרָה בַחֵמָר וּבַזָּפֶת; וַתָּשֶׂם בָּהּ אֶת-הַיֶּלֶד, וַתָּשֶׂם בַּסּוּף עַל-שְׂפַת הַיְאֹר.	3 And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch; and she put the child therein, and laid it in the flags by the river's brink.
2.4 ד  וַתֵּתַצַּב אֲחֹתוֹ, מֵרָחֹק, לְדֵעָה, מַה-יֵּעָשֶׂה לוֹ.	4 And his sister stood afar off, to know what would be done to him.
2.5 ה  וַתֵּרֶד בַּת-פַּרְעֹה לִרְחֹץ עַל-הַיְאֹר, וְנַעֲרֹתֶיהָ הֹלְכֹת עַל-יַד הַיְאֹר; וַתֵּרֶא אֶת-הַתֵּבָה בְּתוֹךְ הַסּוּף, וַתִּשְׁלַח אֶת-אֲמָתָהּ וַתִּקָּחֶהָ.	5 And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe in the river; and her maidens walked along by the river-side; and she saw the ark among the flags, and sent her handmaid to fetch it.
2.6 ו  וַתִּפְתַּח וַתִּרְאֵהוּ אֶת-הַיֶּלֶד, וְהִנֵּה-נַעַר בֹּכֶה; וַתַּחְמֹל עָלָיו--וַתֹּאמֶר, מִיַּלְדֵי הָעִבְרִים זֶה.	6 And she opened it, and saw it, even the child; and behold a boy that wept. And she had compassion on him, and said: 'This is one of the Hebrews' children.'
2.7 ז  וַתֹּאמֶר אֲחֹתוֹ, אֶל-בַּת-פַּרְעֹה, הַאֵלֵךְ וְקָרָאתִי לָךְ אִשָּׁה מֵינֶקֶת, מִן הָעִבְרִיֹּת; וְתֵינִק לָךְ, אֶת-הַיָּלֶד.	7 Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter: 'Shall I go and call thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?'
2.8 ח  וַתֹּאמֶר-לָהּ בַּת-פַּרְעֹה, לֵכִי; וַתֵּלֶךְ, הָעַלְמָה, וַתִּקְרָא, אֶת-אֵם הַיָּלֶד.	8 And Pharaoh's daughter said to her: 'Go.' And the maiden went and called the child's mother.
2.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר לָהּ בַּת-פַּרְעֹה, הֵילִיכִי אֶת-הַיֶּלֶד הַזֶּה וְהֵינִקִהוּ לִי, וַאֲנִי, אֶתֵּן אֶת-שְׂכָרֵךְ; וַתִּקַּח הָאִשָּׁה הַיֶּלֶד, וַתְּנִיקֵהוּ.	9 And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her: 'Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages.' And the woman took the child, and nursed it.
2.10 י  וַיִּגְדַּל הַיֶּלֶד, וַתְּבִאֵהוּ לְבַת-פַּרְעֹה, וַיְהִי-לָהּ, לְבֵן; וַתִּקְרָא שְׁמוֹ, מֹשֶׁה, וַתֹּאמֶר, כִּי מִן-הַמַּיִם מְשִׁיתִהוּ.	10 And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses, and said: 'Because I drew him out of the water.'
2.11 יא  וַיְהִי בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, וַיִּגְדַּל מֹשֶׁה וַיֵּצֵא אֶל-אֶחָיו, וַיַּרְא, בְּסִבְלֹתָם; וַיַּרְא אִישׁ מִצְרִי, מַכֶּה אִישׁ-עִבְרִי מֵאֶחָיו.	11 And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown up, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens; and he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren.
2.12 יב  וַיִּפֶן כֹּה וָכֹה, וַיַּרְא כִּי אֵין אִישׁ; וַיַּךְ, אֶת-הַמִּצְרִי, וַיִּטְמְנֵהוּ, בַּחוֹל.	12 And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
2.13 יג  וַיֵּצֵא בַּיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי, וְהִנֵּה שְׁנֵי-אֲנָשִׁים עִבְרִים נִצִּים; וַיֹּאמֶר, לָרָשָׁע, לָמָּה תַכֶּה, רֵעֶךָ.	13 And he went out the second day, and, behold, two men of the Hebrews were striving together; and he said to him that did the wrong: 'Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?'
2.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר מִי שָׂמְךָ לְאִישׁ שַׂר וְשֹׁפֵט, עָלֵינוּ--הַלְהָרְגֵנִי אַתָּה אֹמֵר, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָרַגְתָּ אֶת-הַמִּצְרִי; וַיִּירָא מֹשֶׁה וַיֹּאמַר, אָכֵן נוֹדַע הַדָּבָר.	14 And he said: 'Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us? thinkest thou to kill me, as thou didst kill the Egyptian?' And Moses feared, and said: 'Surely the thing is known.'
2.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁמַע פַּרְעֹה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, וַיְבַקֵּשׁ לַהֲרֹג אֶת-מֹשֶׁה; וַיִּבְרַח מֹשֶׁה מִפְּנֵי פַרְעֹה, וַיֵּשֶׁב בְּאֶרֶץ-מִדְיָן וַיֵּשֶׁב עַל-הַבְּאֵר.	15 Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian; and he sat down by a well.
2.16 טז  וּלְכֹהֵן מִדְיָן, שֶׁבַע בָּנוֹת; וַתָּבֹאנָה וַתִּדְלֶנָה, וַתְּמַלֶּאנָה אֶת-הָרְהָטִים, לְהַשְׁקוֹת, צֹאן אֲבִיהֶן.	16 Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.
2.17 יז  וַיָּבֹאוּ הָרֹעִים, וַיְגָרְשׁוּם; וַיָּקָם מֹשֶׁה וַיּוֹשִׁעָן, וַיַּשְׁקְ אֶת-צֹאנָם.	17 And the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.
2.18 יח  וַתָּבֹאנָה, אֶל-רְעוּאֵל אֲבִיהֶן; וַיֹּאמֶר, מַדּוּעַ מִהַרְתֶּן בֹּא הַיּוֹם.	18 And when they came to Reuel their father, he said: 'How is it that ye are come so soon to-day?'
2.19 יט  וַתֹּאמַרְןָ--אִישׁ מִצְרִי, הִצִּילָנוּ מִיַּד הָרֹעִים; וְגַם-דָּלֹה דָלָה לָנוּ, וַיַּשְׁקְ אֶת-הַצֹּאן.	19 And they said: 'An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and moreover he drew water for us, and watered the flock.'
2.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-בְּנֹתָיו, וְאַיּוֹ; לָמָּה זֶּה עֲזַבְתֶּן אֶת-הָאִישׁ, קִרְאֶן לוֹ וְיֹאכַל לָחֶם.	20 And he said unto his daughters: 'And where is he? Why is it that ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.'
2.21 כא  וַיּוֹאֶל מֹשֶׁה, לָשֶׁבֶת אֶת-הָאִישׁ; וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-צִפֹּרָה בִתּוֹ, לְמֹשֶׁה.	21 And Moses was content to dwell with the man; and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
2.22 כב  וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ גֵּרְשֹׁם:  כִּי אָמַר--גֵּר הָיִיתִי, בְּאֶרֶץ נָכְרִיָּה.  {פ}	22 And she bore a son, and he called his name Gershom; for he said: 'I have been a stranger in a strange land.' {P}
2.23 כג  וַיְהִי בַיָּמִים הָרַבִּים הָהֵם, וַיָּמָת מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, וַיֵּאָנְחוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִן-הָעֲבֹדָה, וַיִּזְעָקוּ; וַתַּעַל שַׁוְעָתָם אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, מִן-הָעֲבֹדָה.	23 And it came to pass in the course of those many days that the king of Egypt died; and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.
2.24 כד  וַיִּשְׁמַע אֱלֹהִים, אֶת-נַאֲקָתָם; וַיִּזְכֹּר אֱלֹהִים אֶת-בְּרִיתוֹ, אֶת-אַבְרָהָם אֶת-יִצְחָק וְאֶת-יַעֲקֹב.	24 And God heard their groaning, and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
2.25 כה  וַיַּרְא אֱלֹהִים, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּדַע, אֱלֹהִים.  {ס}	25 And God saw the children of Israel, and God took cognizance of them. {S}
3.1 א  וּמֹשֶׁה, הָיָה רֹעֶה אֶת-צֹאן יִתְרוֹ חֹתְנוֹ--כֹּהֵן מִדְיָן; וַיִּנְהַג אֶת-הַצֹּאן אַחַר הַמִּדְבָּר, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-הַר הָאֱלֹהִים חֹרֵבָה.	1 Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian; and he led the flock to the farthest end of the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God, unto Horeb.
3.2 ב  וַיֵּרָא מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה אֵלָיו, בְּלַבַּת-אֵשׁ--מִתּוֹךְ הַסְּנֶה; וַיַּרְא, וְהִנֵּה הַסְּנֶה בֹּעֵר בָּאֵשׁ, וְהַסְּנֶה, אֵינֶנּוּ אֻכָּל.	2 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
3.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה--אָסֻרָה-נָּא וְאֶרְאֶה, אֶת-הַמַּרְאֶה הַגָּדֹל הַזֶּה:  מַדּוּעַ, לֹא-יִבְעַר הַסְּנֶה.	3 And Moses said: 'I will turn aside now, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.'
3.4 ד  וַיַּרְא יְהוָה, כִּי סָר לִרְאוֹת; וַיִּקְרָא אֵלָיו אֱלֹהִים מִתּוֹךְ הַסְּנֶה, וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה מֹשֶׁה--וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּנִי.	4 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said: 'Moses, Moses.' And he said: 'Here am I.'
3.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַל-תִּקְרַב הֲלֹם; שַׁל-נְעָלֶיךָ, מֵעַל רַגְלֶיךָ--כִּי הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה עוֹמֵד עָלָיו, אַדְמַת-קֹדֶשׁ הוּא.	5 And He said: 'Draw not nigh hither; put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.'
3.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אָנֹכִי אֱלֹהֵי אָבִיךָ, אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם אֱלֹהֵי יִצְחָק, וֵאלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב; וַיַּסְתֵּר מֹשֶׁה, פָּנָיו, כִּי יָרֵא, מֵהַבִּיט אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים.	6 Moreover He said: 'I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.
3.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, רָאֹה רָאִיתִי אֶת-עֳנִי עַמִּי אֲשֶׁר בְּמִצְרָיִם; וְאֶת-צַעֲקָתָם שָׁמַעְתִּי מִפְּנֵי נֹגְשָׂיו, כִּי יָדַעְתִּי אֶת-מַכְאֹבָיו.	7 And the LORD said: 'I have surely seen the affliction of My people that are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their pains;
3.8 ח  וָאֵרֵד לְהַצִּילוֹ מִיַּד מִצְרַיִם, וּלְהַעֲלֹתוֹ מִן-הָאָרֶץ הַהִוא, אֶל-אֶרֶץ טוֹבָה וּרְחָבָה, אֶל-אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבָשׁ--אֶל-מְקוֹם הַכְּנַעֲנִי, וְהַחִתִּי, וְהָאֱמֹרִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי, וְהַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי.	8 and I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
3.9 ט  וְעַתָּה, הִנֵּה צַעֲקַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בָּאָה אֵלָי; וְגַם-רָאִיתִי, אֶת-הַלַּחַץ, אֲשֶׁר מִצְרַיִם, לֹחֲצִים אֹתָם.	9 And now, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto Me; moreover I have seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.
3.10 י  וְעַתָּה לְכָה, וְאֶשְׁלָחֲךָ אֶל-פַּרְעֹה; וְהוֹצֵא אֶת-עַמִּי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמִּצְרָיִם.	10 Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth My people the children of Israel out of Egypt.'
3.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, מִי אָנֹכִי, כִּי אֵלֵךְ אֶל-פַּרְעֹה; וְכִי אוֹצִיא אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמִּצְרָיִם.	11 And Moses said unto God: 'Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?'
3.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר, כִּי-אֶהְיֶה עִמָּךְ, וְזֶה-לְּךָ הָאוֹת, כִּי אָנֹכִי שְׁלַחְתִּיךָ:  בְּהוֹצִיאֲךָ אֶת-הָעָם, מִמִּצְרַיִם, תַּעַבְדוּן אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים, עַל הָהָר הַזֶּה.	12 And He said: 'Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be the token unto thee, that I have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.'
3.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי בָא אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתִּי לָהֶם, אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם שְׁלָחַנִי אֲלֵיכֶם; וְאָמְרוּ-לִי מַה-שְּׁמוֹ, מָה אֹמַר אֲלֵהֶם.	13 And Moses said unto God: 'Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them: The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me: What is His name? what shall I say unto them?'
3.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֶהְיֶה אֲשֶׁר אֶהְיֶה; וַיֹּאמֶר, כֹּה תֹאמַר לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶהְיֶה, שְׁלָחַנִי אֲלֵיכֶם.	14 And God said unto Moses: 'I AM THAT I AM'; and He said: 'Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: I AM hath sent me unto you.'
3.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר עוֹד אֱלֹהִים אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כֹּה-תֹאמַר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיכֶם אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם אֱלֹהֵי יִצְחָק וֵאלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב, שְׁלָחַנִי אֲלֵיכֶם; זֶה-שְּׁמִי לְעֹלָם, וְזֶה זִכְרִי לְדֹר דֹּר.	15 And God said moreover unto Moses: 'Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: The LORD, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you; this is My name for ever, and this is My memorial unto all generations.
3.16 טז  לֵךְ וְאָסַפְתָּ אֶת-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיכֶם נִרְאָה אֵלַי, אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם יִצְחָק וְיַעֲקֹב, לֵאמֹר:  פָּקֹד פָּקַדְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, וְאֶת-הֶעָשׂוּי לָכֶם בְּמִצְרָיִם.	16 Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them: The LORD, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, hath appeared unto me, saying: I have surely remembered you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt.
3.17 יז  וָאֹמַר, אַעֲלֶה אֶתְכֶם מֵעֳנִי מִצְרַיִם, אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְהַחִתִּי, וְהָאֱמֹרִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי וְהַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי--אֶל-אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב, וּדְבָשׁ.	17 And I have said: I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
3.18 יח  וְשָׁמְעוּ, לְקֹלֶךָ; וּבָאתָ אַתָּה וְזִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם אֵלָיו יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הָעִבְרִיִּים נִקְרָה עָלֵינוּ, וְעַתָּה נֵלְכָה-נָּא דֶּרֶךְ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְנִזְבְּחָה לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	18 And they shall hearken to thy voice. And thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him: The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, hath met with us. And now let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.
3.19 יט  וַאֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי--כִּי לֹא-יִתֵּן אֶתְכֶם מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, לַהֲלֹךְ:  וְלֹא, בְּיָד חֲזָקָה.	19 And I know that the king of Egypt will not give you leave to go, except by a mighty hand.
3.20 כ  וְשָׁלַחְתִּי אֶת-יָדִי, וְהִכֵּיתִי אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, בְּכֹל נִפְלְאֹתַי, אֲשֶׁר אֶעֱשֶׂה בְּקִרְבּוֹ; וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, יְשַׁלַּח אֶתְכֶם.	20 And I will put forth My hand, and smite Egypt with all My wonders which I will do in the midst thereof. And after that he will let you go.
3.21 כא  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-חֵן הָעָם-הַזֶּה, בְּעֵינֵי מִצְרָיִם; וְהָיָה כִּי תֵלֵכוּן, לֹא תֵלְכוּ רֵיקָם.	21 And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. And it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty;
3.22 כב  וְשָׁאֲלָה אִשָּׁה מִשְּׁכֶנְתָּהּ וּמִגָּרַת בֵּיתָהּ, כְּלֵי-כֶסֶף וּכְלֵי זָהָב וּשְׂמָלֹת; וְשַׂמְתֶּם, עַל-בְּנֵיכֶם וְעַל-בְּנֹתֵיכֶם, וְנִצַּלְתֶּם, אֶת-מִצְרָיִם.	22 but every woman shall ask of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment; and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.'
4.1 א  וַיַּעַן מֹשֶׁה, וַיֹּאמֶר, וְהֵן לֹא-יַאֲמִינוּ לִי, וְלֹא יִשְׁמְעוּ בְּקֹלִי:  כִּי יֹאמְרוּ, לֹא-נִרְאָה אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה.	1 And Moses answered and said: 'But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say: The LORD hath not appeared unto thee.'
4.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו יְהוָה, מזה (מַה-זֶּה) בְיָדֶךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר, מַטֶּה.	2 And the LORD said unto him: 'What is that in thy hand?' And he said: 'A rod.'
4.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַשְׁלִיכֵהוּ אַרְצָה, וַיַּשְׁלִכֵהוּ אַרְצָה וַיְהִי לְנָחָשׁ; וַיָּנָס מֹשֶׁה, מִפָּנָיו.	3 And He said: 'Cast it on the ground.' And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.
4.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, שְׁלַח יָדְךָ, וֶאֱחֹז בִּזְנָבוֹ; וַיִּשְׁלַח יָדוֹ וַיַּחֲזֶק בּוֹ, וַיְהִי לְמַטֶּה בְּכַפּוֹ.	4 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Put forth thy hand, and take it by the tail--and he put forth his hand, and laid hold of it, and it became a rod in his hand--
4.5 ה  לְמַעַן יַאֲמִינוּ, כִּי-נִרְאָה אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתָם:  אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם אֱלֹהֵי יִצְחָק, וֵאלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב.	5 that they may believe that the LORD, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.'
4.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה לוֹ עוֹד, הָבֵא-נָא יָדְךָ בְּחֵיקֶךָ, וַיָּבֵא יָדוֹ, בְּחֵיקוֹ; וַיּוֹצִאָהּ, וְהִנֵּה יָדוֹ מְצֹרַעַת כַּשָּׁלֶג.	6 And the LORD said furthermore unto him: 'Put now thy hand into thy bosom.' And he put his hand into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as white as snow.
4.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר, הָשֵׁב יָדְךָ אֶל-חֵיקֶךָ, וַיָּשֶׁב יָדוֹ, אֶל-חֵיקוֹ; וַיּוֹצִאָהּ, מֵחֵיקוֹ, וְהִנֵּה-שָׁבָה, כִּבְשָׂרוֹ.	7 And He said: 'Put thy hand back into thy bosom.--And he put his hand back into his bosom; and when he took it out of his bosom, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.--
4.8 ח  וְהָיָה, אִם-לֹא יַאֲמִינוּ לָךְ, וְלֹא יִשְׁמְעוּ, לְקֹל הָאֹת הָרִאשׁוֹן--וְהֶאֱמִינוּ, לְקֹל הָאֹת הָאַחֲרוֹן.	8 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
4.9 ט  וְהָיָה אִם-לֹא יַאֲמִינוּ גַּם לִשְׁנֵי הָאֹתוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, וְלֹא יִשְׁמְעוּן לְקֹלֶךָ--וְלָקַחְתָּ מִמֵּימֵי הַיְאֹר, וְשָׁפַכְתָּ הַיַּבָּשָׁה; וְהָיוּ הַמַּיִם אֲשֶׁר תִּקַּח מִן-הַיְאֹר, וְהָיוּ לְדָם בַּיַּבָּשֶׁת.	9 And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe even these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land; and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.'
4.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, בִּי אֲדֹנָי, לֹא אִישׁ דְּבָרִים אָנֹכִי גַּם מִתְּמוֹל גַּם מִשִּׁלְשֹׁם, גַּם מֵאָז דַּבֶּרְךָ אֶל-עַבְדֶּךָ:  כִּי כְבַד-פֶּה וּכְבַד לָשׁוֹן, אָנֹכִי.	10 And Moses said unto the LORD: 'Oh Lord, I am not a man of words, neither heretofore, nor since Thou hast spoken unto Thy servant; for I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.'
4.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, מִי שָׂם פֶּה לָאָדָם, אוֹ מִי-יָשׂוּם אִלֵּם, אוֹ חֵרֵשׁ אוֹ פִקֵּחַ אוֹ עִוֵּר--הֲלֹא אָנֹכִי, יְהוָה.	11 And the LORD said unto him: 'Who hath made man's mouth? or who maketh a man dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? is it not I the LORD?
4.12 יב  וְעַתָּה, לֵךְ; וְאָנֹכִי אֶהְיֶה עִם-פִּיךָ, וְהוֹרֵיתִיךָ אֲשֶׁר תְּדַבֵּר.	12 Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt speak.'
4.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר, בִּי אֲדֹנָי; שְׁלַח-נָא, בְּיַד-תִּשְׁלָח.	13 And he said: 'Oh Lord, send, I pray Thee, by the hand of him whom Thou wilt send.'
4.14 יד  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה בְּמֹשֶׁה, וַיֹּאמֶר הֲלֹא אַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ הַלֵּוִי--יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-דַבֵּר יְדַבֵּר הוּא; וְגַם הִנֵּה-הוּא יֹצֵא לִקְרָאתֶךָ, וְרָאֲךָ וְשָׂמַח בְּלִבּוֹ.	14 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and He said: 'Is there not Aaron thy brother the Levite? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee; and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.
4.15 טו  וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֵלָיו, וְשַׂמְתָּ אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים בְּפִיו; וְאָנֹכִי, אֶהְיֶה עִם-פִּיךָ וְעִם-פִּיהוּ, וְהוֹרֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשׂוּן.	15 And thou shalt speak unto him, and put the words in his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.
4.16 טז  וְדִבֶּר-הוּא לְךָ, אֶל-הָעָם; וְהָיָה הוּא יִהְיֶה-לְּךָ לְפֶה, וְאַתָּה תִּהְיֶה-לּוֹ לֵאלֹהִים.	16 And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people; and it shall come to pass, that he shall be to thee a mouth, and thou shalt be to him in God's stead.
4.17 יז  וְאֶת-הַמַּטֶּה הַזֶּה, תִּקַּח בְּיָדֶךָ, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה-בּוֹ, אֶת-הָאֹתֹת.  {פ}	17 And thou shalt take in thy hand this rod, wherewith thou shalt do the signs.' {P}
4.18 יח  וַיֵּלֶךְ מֹשֶׁה וַיָּשָׁב אֶל-יֶתֶר חֹתְנוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אֵלְכָה נָּא וְאָשׁוּבָה אֶל-אַחַי אֲשֶׁר-בְּמִצְרַיִם, וְאֶרְאֶה, הַעוֹדָם חַיִּים; וַיֹּאמֶר יִתְרוֹ לְמֹשֶׁה, לֵךְ לְשָׁלוֹם.	18 And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said unto him: 'Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren that are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive.' And Jethro said to Moses: 'Go in peace.'
4.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה בְּמִדְיָן, לֵךְ שֻׁב מִצְרָיִם:  כִּי-מֵתוּ, כָּל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַמְבַקְשִׁים, אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ.	19 And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian: 'Go, return into Egypt; for all the men are dead that sought thy life.'
4.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, וַיַּרְכִּבֵם עַל-הַחֲמֹר, וַיָּשָׁב, אַרְצָה מִצְרָיִם; וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-מַטֵּה הָאֱלֹהִים, בְּיָדוֹ.	20 And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt; and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
4.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בְּלֶכְתְּךָ לָשׁוּב מִצְרַיְמָה, רְאֵה כָּל-הַמֹּפְתִים אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי בְיָדֶךָ וַעֲשִׂיתָם לִפְנֵי פַרְעֹה; וַאֲנִי אֲחַזֵּק אֶת-לִבּוֹ, וְלֹא יְשַׁלַּח אֶת-הָעָם.	21 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'When thou goest back into Egypt, see that thou do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in thy hand; but I will harden his heart, and he will not let the people go.
4.22 כב  וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה:  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, בְּנִי בְכֹרִי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	22 And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh: Thus saith the LORD: Israel is My son, My first-born.
4.23 כג  וָאֹמַר אֵלֶיךָ, שַׁלַּח אֶת-בְּנִי וְיַעַבְדֵנִי, וַתְּמָאֵן, לְשַׁלְּחוֹ--הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי הֹרֵג, אֶת-בִּנְךָ בְּכֹרֶךָ.	23 And I have said unto thee: Let My son go, that he may serve Me; and thou hast refused to let him go. Behold, I will slay thy son, thy first-born.'--
4.24 כד  וַיְהִי בַדֶּרֶךְ, בַּמָּלוֹן; וַיִּפְגְּשֵׁהוּ יְהוָה, וַיְבַקֵּשׁ הֲמִיתוֹ.	24 And it came to pass on the way at the lodging-place, that the LORD met him, and sought to kill him.
4.25 כה  וַתִּקַּח צִפֹּרָה צֹר, וַתִּכְרֹת אֶת-עָרְלַת בְּנָהּ, וַתַּגַּע, לְרַגְלָיו; וַתֹּאמֶר, כִּי חֲתַן-דָּמִים אַתָּה לִי.	25 Then Zipporah took a flint, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet; and she said: 'Surely a bridegroom of blood art thou to me.'
4.26 כו  וַיִּרֶף, מִמֶּנּוּ; אָז, אָמְרָה, חֲתַן דָּמִים, לַמּוּלֹת.  {פ}	26 So He let him alone. Then she said: 'A bridegroom of blood in regard of the circumcision.' {P}
4.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, לֵךְ לִקְרַאת מֹשֶׁה הַמִּדְבָּרָה; וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיִּפְגְּשֵׁהוּ בְּהַר הָאֱלֹהִים--וַיִּשַּׁק-לוֹ.	27 And the LORD said to Aaron: 'Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.' And he went, and met him in the mountain of God, and kissed him.
4.28 כח  וַיַּגֵּד מֹשֶׁה לְאַהֲרֹן, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ, וְאֵת כָּל-הָאֹתֹת, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּהוּ.	28 And Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD wherewith He had sent him, and all the signs wherewith He had charged him.
4.29 כט  וַיֵּלֶךְ מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן; וַיַּאַסְפוּ, אֶת-כָּל-זִקְנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	29 And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel.
4.30 ל  וַיְדַבֵּר אַהֲרֹן--אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיַּעַשׂ הָאֹתֹת, לְעֵינֵי הָעָם.	30 And Aaron spoke all the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.
4.31 לא  וַיַּאֲמֵן, הָעָם; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ כִּי-פָקַד יְהוָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְכִי רָאָה אֶת-עָנְיָם, וַיִּקְּדוּ, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ.	31 And the people believed; and when they heard that the LORD had remembered the children of Israel, and that He had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.
5.1 א  וְאַחַר, בָּאוּ מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שַׁלַּח אֶת-עַמִּי, וְיָחֹגּוּ לִי בַּמִּדְבָּר.	1 And afterward Moses and Aaron came, and said unto Pharaoh: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Let My people go, that they may hold a feast unto Me in the wilderness.'
5.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר פַּרְעֹה--מִי יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר אֶשְׁמַע בְּקֹלוֹ, לְשַׁלַּח אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  לֹא יָדַעְתִּי אֶת-יְהוָה, וְגַם אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא אֲשַׁלֵּחַ.	2 And Pharaoh said: 'Who is the LORD, that I should hearken unto His voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD, and moreover I will not let Israel go.'
5.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֱלֹהֵי הָעִבְרִים נִקְרָא עָלֵינוּ; נֵלְכָה נָּא דֶּרֶךְ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְנִזְבְּחָה לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--פֶּן-יִפְגָּעֵנוּ, בַּדֶּבֶר אוֹ בֶחָרֶב.	3 And they said: 'The God of the Hebrews hath met with us. Let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice unto the LORD our God; lest He fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.'
5.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, לָמָּה מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, תַּפְרִיעוּ אֶת-הָעָם מִמַּעֲשָׂיו; לְכוּ, לְסִבְלֹתֵיכֶם.	4 And the king of Egypt said unto them: 'Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, cause the people to break loose from their work? get you unto your burdens.'
5.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר פַּרְעֹה, הֵן-רַבִּים עַתָּה עַם הָאָרֶץ; וְהִשְׁבַּתֶּם אֹתָם, מִסִּבְלֹתָם.	5 And Pharaoh said: 'Behold, the people of the land are now many, and will ye make them rest from their burdens?'
5.6 ו  וַיְצַו פַּרְעֹה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֶת-הַנֹּגְשִׂים בָּעָם, וְאֶת-שֹׁטְרָיו לֵאמֹר.	6 And the same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying:
5.7 ז  לֹא תֹאסִפוּן לָתֵת תֶּבֶן לָעָם, לִלְבֹּן הַלְּבֵנִים--כִּתְמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם:  הֵם, יֵלְכוּ, וְקֹשְׁשׁוּ לָהֶם, תֶּבֶן.	7 'Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore. Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
5.8 ח  וְאֶת-מַתְכֹּנֶת הַלְּבֵנִים אֲשֶׁר הֵם עֹשִׂים תְּמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם, תָּשִׂימוּ עֲלֵיהֶם--לֹא תִגְרְעוּ, מִמֶּנּוּ:  כִּי-נִרְפִּים הֵם--עַל-כֵּן הֵם צֹעֲקִים לֵאמֹר, נֵלְכָה נִזְבְּחָה לֵאלֹהֵינוּ.	8 And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish aught thereof; for they are idle; therefore they cry, saying: Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
5.9 ט  תִּכְבַּד הָעֲבֹדָה עַל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, וְיַעֲשׂוּ-בָהּ; וְאַל-יִשְׁעוּ, בְּדִבְרֵי-שָׁקֶר.	9 Let heavier work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard lying words.'
5.10 י  וַיֵּצְאוּ נֹגְשֵׂי הָעָם, וְשֹׁטְרָיו, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-הָעָם, לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה אָמַר פַּרְעֹה, אֵינֶנִּי נֹתֵן לָכֶם תֶּבֶן.	10 And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spoke to the people, saying: 'Thus saith Pharaoh: I will not give you straw.
5.11 יא  אַתֶּם, לְכוּ קְחוּ לָכֶם תֶּבֶן, מֵאֲשֶׁר, תִּמְצָאוּ:  כִּי אֵין נִגְרָע מֵעֲבֹדַתְכֶם, דָּבָר.	11 Go yourselves, get you straw where ye can find it; for nought of your work shall be diminished.'
5.12 יב  וַיָּפֶץ הָעָם, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם, לְקֹשֵׁשׁ קַשׁ, לַתֶּבֶן.	12 So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
5.13 יג  וְהַנֹּגְשִׂים, אָצִים לֵאמֹר:  כַּלּוּ מַעֲשֵׂיכֶם דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר בִּהְיוֹת הַתֶּבֶן.	13 And the taskmasters were urgent, saying: 'Fulfil your work, your daily task, as when there was straw.'
5.14 יד  וַיֻּכּוּ, שֹׁטְרֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-שָׂמוּ עֲלֵהֶם, נֹגְשֵׂי פַרְעֹה לֵאמֹר:  מַדּוּעַ לֹא כִלִּיתֶם חָקְכֶם לִלְבֹּן, כִּתְמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם--גַּם-תְּמוֹל, גַּם-הַיּוֹם.	14 And the officers of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, saying: 'Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your appointed task in making brick both yesterday and today as heretofore?'
5.15 טו  וַיָּבֹאוּ, שֹׁטְרֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּצְעֲקוּ אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, לֵאמֹר:  לָמָּה תַעֲשֶׂה כֹה, לַעֲבָדֶיךָ.	15 Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying: 'Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?
5.16 טז  תֶּבֶן, אֵין נִתָּן לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, וּלְבֵנִים אֹמְרִים לָנוּ, עֲשׂוּ; וְהִנֵּה עֲבָדֶיךָ מֻכִּים, וְחָטָאת עַמֶּךָ.	16 There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us: Make brick; and, behold, thy servants are beaten, but the fault is in thine own people.'
5.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר נִרְפִּים אַתֶּם, נִרְפִּים; עַל-כֵּן אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, נֵלְכָה נִזְבְּחָה לַיהוָה.	17 But he said: 'Ye are idle, ye are idle; therefore ye say: Let us go and sacrifice to the LORD.
5.18 יח  וְעַתָּה לְכוּ עִבְדוּ, וְתֶבֶן לֹא-יִנָּתֵן לָכֶם; וְתֹכֶן לְבֵנִים, תִּתֵּנוּ.	18 Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.'
5.19 יט  וַיִּרְאוּ שֹׁטְרֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֹתָם--בְּרָע לֵאמֹר:  לֹא-תִגְרְעוּ מִלִּבְנֵיכֶם, דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ.	19 And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were set on mischief, when they said: 'Ye shall not diminish aught from your bricks, your daily task.'
5.20 כ  וַיִּפְגְּעוּ אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן, נִצָּבִים לִקְרָאתָם, בְּצֵאתָם, מֵאֵת פַּרְעֹה.	20 And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh;
5.21 כא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֲלֵהֶם, יֵרֶא יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם וְיִשְׁפֹּט:  אֲשֶׁר הִבְאַשְׁתֶּם אֶת-רֵיחֵנוּ, בְּעֵינֵי פַרְעֹה וּבְעֵינֵי עֲבָדָיו, לָתֶת-חֶרֶב בְּיָדָם, לְהָרְגֵנוּ.	21 and they said unto them: 'The LORD look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.'
5.22 כב  וַיָּשָׁב מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  אֲדֹנָי, לָמָה הֲרֵעֹתָה לָעָם הַזֶּה--לָמָּה זֶּה, שְׁלַחְתָּנִי.	22 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said: 'Lord, wherefore hast Thou dealt ill with this people? why is it that Thou hast sent me?
5.23 כג  וּמֵאָז בָּאתִי אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, לְדַבֵּר בִּשְׁמֶךָ, הֵרַע, לָעָם הַזֶּה; וְהַצֵּל לֹא-הִצַּלְתָּ, אֶת-עַמֶּךָ.	23 For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in Thy name, he hath dealt ill with this people; neither hast Thou delivered Thy people at all.'
6.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עַתָּה תִרְאֶה, אֲשֶׁר אֶעֱשֶׂה לְפַרְעֹה:  כִּי בְיָד חֲזָקָה, יְשַׁלְּחֵם, וּבְיָד חֲזָקָה, יְגָרְשֵׁם מֵאַרְצוֹ.  {ס}	1 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh; for by a strong hand shall he let them go, and by a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.' {S}
6.2 ב  וַיְדַבֵּר אֱלֹהִים, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אֲנִי יְהוָה.	2 And God spoke unto Moses, and said unto him: 'I am the LORD;
6.3 ג  וָאֵרָא, אֶל-אַבְרָהָם אֶל-יִצְחָק וְאֶל-יַעֲקֹב--בְּאֵל שַׁדָּי; וּשְׁמִי יְהוָה, לֹא נוֹדַעְתִּי לָהֶם.	3 and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, but by My name YHWH I made Me not known to them.
6.4 ד  וְגַם הֲקִמֹתִי אֶת-בְּרִיתִי אִתָּם, לָתֵת לָהֶם אֶת-אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן--אֵת אֶרֶץ מְגֻרֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר-גָּרוּ בָהּ.	4 And I have also established My covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their sojournings, wherein they sojourned.
6.5 ה  וְגַם אֲנִי שָׁמַעְתִּי, אֶת-נַאֲקַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר מִצְרַיִם, מַעֲבִדִים אֹתָם; וָאֶזְכֹּר, אֶת-בְּרִיתִי.	5 And moreover I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered My covenant.
6.6 ו  לָכֵן אֱמֹר לִבְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲנִי יְהוָה, וְהוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם מִתַּחַת סִבְלֹת מִצְרַיִם, וְהִצַּלְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מֵעֲבֹדָתָם; וְגָאַלְתִּי אֶתְכֶם בִּזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה, וּבִשְׁפָטִים גְּדֹלִים.	6 Wherefore say unto the children of Israel: I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments;
6.7 ז  וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם לִי לְעָם, וְהָיִיתִי לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, הַמּוֹצִיא אֶתְכֶם, מִתַּחַת סִבְלוֹת מִצְרָיִם.	7 and I will take you to Me for a people, and I will be to you a God; and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God, who brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
6.8 ח  וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי, לָתֵת אֹתָהּ לְאַבְרָהָם לְיִצְחָק וּלְיַעֲקֹב; וְנָתַתִּי אֹתָהּ לָכֶם מוֹרָשָׁה, אֲנִי יְהוָה.	8 And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning which I lifted up My hand to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for a heritage: I am the LORD.'
6.9 ט  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה כֵּן, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, מִקֹּצֶר רוּחַ, וּמֵעֲבֹדָה קָשָׁה.  {פ}	9 And Moses spoke so unto the children of Israel; but they hearkened not unto Moses for impatience of spirit, and for cruel bondage. {P}
6.10 י  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	10 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.11 יא  בֹּא דַבֵּר, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ מִצְרָיִם; וִישַׁלַּח אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאַרְצוֹ.	11 'Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.'
6.12 יב  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה לֵאמֹר:  הֵן בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ אֵלַי, וְאֵיךְ יִשְׁמָעֵנִי פַרְעֹה, וַאֲנִי עֲרַל שְׂפָתָיִם.  {פ}	12 And Moses spoke before the LORD, saying: 'Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?' {P}
6.13 יג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, וַיְצַוֵּם אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ מִצְרָיִם--לְהוֹצִיא אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.  {ס}	13 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. {S}
6.14 יד  אֵלֶּה, רָאשֵׁי בֵית-אֲבֹתָם:  בְּנֵי רְאוּבֵן בְּכֹר יִשְׂרָאֵל, חֲנוֹךְ וּפַלּוּא חֶצְרֹן וְכַרְמִי--אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחֹת רְאוּבֵן.	14 These are the heads of their fathers' houses: the sons of Reuben the first-born of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. These are the families of Reuben.
6.15 טו  וּבְנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, יְמוּאֵל וְיָמִין וְאֹהַד וְיָכִין וְצֹחַר, וְשָׁאוּל, בֶּן-הַכְּנַעֲנִית; אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחֹת שִׁמְעוֹן.	15 And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman. These are the families of Simeon.
6.16 טז  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי-לֵוִי, לְתֹלְדֹתָם--גֵּרְשׁוֹן, וּקְהָת וּמְרָרִי; וּשְׁנֵי חַיֵּי לֵוִי, שֶׁבַע וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וּמְאַת שָׁנָה.	16 And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations: Gershon and Kohath, and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred thirty and seven years.
6.17 יז  בְּנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן לִבְנִי וְשִׁמְעִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	17 The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, according to their families.
6.18 יח  וּבְנֵי קְהָת--עַמְרָם וְיִצְהָר, וְחֶבְרוֹן וְעֻזִּיאֵל; וּשְׁנֵי חַיֵּי קְהָת, שָׁלֹשׁ וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וּמְאַת שָׁנָה.	18 And the sons of Kohath: Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kohath were a hundred thirty and three years.
6.19 יט  וּבְנֵי מְרָרִי, מַחְלִי וּמוּשִׁי; אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַלֵּוִי, לְתֹלְדֹתָם.	19 And the sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their generations.
6.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח עַמְרָם אֶת-יוֹכֶבֶד דֹּדָתוֹ, לוֹ לְאִשָּׁה, וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-מֹשֶׁה; וּשְׁנֵי חַיֵּי עַמְרָם, שֶׁבַע וּשְׁלֹשִׁים וּמְאַת שָׁנָה.	20 And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of the life of Amram were a hundred and thirty and seven years.
6.21 כא  וּבְנֵי, יִצְהָר--קֹרַח וָנֶפֶג, וְזִכְרִי.	21 And the sons of Izhar: Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
6.22 כב  וּבְנֵי, עֻזִּיאֵל--מִישָׁאֵל וְאֶלְצָפָן, וְסִתְרִי.	22 And the sons of Uzziel: Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Sithri.
6.23 כג  וַיִּקַּח אַהֲרֹן אֶת-אֱלִישֶׁבַע בַּת-עַמִּינָדָב, אֲחוֹת נַחְשׁוֹן--לוֹ לְאִשָּׁה; וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-נָדָב וְאֶת-אֲבִיהוּא, אֶת-אֶלְעָזָר, וְאֶת-אִיתָמָר.	23 And Aaron took him Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon, to wife; and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
6.24 כד  וּבְנֵי קֹרַח, אַסִּיר וְאֶלְקָנָה וַאֲבִיאָסָף; אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַקָּרְחִי.	24 And the sons of Korah: Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these are the families of the Korahites.
6.25 כה  וְאֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן לָקַח-לוֹ מִבְּנוֹת פּוּטִיאֵל, לוֹ לְאִשָּׁה, וַתֵּלֶד לוֹ, אֶת-פִּינְחָס; אֵלֶּה, רָאשֵׁי אֲבוֹת הַלְוִיִּם--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	25 And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bore him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers' houses of the Levites according to their families.
6.26 כו  הוּא אַהֲרֹן, וּמֹשֶׁה--אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה, לָהֶם, הוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, עַל-צִבְאֹתָם.	26 These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said: 'Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their hosts.'
6.27 כז  הֵם, הַמְדַבְּרִים אֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, לְהוֹצִיא אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמִּצְרָיִם; הוּא מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן.	27 These are they that spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and Aaron.
6.28 כח  וַיְהִי, בְּיוֹם דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה--בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.  {ס}	28 And it came to pass on the day when the LORD spoke unto Moses in the land of Egypt, {S}
6.29 כט  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר, אֲנִי יְהוָה; דַּבֵּר, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי, דֹּבֵר אֵלֶיךָ.	29 that the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying: 'I am the LORD; speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I speak unto thee.'
6.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  הֵן אֲנִי, עֲרַל שְׂפָתַיִם, וְאֵיךְ, יִשְׁמַע אֵלַי פַּרְעֹה.  {פ}	30 And Moses said before the LORD: 'Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?' {P}
7.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, רְאֵה נְתַתִּיךָ אֱלֹהִים לְפַרְעֹה; וְאַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ, יִהְיֶה נְבִיאֶךָ.	1 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'See, I have set thee in God's stead to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
7.2 ב  אַתָּה תְדַבֵּר, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֲצַוֶּךָּ; וְאַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ יְדַבֵּר אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, וְשִׁלַּח אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאַרְצוֹ.	2 Thou shalt speak all that I command thee; and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.
7.3 ג  וַאֲנִי אַקְשֶׁה, אֶת-לֵב פַּרְעֹה; וְהִרְבֵּיתִי אֶת-אֹתֹתַי וְאֶת-מוֹפְתַי, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	3 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply My signs and My wonders in the land of Egypt.
7.4 ד  וְלֹא-יִשְׁמַע אֲלֵכֶם פַּרְעֹה, וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-יָדִי בְּמִצְרָיִם; וְהוֹצֵאתִי אֶת-צִבְאֹתַי אֶת-עַמִּי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, בִּשְׁפָטִים, גְּדֹלִים.	4 But Pharaoh will not hearken unto you, and I will lay My hand upon Egypt, and bring forth My hosts, My people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt, by great judgments.
7.5 ה  וְיָדְעוּ מִצְרַיִם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בִּנְטֹתִי אֶת-יָדִי עַל-מִצְרָיִם; וְהוֹצֵאתִי אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִתּוֹכָם.	5 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth My hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.'
7.6 ו  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֹתָם, כֵּן עָשׂוּ.	6 And Moses and Aaron did so; as the LORD commanded them, so did they.
7.7 ז  וּמֹשֶׁה, בֶּן-שְׁמֹנִים שָׁנָה, וְאַהֲרֹן, בֶּן-שָׁלֹשׁ וּשְׁמֹנִים שָׁנָה--בְּדַבְּרָם, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה.  {פ}	7 And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spoke unto Pharaoh. {P}
7.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	8 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
7.9 ט  כִּי יְדַבֵּר אֲלֵכֶם פַּרְעֹה לֵאמֹר, תְּנוּ לָכֶם מוֹפֵת; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, קַח אֶת-מַטְּךָ וְהַשְׁלֵךְ לִפְנֵי-פַרְעֹה--יְהִי לְתַנִּין.	9 'When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying: Show a wonder for you; then thou shalt say unto Aaron: Take thy rod, and cast it down before Pharaoh, that it become a serpent.'
7.10 י  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ כֵן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה; וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ אַהֲרֹן אֶת-מַטֵּהוּ, לִפְנֵי פַרְעֹה וְלִפְנֵי עֲבָדָיו--וַיְהִי לְתַנִּין.	10 And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so, as the LORD had commanded; and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
7.11 יא  וַיִּקְרָא, גַּם-פַּרְעֹה, לַחֲכָמִים, וְלַמְכַשְּׁפִים; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ גַם-הֵם חַרְטֻמֵּי מִצְרַיִם, בְּלַהֲטֵיהֶם--כֵּן.	11 Then Pharaoh also called for the wise men and the sorcerers; and they also, the magicians of Egypt, did in like manner with their secret arts.
7.12 יב  וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּ אִישׁ מַטֵּהוּ, וַיִּהְיוּ לְתַנִּינִם; וַיִּבְלַע מַטֵּה-אַהֲרֹן, אֶת-מַטֹּתָם.	12 For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents; but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.
7.13 יג  וַיֶּחֱזַק לֵב פַּרְעֹה, וְלֹא שָׁמַע אֲלֵהֶם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.  {ס}	13 And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken. {S}
7.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כָּבֵד לֵב פַּרְעֹה; מֵאֵן, לְשַׁלַּח הָעָם.	14 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Pharaoh's heart is stubborn, he refuseth to let the people go.
7.15 טו  לֵךְ אֶל-פַּרְעֹה בַּבֹּקֶר, הִנֵּה יֹצֵא הַמַּיְמָה, וְנִצַּבְתָּ לִקְרָאתוֹ, עַל-שְׂפַת הַיְאֹר; וְהַמַּטֶּה אֲשֶׁר-נֶהְפַּךְ לְנָחָשׁ, תִּקַּח בְּיָדֶךָ.	15 Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink to meet him; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thy hand.
7.16 טז  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הָעִבְרִים שְׁלָחַנִי אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר, שַׁלַּח אֶת-עַמִּי, וְיַעַבְדֻנִי בַּמִּדְבָּר; וְהִנֵּה לֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ, עַד-כֹּה.	16 And thou shalt say unto him: The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, hath sent me unto thee, saying: Let My people go, that they may serve Me in the wilderness; and, behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened;
7.17 יז  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, בְּזֹאת תֵּדַע, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה:  הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי מַכֶּה בַּמַּטֶּה אֲשֶׁר-בְּיָדִי, עַל-הַמַּיִם אֲשֶׁר בַּיְאֹר--וְנֶהֶפְכוּ לְדָם.	17 thus saith the LORD: In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD--behold, I will smite with the rod that is in my hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.
7.18 יח  וְהַדָּגָה אֲשֶׁר-בַּיְאֹר תָּמוּת, וּבָאַשׁ הַיְאֹר; וְנִלְאוּ מִצְרַיִם, לִשְׁתּוֹת מַיִם מִן-הַיְאֹר.  {ס}	18 And the fish that are in the river shall die, and the river shall become foul; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink water from the river.' {S}
7.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֱמֹר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן קַח מַטְּךָ וּנְטֵה-יָדְךָ עַל-מֵימֵי מִצְרַיִם עַל-נַהֲרֹתָם עַל-יְאֹרֵיהֶם וְעַל-אַגְמֵיהֶם וְעַל כָּל-מִקְוֵה מֵימֵיהֶם--וְיִהְיוּ-דָם; וְהָיָה דָם בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וּבָעֵצִים וּבָאֲבָנִים.	19 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Say unto Aaron: Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their streams, and over their pools, and over all their ponds of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.'
7.20 כ  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, וַיָּרֶם בַּמַּטֶּה וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַמַּיִם אֲשֶׁר בַּיְאֹר, לְעֵינֵי פַרְעֹה, וּלְעֵינֵי עֲבָדָיו; וַיֵּהָפְכוּ כָּל-הַמַּיִם אֲשֶׁר-בַּיְאֹר, לְדָם.	20 And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.
7.21 כא  וְהַדָּגָה אֲשֶׁר-בַּיְאֹר מֵתָה, וַיִּבְאַשׁ הַיְאֹר, וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ מִצְרַיִם, לִשְׁתּוֹת מַיִם מִן-הַיְאֹר; וַיְהִי הַדָּם, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	21 And the fish that were in the river died; and the river became foul, and the Egyptians could not drink water from the river; and the blood was throughout all the land of Egypt.
7.22 כב  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן חַרְטֻמֵּי מִצְרַיִם, בְּלָטֵיהֶם; וַיֶּחֱזַק לֵב-פַּרְעֹה וְלֹא-שָׁמַע אֲלֵהֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.	22 And the magicians of Egypt did in like manner with their secret arts; and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken.
7.23 כג  וַיִּפֶן פַּרְעֹה, וַיָּבֹא אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ; וְלֹא-שָׁת לִבּוֹ, גַּם-לָזֹאת.	23 And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he lay even this to heart.
7.24 כד  וַיַּחְפְּרוּ כָל-מִצְרַיִם סְבִיבֹת הַיְאֹר, מַיִם לִשְׁתּוֹת:  כִּי לֹא יָכְלוּ לִשְׁתֹּת, מִמֵּימֵי הַיְאֹר.	24 And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.
7.25 כה  וַיִּמָּלֵא, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, אַחֲרֵי הַכּוֹת-יְהוָה, אֶת-הַיְאֹר.  {פ}	25 And seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten the river. {P}
8.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בֹּא אֶל-פַּרְעֹה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, שַׁלַּח אֶת-עַמִּי, וְיַעַבְדֻנִי.	26 And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 'Go in unto Pharaoh, and say unto him: Thus saith the LORD: Let My people go, that they may serve Me.
8.27 כז  וְאִם-מָאֵן אַתָּה, לְשַׁלֵּחַ:  הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי, נֹגֵף אֶת-כָּל-גְּבוּלְךָ--בַּצְפַרְדְּעִים.	27 And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs.
8.28 כח  וְשָׁרַץ הַיְאֹר, צְפַרְדְּעִים, וְעָלוּ וּבָאוּ בְּבֵיתֶךָ, וּבַחֲדַר מִשְׁכָּבְךָ וְעַל-מִטָּתֶךָ; וּבְבֵית עֲבָדֶיךָ וּבְעַמֶּךָ, וּבְתַנּוּרֶיךָ וּבְמִשְׁאֲרוֹתֶיךָ.	28 And the river shall swarm with frogs, which shall go up and come into thy house, and into thy bed-chamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs.
8.29 כט  וּבְכָה וּבְעַמְּךָ, וּבְכָל-עֲבָדֶיךָ--יַעֲלוּ, הַצְפַרְדְּעִים.	29 And the frogs shall come up both upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.'
8.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֱמֹר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן נְטֵה אֶת-יָדְךָ בְּמַטֶּךָ, עַל-הַנְּהָרֹת עַל-הַיְאֹרִים וְעַל-הָאֲגַמִּים; וְהַעַל אֶת-הַצְפַרְדְּעִים, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	1 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Say unto Aaron: Stretch forth thy hand with thy rod over the rivers, over the canals, and over the pools, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.'
8.2 ב  וַיֵּט אַהֲרֹן אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל מֵימֵי מִצְרָיִם; וַתַּעַל, הַצְּפַרְדֵּעַ, וַתְּכַס, אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	2 And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
8.3 ג  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן הַחַרְטֻמִּים, בְּלָטֵיהֶם; וַיַּעֲלוּ אֶת-הַצְפַרְדְּעִים, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	3 And the magicians did in like manner with their secret arts, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.
8.4 ד  וַיִּקְרָא פַרְעֹה לְמֹשֶׁה וּלְאַהֲרֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר הַעְתִּירוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, וְיָסֵר הַצְפַרְדְּעִים, מִמֶּנִּי וּמֵעַמִּי; וַאֲשַׁלְּחָה, אֶת-הָעָם, וְיִזְבְּחוּ, לַיהוָה.	4 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said: 'Entreat the LORD, that He take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice unto the LORD.'
8.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה לְפַרְעֹה, הִתְפָּאֵר עָלַי, לְמָתַי אַעְתִּיר לְךָ וְלַעֲבָדֶיךָ וּלְעַמְּךָ, לְהַכְרִית הַצְפַרְדְּעִים מִמְּךָ וּמִבָּתֶּיךָ:  רַק בַּיְאֹר, תִּשָּׁאַרְנָה.	5 And Moses said unto Pharaoh: 'Have thou this glory over me; against what time shall I entreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, that the frogs be destroyed from thee and thy houses, and remain in the river only?'
8.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, לְמָחָר; וַיֹּאמֶר, כִּדְבָרְךָ--לְמַעַן תֵּדַע, כִּי-אֵין כַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	6 And he said: 'Against to-morrow.' And he said: 'Be it according to thy word; that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD our God.
8.7 ז  וְסָרוּ הַצְפַרְדְּעִים, מִמְּךָ וּמִבָּתֶּיךָ, וּמֵעֲבָדֶיךָ, וּמֵעַמֶּךָ:  רַק בַּיְאֹר, תִּשָּׁאַרְנָה.	7 And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.'
8.8 ח  וַיֵּצֵא מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, מֵעִם פַּרְעֹה; וַיִּצְעַק מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, עַל-דְּבַר הַצְפַרְדְּעִים אֲשֶׁר-שָׂם לְפַרְעֹה.	8 And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh; and Moses cried unto the LORD concerning the frogs, which He had brought upon Pharaoh.
8.9 ט  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה, כִּדְבַר מֹשֶׁה; וַיָּמֻתוּ, הַצְפַרְדְּעִים, מִן-הַבָּתִּים מִן-הַחֲצֵרֹת, וּמִן-הַשָּׂדֹת.	9 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields.
8.10 י  וַיִּצְבְּרוּ אֹתָם, חֳמָרִם חֳמָרִם; וַתִּבְאַשׁ, הָאָרֶץ.	10 And they gathered them together in heaps; and the land stank.
8.11 יא  וַיַּרְא פַּרְעֹה, כִּי הָיְתָה הָרְוָחָה, וְהַכְבֵּד אֶת-לִבּוֹ, וְלֹא שָׁמַע אֲלֵהֶם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.  {ס}	11 But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken. {S}
8.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֱמֹר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, נְטֵה אֶת-מַטְּךָ וְהַךְ אֶת-עֲפַר הָאָרֶץ; וְהָיָה לְכִנִּם, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	12 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Say unto Aaron: Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the earth, that it may become gnats throughout all the land of Egypt.'
8.13 יג  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן, וַיֵּט אַהֲרֹן אֶת-יָדוֹ בְמַטֵּהוּ וַיַּךְ אֶת-עֲפַר הָאָרֶץ, וַתְּהִי הַכִּנָּם, בָּאָדָם וּבַבְּהֵמָה:  כָּל-עֲפַר הָאָרֶץ הָיָה כִנִּים, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	13 And they did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and there were gnats upon man, and upon beast; all the dust of the earth became gnats throughout all the land of Egypt.
8.14 יד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן הַחַרְטֻמִּים בְּלָטֵיהֶם לְהוֹצִיא אֶת-הַכִּנִּים, וְלֹא יָכֹלוּ; וַתְּהִי, הַכִּנָּם, בָּאָדָם, וּבַבְּהֵמָה.	14 And the magicians did so with their secret arts to bring forth gnats, but they could not; and there were gnats upon man, and upon beast.
8.15 טו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הַחַרְטֻמִּם אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, אֶצְבַּע אֱלֹהִים הִוא; וַיֶּחֱזַק לֵב-פַּרְעֹה וְלֹא-שָׁמַע אֲלֵהֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.  {ס}	15 Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh: 'This is the finger of God'; and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken. {S}
8.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הַשְׁכֵּם בַּבֹּקֶר וְהִתְיַצֵּב לִפְנֵי פַרְעֹה--הִנֵּה, יוֹצֵא הַמָּיְמָה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, שַׁלַּח עַמִּי, וְיַעַבְדֻנִי.	16 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him: Thus saith the LORD: Let My people go, that they may serve Me.
8.17 יז  כִּי אִם-אֵינְךָ, מְשַׁלֵּחַ אֶת-עַמִּי--הִנְנִי מַשְׁלִיחַ בְּךָ וּבַעֲבָדֶיךָ וּבְעַמְּךָ וּבְבָתֶּיךָ, אֶת-הֶעָרֹב; וּמָלְאוּ בָּתֵּי מִצְרַיִם, אֶת-הֶעָרֹב, וְגַם הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר-הֵם עָלֶיהָ.	17 Else, if thou wilt not let My people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.
8.18 יח  וְהִפְלֵיתִי בַיּוֹם הַהוּא אֶת-אֶרֶץ גֹּשֶׁן, אֲשֶׁר עַמִּי עֹמֵד עָלֶיהָ, לְבִלְתִּי הֱיוֹת-שָׁם, עָרֹב--לְמַעַן תֵּדַע, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ.	18 And I will set apart in that day the land of Goshen, in which My people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end that thou mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth.
8.19 יט  וְשַׂמְתִּי פְדֻת, בֵּין עַמִּי וּבֵין עַמֶּךָ; לְמָחָר יִהְיֶה, הָאֹת הַזֶּה.	19 And I will put a division between My people and thy people--by to-morrow shall this sign be.'
8.20 כ  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה, כֵּן, וַיָּבֹא עָרֹב כָּבֵד, בֵּיתָה פַרְעֹה וּבֵית עֲבָדָיו; וּבְכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם תִּשָּׁחֵת הָאָרֶץ, מִפְּנֵי הֶעָרֹב.	20 And the LORD did so; and there came grievous swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses; and in all the land of Egypt the land was ruined by reason of the swarms of flies.
8.21 כא  וַיִּקְרָא פַרְעֹה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וּלְאַהֲרֹן; וַיֹּאמֶר, לְכוּ זִבְחוּ לֵאלֹהֵיכֶם--בָּאָרֶץ.	21 And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said: 'Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.'
8.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, לֹא נָכוֹן לַעֲשׂוֹת כֵּן, כִּי תּוֹעֲבַת מִצְרַיִם, נִזְבַּח לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ:  הֵן נִזְבַּח אֶת-תּוֹעֲבַת מִצְרַיִם, לְעֵינֵיהֶם--וְלֹא יִסְקְלֻנוּ.	22 And Moses said: 'It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God; lo, if we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, will they not stone us?
8.23 כג  דֶּרֶךְ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, נֵלֵךְ בַּמִּדְבָּר; וְזָבַחְנוּ לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר יֹאמַר אֵלֵינוּ.	23 We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God, as He shall command us.'
8.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר פַּרְעֹה, אָנֹכִי אֲשַׁלַּח אֶתְכֶם וּזְבַחְתֶּם לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם בַּמִּדְבָּר--רַק הַרְחֵק לֹא-תַרְחִיקוּ, לָלֶכֶת; הַעְתִּירוּ, בַּעֲדִי.	24 And Pharaoh said: 'I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away; entreat for me.'
8.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי יוֹצֵא מֵעִמָּךְ וְהַעְתַּרְתִּי אֶל-יְהוָה, וְסָר הֶעָרֹב מִפַּרְעֹה מֵעֲבָדָיו וּמֵעַמּוֹ, מָחָר:  רַק, אַל-יֹסֵף פַּרְעֹה הָתֵל, לְבִלְתִּי שַׁלַּח אֶת-הָעָם, לִזְבֹּחַ לַיהוָה.	25 And Moses said: 'Behold, I go out from thee, and I will entreat the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow; only let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.'
8.26 כו  וַיֵּצֵא מֹשֶׁה, מֵעִם פַּרְעֹה; וַיֶּעְתַּר, אֶל-יְהוָה.	26 And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD.
8.27 כז  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה, כִּדְבַר מֹשֶׁה, וַיָּסַר הֶעָרֹב, מִפַּרְעֹה מֵעֲבָדָיו וּמֵעַמּוֹ:  לֹא נִשְׁאַר, אֶחָד.	27 And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and He removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.
8.28 כח  וַיַּכְבֵּד פַּרְעֹה אֶת-לִבּוֹ, גַּם בַּפַּעַם הַזֹּאת; וְלֹא שִׁלַּח, אֶת-הָעָם.  {פ}	28 And Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and he did not let the people go. {P}
9.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בֹּא אֶל-פַּרְעֹה; וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הָעִבְרִים, שַׁלַּח אֶת-עַמִּי, וְיַעַבְדֻנִי.	1 Then the LORD said unto Moses: 'Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him: Thus saith the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: Let My people go, that they may serve Me.
9.2 ב  כִּי אִם-מָאֵן אַתָּה, לְשַׁלֵּחַ, וְעוֹדְךָ, מַחֲזִיק בָּם.	2 For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still,
9.3 ג  הִנֵּה יַד-יְהוָה הוֹיָה, בְּמִקְנְךָ אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה, בַּסּוּסִים בַּחֲמֹרִים בַּגְּמַלִּים, בַּבָּקָר וּבַצֹּאן--דֶּבֶר, כָּבֵד מְאֹד.	3 behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which are in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the herds, and upon the flocks; there shall be a very grievous murrain.
9.4 ד  וְהִפְלָה יְהוָה--בֵּין מִקְנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבֵין מִקְנֵה מִצְרָיִם; וְלֹא יָמוּת מִכָּל-לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, דָּבָר.	4 And the LORD shall make a division between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt; and there shall nothing die of all that belongeth to the children of Israel.'
9.5 ה  וַיָּשֶׂם יְהוָה, מוֹעֵד לֵאמֹר:  מָחָר, יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה--בָּאָרֶץ.	5 And the LORD appointed a set time, saying: 'Tomorrow the LORD shall do this thing in the land.'
9.6 ו  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיָּמָת, כֹּל מִקְנֵה מִצְרָיִם; וּמִמִּקְנֵה בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא-מֵת אֶחָד.	6 And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.
9.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁלַח פַּרְעֹה--וְהִנֵּה לֹא-מֵת מִמִּקְנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד-אֶחָד; וַיִּכְבַּד לֵב פַּרְעֹה, וְלֹא שִׁלַּח אֶת-הָעָם.  {פ}	7 And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not so much as one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn, and he did not let the people go. {P}
9.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, קְחוּ לָכֶם מְלֹא חָפְנֵיכֶם, פִּיחַ כִּבְשָׁן; וּזְרָקוֹ מֹשֶׁה הַשָּׁמַיְמָה, לְעֵינֵי פַרְעֹה.	8 And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron: 'Take to you handfuls of soot of the furnace, and let Moses throw it heavenward in the sight of Pharaoh.
9.9 ט  וְהָיָה לְאָבָק, עַל כָּל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְהָיָה עַל-הָאָדָם וְעַל-הַבְּהֵמָה, לִשְׁחִין פֹּרֵחַ אֲבַעְבֻּעֹת--בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	9 And it shall become small dust over all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.'
9.10 י  וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-פִּיחַ הַכִּבְשָׁן, וַיַּעַמְדוּ לִפְנֵי פַרְעֹה, וַיִּזְרֹק אֹתוֹ מֹשֶׁה, הַשָּׁמָיְמָה; וַיְהִי, שְׁחִין אֲבַעְבֻּעֹת, פֹּרֵחַ, בָּאָדָם וּבַבְּהֵמָה.	10 And they took soot of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses threw it up heavenward; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast.
9.11 יא  וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ הַחַרְטֻמִּים, לַעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה--מִפְּנֵי הַשְּׁחִין:  כִּי-הָיָה הַשְּׁחִין, בַּחַרְטֻמִּם וּבְכָל-מִצְרָיִם.	11 And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boils were upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.
9.12 יב  וַיְחַזֵּק יְהוָה אֶת-לֵב פַּרְעֹה, וְלֹא שָׁמַע אֲלֵהֶם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	12 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken unto Moses. {S}
9.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הַשְׁכֵּם בַּבֹּקֶר, וְהִתְיַצֵּב לִפְנֵי פַרְעֹה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הָעִבְרִים, שַׁלַּח אֶת-עַמִּי, וְיַעַבְדֻנִי.	13 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him: Thus saith the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: Let My people go, that they may serve Me.
9.14 יד  כִּי בַּפַּעַם הַזֹּאת, אֲנִי שֹׁלֵחַ אֶת-כָּל-מַגֵּפֹתַי אֶל-לִבְּךָ, וּבַעֲבָדֶיךָ, וּבְעַמֶּךָ--בַּעֲבוּר תֵּדַע, כִּי אֵין כָּמֹנִי בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ.	14 For I will this time send all My plagues upon thy person, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like Me in all the earth.
9.15 טו  כִּי עַתָּה שָׁלַחְתִּי אֶת-יָדִי, וָאַךְ אוֹתְךָ וְאֶת-עַמְּךָ בַּדָּבֶר; וַתִּכָּחֵד, מִן-הָאָרֶץ.	15 Surely now I had put forth My hand, and smitten thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou hadst been cut off from the earth.
9.16 טז  וְאוּלָם, בַּעֲבוּר זֹאת הֶעֱמַדְתִּיךָ, בַּעֲבוּר, הַרְאֹתְךָ אֶת-כֹּחִי; וּלְמַעַן סַפֵּר שְׁמִי, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ.	16 But in very deed for this cause have I made thee to stand, to show thee My power, and that My name may be declared throughout all the earth.
9.17 יז  עוֹדְךָ, מִסְתּוֹלֵל בְּעַמִּי, לְבִלְתִּי, שַׁלְּחָם.	17 As yet exaltest thou thyself against My people, that thou wilt not let them go?
9.18 יח  הִנְנִי מַמְטִיר כָּעֵת מָחָר, בָּרָד כָּבֵד מְאֹד, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיָה כָמֹהוּ בְּמִצְרַיִם, לְמִן-הַיּוֹם הִוָּסְדָה וְעַד-עָתָּה.	18 Behold, tomorrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the day it was founded even until now.
9.19 יט  וְעַתָּה, שְׁלַח הָעֵז אֶת-מִקְנְךָ, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לְךָ, בַּשָּׂדֶה:  כָּל-הָאָדָם וְהַבְּהֵמָה אֲשֶׁר-יִמָּצֵא בַשָּׂדֶה, וְלֹא יֵאָסֵף הַבַּיְתָה--וְיָרַד עֲלֵהֶם הַבָּרָד, וָמֵתוּ.	19 Now therefore send, hasten in thy cattle and all that thou hast in the field; for every man and beast that shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.'
9.20 כ  הַיָּרֵא אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה, מֵעַבְדֵי פַּרְעֹה--הֵנִיס אֶת-עֲבָדָיו וְאֶת-מִקְנֵהוּ, אֶל-הַבָּתִּים.	20 He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses;
9.21 כא  וַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׂם לִבּוֹ, אֶל-דְּבַר יְהוָה--וַיַּעֲזֹב אֶת-עֲבָדָיו וְאֶת-מִקְנֵהוּ, בַּשָּׂדֶה.  {פ}	21 and he that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his cattle in the field. {P}
9.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, נְטֵה אֶת-יָדְךָ עַל-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וִיהִי בָרָד, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  עַל-הָאָדָם וְעַל-הַבְּהֵמָה, וְעַל כָּל-עֵשֶׂב הַשָּׂדֶה--בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	22 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch forth thy hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.'
9.23 כג  וַיֵּט מֹשֶׁה אֶת-מַטֵּהוּ, עַל-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַיהוָה נָתַן קֹלֹת וּבָרָד, וַתִּהֲלַךְ אֵשׁ אָרְצָה; וַיַּמְטֵר יְהוָה בָּרָד, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	23 And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and fire ran down unto the earth; and the LORD caused to hail upon the land of Egypt.
9.24 כד  וַיְהִי בָרָד--וְאֵשׁ, מִתְלַקַּחַת בְּתוֹךְ הַבָּרָד:  כָּבֵד מְאֹד--אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיָה כָמֹהוּ בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מֵאָז הָיְתָה לְגוֹי.	24 So there was hail, and fire flashing up amidst the hail, very grievous, such as had not been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
9.25 כה  וַיַּךְ הַבָּרָד בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה, מֵאָדָם, וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה; וְאֵת כָּל-עֵשֶׂב הַשָּׂדֶה הִכָּה הַבָּרָד, וְאֶת-כָּל-עֵץ הַשָּׂדֶה שִׁבֵּר.	25 And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and broke every tree of the field.
9.26 כו  רַק בְּאֶרֶץ גֹּשֶׁן, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לֹא הָיָה, בָּרָד.	26 Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.
9.27 כז  וַיִּשְׁלַח פַּרְעֹה, וַיִּקְרָא לְמֹשֶׁה וּלְאַהֲרֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, חָטָאתִי הַפָּעַם:  יְהוָה, הַצַּדִּיק, וַאֲנִי וְעַמִּי, הָרְשָׁעִים.	27 And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them: 'I have sinned this time; the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.
9.28 כח  הַעְתִּירוּ, אֶל-יְהוָה, וְרַב, מִהְיֹת קֹלֹת אֱלֹהִים וּבָרָד; וַאֲשַׁלְּחָה אֶתְכֶם, וְלֹא תֹסִפוּן לַעֲמֹד.	28 Entreat the LORD, and let there be enough of these mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.'
9.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, מֹשֶׁה, כְּצֵאתִי אֶת-הָעִיר, אֶפְרֹשׂ אֶת-כַּפַּי אֶל-יְהוָה; הַקֹּלוֹת יֶחְדָּלוּן, וְהַבָּרָד לֹא יִהְיֶה-עוֹד, לְמַעַן תֵּדַע, כִּי לַיהוָה הָאָרֶץ.	29 And Moses said unto him: 'As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread forth my hands unto the LORD; the thunders shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know that the earth is the LORD'S.
9.30 ל  וְאַתָּה, וַעֲבָדֶיךָ:  יָדַעְתִּי--כִּי טֶרֶם תִּירְאוּן, מִפְּנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים.	30 But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the LORD God.'--
9.31 לא  וְהַפִּשְׁתָּה וְהַשְּׂעֹרָה, נֻכָּתָה:  כִּי הַשְּׂעֹרָה אָבִיב, וְהַפִּשְׁתָּה גִּבְעֹל.	31 And the flax and the barley were smitten; for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was in bloom.
9.32 לב  וְהַחִטָּה וְהַכֻּסֶּמֶת, לֹא נֻכּוּ:  כִּי אֲפִילֹת, הֵנָּה.	32 But the wheat and the spelt were not smitten; for they ripen late.--
9.33 לג  וַיֵּצֵא מֹשֶׁה מֵעִם פַּרְעֹה, אֶת-הָעִיר, וַיִּפְרֹשׂ כַּפָּיו, אֶל-יְהוָה; וַיַּחְדְּלוּ הַקֹּלוֹת וְהַבָּרָד, וּמָטָר לֹא-נִתַּךְ אָרְצָה.	33 And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread forth his hands unto the LORD; and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.
9.34 לד  וַיַּרְא פַּרְעֹה, כִּי-חָדַל הַמָּטָר וְהַבָּרָד וְהַקֹּלֹת--וַיֹּסֶף לַחֲטֹא; וַיַּכְבֵּד לִבּוֹ, הוּא וַעֲבָדָיו.	34 And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
9.35 לה  וַיֶּחֱזַק לֵב פַּרְעֹה, וְלֹא שִׁלַּח אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	35 And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses. {P}
10.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בֹּא אֶל-פַּרְעֹה:  כִּי-אֲנִי הִכְבַּדְתִּי אֶת-לִבּוֹ, וְאֶת-לֵב עֲבָדָיו, לְמַעַן שִׁתִי אֹתֹתַי אֵלֶּה, בְּקִרְבּוֹ.	1 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Go in unto Pharaoh; for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might show these My signs in the midst of them;
10.2 ב  וּלְמַעַן תְּסַפֵּר בְּאָזְנֵי בִנְךָ וּבֶן-בִּנְךָ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר הִתְעַלַּלְתִּי בְּמִצְרַיִם, וְאֶת-אֹתֹתַי, אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי בָם; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.	2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what I have wrought upon Egypt, and My signs which I have done among them; that ye may know that I am the LORD.'
10.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הָעִבְרִים, עַד-מָתַי מֵאַנְתָּ לֵעָנֹת מִפָּנָי; שַׁלַּח עַמִּי, וְיַעַבְדֻנִי.	3 And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before Me? let My people go, that they may serve Me.
10.4 ד  כִּי אִם-מָאֵן אַתָּה, לְשַׁלֵּחַ אֶת-עַמִּי--הִנְנִי מֵבִיא מָחָר אַרְבֶּה, בִּגְבֻלֶךָ.	4 Else, if thou refuse to let My people go, behold, to-morrow will I bring locusts into thy border;
10.5 ה  וְכִסָּה אֶת-עֵין הָאָרֶץ, וְלֹא יוּכַל לִרְאֹת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וְאָכַל אֶת-יֶתֶר הַפְּלֵטָה, הַנִּשְׁאֶרֶת לָכֶם מִן-הַבָּרָד, וְאָכַל אֶת-כָּל-הָעֵץ, הַצֹּמֵחַ לָכֶם מִן-הַשָּׂדֶה.	5 and they shall cover the face of the earth, that one shall not be able to see the earth; and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field;
10.6 ו  וּמָלְאוּ בָתֶּיךָ וּבָתֵּי כָל-עֲבָדֶיךָ, וּבָתֵּי כָל-מִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-רָאוּ אֲבֹתֶיךָ וַאֲבוֹת אֲבֹתֶיךָ, מִיּוֹם הֱיוֹתָם עַל-הָאֲדָמָה עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וַיִּפֶן וַיֵּצֵא, מֵעִם פַּרְעֹה.	6 and thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; as neither thy fathers nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day.' And he turned, and went out from Pharaoh.
10.7 ז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ עַבְדֵי פַרְעֹה אֵלָיו, עַד-מָתַי יִהְיֶה זֶה לָנוּ לְמוֹקֵשׁ--שַׁלַּח אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים, וְיַעַבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; הֲטֶרֶם תֵּדַע, כִּי אָבְדָה מִצְרָיִם.	7 And Pharaoh's servants said unto him: 'How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their God, knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?'
10.8 ח  וַיּוּשַׁב אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן, אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, לְכוּ עִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם; מִי וָמִי, הַהֹלְכִים.	8 And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh; and he said unto them: 'Go, serve the LORD your God; but who are they that shall go?'
10.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, בִּנְעָרֵינוּ וּבִזְקֵנֵינוּ נֵלֵךְ; בְּבָנֵינוּ וּבִבְנוֹתֵנוּ בְּצֹאנֵנוּ וּבִבְקָרֵנוּ, נֵלֵךְ--כִּי חַג-יְהוָה, לָנוּ.	9 And Moses said: 'We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds we will go; for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.'
10.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, יְהִי כֵן יְהוָה עִמָּכֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר אֲשַׁלַּח אֶתְכֶם, וְאֶת-טַפְּכֶם; רְאוּ, כִּי רָעָה נֶגֶד פְּנֵיכֶם.	10 And he said unto them: 'So be the LORD with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones; see ye that evil is before your face.
10.11 יא  לֹא כֵן, לְכוּ-נָא הַגְּבָרִים וְעִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה--כִּי אֹתָהּ, אַתֶּם מְבַקְשִׁים; וַיְגָרֶשׁ אֹתָם, מֵאֵת פְּנֵי פַרְעֹה.  {ס}	11 Not so; go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD; for that is what ye desire.' And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence. {S}
10.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, נְטֵה יָדְךָ עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם בָּאַרְבֶּה, וְיַעַל, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְיֹאכַל אֶת-כָּל-עֵשֶׂב הָאָרֶץ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁאִיר הַבָּרָד.	12 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch out thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left.'
10.13 יג  וַיֵּט מֹשֶׁה אֶת-מַטֵּהוּ, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וַיהוָה נִהַג רוּחַ-קָדִים בָּאָרֶץ, כָּל-הַיּוֹם הַהוּא וְכָל-הַלָּיְלָה; הַבֹּקֶר הָיָה--וְרוּחַ הַקָּדִים, נָשָׂא אֶת-הָאַרְבֶּה.	13 And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all the night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
10.14 יד  וַיַּעַל הָאַרְבֶּה, עַל כָּל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וַיָּנַח, בְּכֹל גְּבוּל מִצְרָיִם:  כָּבֵד מְאֹד--לְפָנָיו לֹא-הָיָה כֵן אַרְבֶּה כָּמֹהוּ, וְאַחֲרָיו לֹא יִהְיֶה-כֵּן.	14 And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt; very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.
10.15 טו  וַיְכַס אֶת-עֵין כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, וַתֶּחְשַׁךְ הָאָרֶץ, וַיֹּאכַל אֶת-כָּל-עֵשֶׂב הָאָרֶץ וְאֵת כָּל-פְּרִי הָעֵץ, אֲשֶׁר הוֹתִיר הַבָּרָד; וְלֹא-נוֹתַר כָּל-יֶרֶק בָּעֵץ וּבְעֵשֶׂב הַשָּׂדֶה, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	15 For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left; and there remained not any green thing, either tree or herb of the field, through all the land of Egypt.
10.16 טז  וַיְמַהֵר פַּרְעֹה, לִקְרֹא לְמֹשֶׁה וּלְאַהֲרֹן; וַיֹּאמֶר, חָטָאתִי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--וְלָכֶם.	16 Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said: 'I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.
10.17 יז  וְעַתָּה, שָׂא נָא חַטָּאתִי אַךְ הַפַּעַם, וְהַעְתִּירוּ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם; וְיָסֵר, מֵעָלַי, רַק, אֶת-הַמָּוֶת הַזֶּה.	17 Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and entreat the LORD your God, that He may take away from me this death only.'
10.18 יח  וַיֵּצֵא, מֵעִם פַּרְעֹה; וַיֶּעְתַּר, אֶל-יְהוָה.	18 And he went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the LORD.
10.19 יט  וַיַּהֲפֹךְ יְהוָה רוּחַ-יָם, חָזָק מְאֹד, וַיִּשָּׂא אֶת-הָאַרְבֶּה, וַיִּתְקָעֵהוּ יָמָּה סּוּף:  לֹא נִשְׁאַר אַרְבֶּה אֶחָד, בְּכֹל גְּבוּל מִצְרָיִם.	19 And the LORD turned an exceeding strong west wind, which took up the locusts, and drove them into the Red Sea; there remained not one locust in all the border of Egypt.
10.20 כ  וַיְחַזֵּק יְהוָה, אֶת-לֵב פַּרְעֹה; וְלֹא שִׁלַּח, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he did not let the children of Israel go. {P}
10.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, נְטֵה יָדְךָ עַל-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וִיהִי חֹשֶׁךְ, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְיָמֵשׁ, חֹשֶׁךְ.	21 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch out thy hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.'
10.22 כב  וַיֵּט מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל-הַשָּׁמָיִם; וַיְהִי חֹשֶׁךְ-אֲפֵלָה בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים.	22 And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days;
10.23 כג  לֹא-רָאוּ אִישׁ אֶת-אָחִיו, וְלֹא-קָמוּ אִישׁ מִתַּחְתָּיו--שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים; וּלְכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הָיָה אוֹר, בְּמוֹשְׁבֹתָם.	23 they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.
10.24 כד  וַיִּקְרָא פַרְעֹה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וַיֹּאמֶר לְכוּ עִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה--רַק צֹאנְכֶם וּבְקַרְכֶם, יֻצָּג:  גַּם-טַפְּכֶם, יֵלֵךְ עִמָּכֶם.	24 And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said: 'Go ye, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed; let your little ones also go with you.'
10.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, גַּם-אַתָּה תִּתֵּן בְּיָדֵנוּ זְבָחִים וְעֹלֹת; וְעָשִׂינוּ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	25 And Moses said: 'Thou must also give into our hand sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God.
10.26 כו  וְגַם-מִקְנֵנוּ יֵלֵךְ עִמָּנוּ, לֹא תִשָּׁאֵר פַּרְסָה--כִּי מִמֶּנּוּ נִקַּח, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וַאֲנַחְנוּ לֹא-נֵדַע, מַה-נַּעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה, עַד-בֹּאֵנוּ, שָׁמָּה.	26 Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not a hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God; and we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come thither.'
10.27 כז  וַיְחַזֵּק יְהוָה, אֶת-לֵב פַּרְעֹה; וְלֹא אָבָה, לְשַׁלְּחָם.	27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go.
10.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר-לוֹ פַרְעֹה, לֵךְ מֵעָלָי; הִשָּׁמֶר לְךָ, אַל-תֹּסֶף רְאוֹת פָּנַי--כִּי בְּיוֹם רְאֹתְךָ פָנַי, תָּמוּת.	28 And Pharaoh said unto him: 'Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in the day thou seest my face thou shalt die.'
10.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן דִּבַּרְתָּ:  לֹא-אֹסִף עוֹד, רְאוֹת פָּנֶיךָ.  {פ}	29 And Moses said: 'Thou hast spoken well; I will see thy face again no more.' {P}
11.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עוֹד נֶגַע אֶחָד אָבִיא עַל-פַּרְעֹה וְעַל-מִצְרַיִם--אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, יְשַׁלַּח אֶתְכֶם מִזֶּה:  כְּשַׁלְּחוֹ--כָּלָה, גָּרֵשׁ יְגָרֵשׁ אֶתְכֶם מִזֶּה.	1 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Yet one plague more will I bring upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence; when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.
11.2 ב  דַּבֶּר-נָא, בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם; וְיִשְׁאֲלוּ אִישׁ מֵאֵת רֵעֵהוּ, וְאִשָּׁה מֵאֵת רְעוּתָהּ, כְּלֵי-כֶסֶף, וּכְלֵי זָהָב.	2 Speak now in the ears of the people, and let them ask every man of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.'
11.3 ג  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה אֶת-חֵן הָעָם, בְּעֵינֵי מִצְרָיִם; גַּם הָאִישׁ מֹשֶׁה, גָּדוֹל מְאֹד בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, בְּעֵינֵי עַבְדֵי-פַרְעֹה, וּבְעֵינֵי הָעָם.  {ס}	3 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people. {S}
11.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  כַּחֲצֹת הַלַּיְלָה, אֲנִי יוֹצֵא בְּתוֹךְ מִצְרָיִם.	4 And Moses said: 'Thus saith the LORD: About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt;
11.5 ה  וּמֵת כָּל-בְּכוֹר, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם--מִבְּכוֹר פַּרְעֹה הַיֹּשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, עַד בְּכוֹר הַשִּׁפְחָה אֲשֶׁר אַחַר הָרֵחָיִם; וְכֹל, בְּכוֹר בְּהֵמָה.	5 and all the first-born in the land of Egypt shall die, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the first-born of the maid-servant that is behind the mill; and all the first-born of cattle.
11.6 ו  וְהָיְתָה צְעָקָה גְדֹלָה, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם, אֲשֶׁר כָּמֹהוּ לֹא נִהְיָתָה, וְכָמֹהוּ לֹא תֹסִף.	6 And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there hath been none like it, nor shall be like it any more.
11.7 ז  וּלְכֹל בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא יֶחֱרַץ-כֶּלֶב לְשֹׁנוֹ, לְמֵאִישׁ, וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה--לְמַעַן, תֵּדְעוּן, אֲשֶׁר יַפְלֶה יְהוָה, בֵּין מִצְרַיִם וּבֵין יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog whet his tongue, against man or beast; that ye may know how that the LORD doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.
11.8 ח  וְיָרְדוּ כָל-עֲבָדֶיךָ אֵלֶּה אֵלַי וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ-לִי לֵאמֹר, צֵא אַתָּה וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בְּרַגְלֶיךָ, וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, אֵצֵא; וַיֵּצֵא מֵעִם-פַּרְעֹה, בָּחֳרִי-אָף.  {ס}	8 And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down unto me, saying: Get thee out, and all the people that follow thee; and after that I will go out.' And he went out from Pharaoh in hot anger. {S}
11.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, לֹא-יִשְׁמַע אֲלֵיכֶם פַּרְעֹה--לְמַעַן רְבוֹת מוֹפְתַי, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	9 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Pharaoh will not hearken unto you; that My wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.'
11.10 י  וּמֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, עָשׂוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַמֹּפְתִים הָאֵלֶּה--לִפְנֵי פַרְעֹה; וַיְחַזֵּק יְהוָה אֶת-לֵב פַּרְעֹה, וְלֹא-שִׁלַּח אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאַרְצוֹ.  {ס}	10 And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh; and the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he did not let the children of Israel go out of his land. {S}
12.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying:
12.2 ב  הַחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה לָכֶם, רֹאשׁ חֳדָשִׁים:  רִאשׁוֹן הוּא לָכֶם, לְחָדְשֵׁי הַשָּׁנָה.	2 'This month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you.
12.3 ג  דַּבְּרוּ, אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר, בֶּעָשֹׂר, לַחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה:  וְיִקְחוּ לָהֶם, אִישׁ שֶׂה לְבֵית-אָבֹת--שֶׂה לַבָּיִת.	3 Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying: In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a household;
12.4 ד  וְאִם-יִמְעַט הַבַּיִת, מִהְיוֹת מִשֶּׂה--וְלָקַח הוּא וּשְׁכֵנוֹ הַקָּרֹב אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, בְּמִכְסַת נְפָשֹׁת:  אִישׁ לְפִי אָכְלוֹ, תָּכֹסּוּ עַל-הַשֶּׂה.	4 and if the household be too little for a lamb, then shall he and his neighbour next unto his house take one according to the number of the souls; according to every man's eating ye shall make your count for the lamb.
12.5 ה  שֶׂה תָמִים זָכָר בֶּן-שָׁנָה, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם; מִן-הַכְּבָשִׂים וּמִן-הָעִזִּים, תִּקָּחוּ.	5 Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year; ye shall take it from the sheep, or from the goats;
12.6 ו  וְהָיָה לָכֶם לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת, עַד אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה; וְשָׁחֲטוּ אֹתוֹ, כֹּל קְהַל עֲדַת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בֵּין הָעַרְבָּיִם.	6 and ye shall keep it unto the fourteenth day of the same month; and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it at dusk.
12.7 ז  וְלָקְחוּ, מִן-הַדָּם, וְנָתְנוּ עַל-שְׁתֵּי הַמְּזוּזֹת, וְעַל-הַמַּשְׁקוֹף--עַל, הַבָּתִּים, אֲשֶׁר-יֹאכְלוּ אֹתוֹ, בָּהֶם.	7 And they shall take of the blood, and put it on the two side-posts and on the lintel, upon the houses wherein they shall eat it.
12.8 ח  וְאָכְלוּ אֶת-הַבָּשָׂר, בַּלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה:  צְלִי-אֵשׁ וּמַצּוֹת, עַל-מְרֹרִים יֹאכְלֻהוּ.	8 And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
12.9 ט  אַל-תֹּאכְלוּ מִמֶּנּוּ נָא, וּבָשֵׁל מְבֻשָּׁל בַּמָּיִם:  כִּי אִם-צְלִי-אֵשׁ, רֹאשׁוֹ עַל-כְּרָעָיו וְעַל-קִרְבּוֹ.	9 Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; its head with its legs and with the inwards thereof.
12.10 י  וְלֹא-תוֹתִירוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, עַד-בֹּקֶר; וְהַנֹּתָר מִמֶּנּוּ עַד-בֹּקֶר, בָּאֵשׁ תִּשְׂרֹפוּ.	10 And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; but that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
12.11 יא  וְכָכָה, תֹּאכְלוּ אֹתוֹ--מָתְנֵיכֶם חֲגֻרִים, נַעֲלֵיכֶם בְּרַגְלֵיכֶם וּמַקֶּלְכֶם בְּיֶדְכֶם; וַאֲכַלְתֶּם אֹתוֹ בְּחִפָּזוֹן, פֶּסַח הוּא לַיהוָה.	11 And thus shall ye eat it: with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste--it is the LORD'S passover.
12.12 יב  וְעָבַרְתִּי בְאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם, בַּלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה, וְהִכֵּיתִי כָל-בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מֵאָדָם וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה; וּבְכָל-אֱלֹהֵי מִצְרַיִם אֶעֱשֶׂה שְׁפָטִים, אֲנִי יְהוָה.	12 For I will go through the land of Egypt in that night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments: I am the LORD.
12.13 יג  וְהָיָה הַדָּם לָכֶם לְאֹת, עַל הַבָּתִּים אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם שָׁם, וְרָאִיתִי אֶת-הַדָּם, וּפָסַחְתִּי עֲלֵכֶם; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה בָכֶם נֶגֶף לְמַשְׁחִית, בְּהַכֹּתִי בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	13 And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and there shall no plague be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.
12.14 יד  וְהָיָה הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה לָכֶם לְזִכָּרוֹן, וְחַגֹּתֶם אֹתוֹ חַג לַיהוָה:  לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, חֻקַּת עוֹלָם תְּחָגֻּהוּ.	14 And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to the LORD; throughout your generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
12.15 טו  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, מַצּוֹת תֹּאכֵלוּ--אַךְ בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן, תַּשְׁבִּיתוּ שְּׂאֹר מִבָּתֵּיכֶם:  כִּי כָּל-אֹכֵל חָמֵץ, וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל--מִיּוֹם הָרִאשֹׁן, עַד-יוֹם הַשְּׁבִעִי.	15 Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; howbeit the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses; for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
12.16 טז  וּבַיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם:  כָּל-מְלָאכָה, לֹא-יֵעָשֶׂה בָהֶם--אַךְ אֲשֶׁר יֵאָכֵל לְכָל-נֶפֶשׁ, הוּא לְבַדּוֹ יֵעָשֶׂה לָכֶם.	16 And in the first day there shall be to you a holy convocation, and in the seventh day a holy convocation; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done by you.
12.17 יז  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֶת-הַמַּצּוֹת, כִּי בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, הוֹצֵאתִי אֶת-צִבְאוֹתֵיכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם--חֻקַּת עוֹלָם.	17 And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your hosts out of the land of Egypt; therefore shall ye observe this day throughout your generations by an ordinance for ever.
12.18 יח  בָּרִאשֹׁן בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ, בָּעֶרֶב, תֹּאכְלוּ, מַצֹּת:  עַד יוֹם הָאֶחָד וְעֶשְׂרִים, לַחֹדֶשׁ--בָּעָרֶב.	18 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
12.19 יט  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים--שְׂאֹר, לֹא יִמָּצֵא בְּבָתֵּיכֶם:  כִּי כָּל-אֹכֵל מַחְמֶצֶת, וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא מֵעֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--בַּגֵּר, וּבְאֶזְרַח הָאָרֶץ.	19 Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses; for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a sojourner, or one that is born in the land.
12.20 כ  כָּל-מַחְמֶצֶת, לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ; בְּכֹל, מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם, תֹּאכְלוּ, מַצּוֹת.  {פ}	20 Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.' {P}
12.21 כא  וַיִּקְרָא מֹשֶׁה לְכָל-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם:  מִשְׁכוּ, וּקְחוּ לָכֶם צֹאן לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתֵיכֶם--וְשַׁחֲטוּ הַפָּסַח.	21 Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them: 'Draw out, and take you lambs according to your families, and kill the passover lamb.
12.22 כב  וּלְקַחְתֶּם אֲגֻדַּת אֵזוֹב, וּטְבַלְתֶּם בַּדָּם אֲשֶׁר-בַּסַּף, וְהִגַּעְתֶּם אֶל-הַמַּשְׁקוֹף וְאֶל-שְׁתֵּי הַמְּזוּזֹת, מִן-הַדָּם אֲשֶׁר בַּסָּף; וְאַתֶּם, לֹא תֵצְאוּ אִישׁ מִפֶּתַח-בֵּיתוֹ--עַד-בֹּקֶר.	22 And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin; and none of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning.
12.23 כג  וְעָבַר יְהוָה, לִנְגֹּף אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, וְרָאָה אֶת-הַדָּם עַל-הַמַּשְׁקוֹף, וְעַל שְׁתֵּי הַמְּזוּזֹת; וּפָסַח יְהוָה, עַל-הַפֶּתַח, וְלֹא יִתֵּן הַמַּשְׁחִית, לָבֹא אֶל-בָּתֵּיכֶם לִנְגֹּף.	23 For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when He seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side-posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
12.24 כד  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, לְחָק-לְךָ וּלְבָנֶיךָ, עַד-עוֹלָם.	24 And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.
12.25 כה  וְהָיָה כִּי-תָבֹאוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר יִתֵּן יְהוָה לָכֶם--כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר; וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֶת-הָעֲבֹדָה הַזֹּאת.	25 And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the LORD will give you, according as He hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.
12.26 כו  וְהָיָה, כִּי-יֹאמְרוּ אֲלֵיכֶם בְּנֵיכֶם:  מָה הָעֲבֹדָה הַזֹּאת, לָכֶם.	26 And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you: What mean ye by this service?
12.27 כז  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם זֶבַח-פֶּסַח הוּא לַיהוָה, אֲשֶׁר פָּסַח עַל-בָּתֵּי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּמִצְרַיִם, בְּנָגְפּוֹ אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, וְאֶת-בָּתֵּינוּ הִצִּיל; וַיִּקֹּד הָעָם, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ.	27 that ye shall say: It is the sacrifice of the LORD'S passover, for that He passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when He smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses.' And the people bowed the head and worshipped.
12.28 כח  וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, כֵּן עָשׂוּ.  {ס}	28 And the children of Israel went and did so; as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. {S}
12.29 כט  וַיְהִי בַּחֲצִי הַלַּיְלָה, וַיהוָה הִכָּה כָל-בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מִבְּכֹר פַּרְעֹה הַיֹּשֵׁב עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, עַד בְּכוֹר הַשְּׁבִי אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית הַבּוֹר; וְכֹל, בְּכוֹר בְּהֵמָה.	29 And it came to pass at midnight, that the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the first-born of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the first-born of cattle.
12.30 ל  וַיָּקָם פַּרְעֹה לַיְלָה, הוּא וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו וְכָל-מִצְרַיִם, וַתְּהִי צְעָקָה גְדֹלָה, בְּמִצְרָיִם:  כִּי-אֵין בַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-שָׁם מֵת.	30 And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
12.31 לא  וַיִּקְרָא לְמֹשֶׁה וּלְאַהֲרֹן לַיְלָה, וַיֹּאמֶר קוּמוּ צְּאוּ מִתּוֹךְ עַמִּי--גַּם-אַתֶּם, גַּם-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּלְכוּ עִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, כְּדַבֶּרְכֶם.	31 And he called for Moses and Aaron by night and said: 'Rise up, get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.
12.32 לב  גַּם-צֹאנְכֶם גַּם-בְּקַרְכֶם קְחוּ כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתֶּם, וָלֵכוּ; וּבֵרַכְתֶּם, גַּם-אֹתִי.	32 Take both your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.'
12.33 לג  וַתֶּחֱזַק מִצְרַיִם עַל-הָעָם, לְמַהֵר לְשַׁלְּחָם מִן-הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי אָמְרוּ, כֻּלָּנוּ מֵתִים.	33 And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, to send them out of the land in haste; for they said: 'We are all dead men.'
12.34 לד  וַיִּשָּׂא הָעָם אֶת-בְּצֵקוֹ, טֶרֶם יֶחְמָץ; מִשְׁאֲרֹתָם צְרֻרֹת בְּשִׂמְלֹתָם, עַל-שִׁכְמָם.	34 And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading-troughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
12.35 לה  וּבְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל עָשׂוּ, כִּדְבַר מֹשֶׁה; וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ, מִמִּצְרַיִם, כְּלֵי-כֶסֶף וּכְלֵי זָהָב, וּשְׂמָלֹת.	35 And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.
12.36 לו  וַיהוָה נָתַן אֶת-חֵן הָעָם, בְּעֵינֵי מִצְרַיִם--וַיַּשְׁאִלוּם; וַיְנַצְּלוּ, אֶת-מִצְרָיִם.  {פ}	36 And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked. And they despoiled the Egyptians. {P}
12.37 לז  וַיִּסְעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵרַעְמְסֵס, סֻכֹּתָה, כְּשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף רַגְלִי הַגְּבָרִים, לְבַד מִטָּף.	37 And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, beside children.
12.38 לח  וְגַם-עֵרֶב רַב, עָלָה אִתָּם, וְצֹאן וּבָקָר, מִקְנֶה כָּבֵד מְאֹד.	38 And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.
12.39 לט  וַיֹּאפוּ אֶת-הַבָּצֵק אֲשֶׁר הוֹצִיאוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, עֻגֹת מַצּוֹת--כִּי לֹא חָמֵץ:  כִּי-גֹרְשׁוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, וְלֹא יָכְלוּ לְהִתְמַהְמֵהַּ, וְגַם-צֵדָה, לֹא-עָשׂוּ לָהֶם.	39 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.
12.40 מ  וּמוֹשַׁב בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יָשְׁבוּ בְּמִצְרָיִם--שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת שָׁנָה.	40 Now the time that the children of Israel dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years.
12.41 מא  וַיְהִי, מִקֵּץ שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת, שָׁנָה; וַיְהִי, בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, יָצְאוּ כָּל-צִבְאוֹת יְהוָה, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	41 And it came to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the host of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt.
12.42 מב  לֵיל שִׁמֻּרִים הוּא לַיהוָה, לְהוֹצִיאָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  הוּא-הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה לַיהוָה, שִׁמֻּרִים לְכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לְדֹרֹתָם.  {פ}	42 It was a night of watching unto the LORD for bringing them out from the land of Egypt; this same night is a night of watching unto the LORD for all the children of Israel throughout their generations. {P}
12.43 מג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, זֹאת חֻקַּת הַפָּסַח:  כָּל-בֶּן-נֵכָר, לֹא-יֹאכַל בּוֹ.	43 And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron: 'This is the ordinance of the passover: there shall no alien eat thereof;
12.44 מד  וְכָל-עֶבֶד אִישׁ, מִקְנַת-כָּסֶף--וּמַלְתָּה אֹתוֹ, אָז יֹאכַל בּוֹ.	44 but every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.
12.45 מה  תּוֹשָׁב וְשָׂכִיר, לֹא-יֹאכַל בּוֹ.	45 A sojourner and a hired servant shall not eat thereof.
12.46 מו  בְּבַיִת אֶחָד יֵאָכֵל, לֹא-תוֹצִיא מִן-הַבַּיִת מִן-הַבָּשָׂר חוּצָה; וְעֶצֶם, לֹא תִשְׁבְּרוּ-בוֹ.	46 In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof.
12.47 מז  כָּל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, יַעֲשׂוּ אֹתוֹ.	47 All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
12.48 מח  וְכִי-יָגוּר אִתְּךָ גֵּר, וְעָשָׂה פֶסַח לַיהוָה--הִמּוֹל לוֹ כָל-זָכָר וְאָז יִקְרַב לַעֲשֹׂתוֹ, וְהָיָה כְּאֶזְרַח הָאָרֶץ; וְכָל-עָרֵל, לֹא-יֹאכַל בּוֹ.	48 And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land; but no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
12.49 מט  תּוֹרָה אַחַת, יִהְיֶה לָאֶזְרָח, וְלַגֵּר, הַגָּר בְּתוֹכְכֶם.	49 One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.'
12.50 נ  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן, כֵּן עָשׂוּ.  {ס}	50 Thus did all the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. {S}
12.51 נא  וַיְהִי, בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  הוֹצִיא יְהוָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם--עַל-צִבְאֹתָם.  {פ}	51 And it came to pass the selfsame day that the LORD did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their hosts. {P}
13.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
13.2 ב  קַדֶּשׁ-לִי כָל-בְּכוֹר פֶּטֶר כָּל-רֶחֶם, בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--בָּאָדָם, וּבַבְּהֵמָה:  לִי, הוּא.	2 'Sanctify unto Me all the first-born, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast, it is Mine.'
13.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָעָם, זָכוֹר אֶת-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר יְצָאתֶם מִמִּצְרַיִם מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים, כִּי בְּחֹזֶק יָד, הוֹצִיא יְהוָה אֶתְכֶם מִזֶּה; וְלֹא יֵאָכֵל, חָמֵץ.	3 And Moses said unto the people: 'Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this place; there shall no leavened bread be eaten.
13.4 ד  הַיּוֹם, אַתֶּם יֹצְאִים, בְּחֹדֶשׁ, הָאָבִיב.	4 This day ye go forth in the month Abib.
13.5 ה  וְהָיָה כִי-יְבִיאֲךָ יְהוָה אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְהַחִתִּי וְהָאֱמֹרִי וְהַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע לַאֲבֹתֶיךָ לָתֶת לָךְ, אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב, וּדְבָשׁ; וְעָבַדְתָּ אֶת-הָעֲבֹדָה הַזֹּאת, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה.	5 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which He swore unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.
13.6 ו  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, תֹּאכַל מַצֹּת; וּבַיּוֹם, הַשְּׁבִיעִי, חַג, לַיהוָה.	6 Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to the LORD.
13.7 ז  מַצּוֹת, יֵאָכֵל, אֵת, שִׁבְעַת הַיָּמִים; וְלֹא-יֵרָאֶה לְךָ חָמֵץ, וְלֹא-יֵרָאֶה לְךָ שְׂאֹר--בְּכָל-גְּבֻלֶךָ.	7 Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee, in all thy borders.
13.8 ח  וְהִגַּדְתָּ לְבִנְךָ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר:  בַּעֲבוּר זֶה, עָשָׂה יְהוָה לִי, בְּצֵאתִי, מִמִּצְרָיִם.	8 And thou shalt tell thy son in that day, saying: It is because of that which the LORD did for me when I came forth out of Egypt.
13.9 ט  וְהָיָה לְךָ לְאוֹת עַל-יָדְךָ, וּלְזִכָּרוֹן בֵּין עֵינֶיךָ, לְמַעַן תִּהְיֶה תּוֹרַת יְהוָה, בְּפִיךָ:  כִּי בְּיָד חֲזָקָה, הוֹצִאֲךָ יְהוָה מִמִּצְרָיִם.	9 And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of the LORD may be in thy mouth; for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.
13.10 י  וְשָׁמַרְתָּ אֶת-הַחֻקָּה הַזֹּאת, לְמוֹעֲדָהּ, מִיָּמִים, יָמִימָה.  {פ}	10 Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in its season from year to year. {P}
13.11 יא  וְהָיָה כִּי-יְבִאֲךָ יְהוָה, אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע לְךָ, וְלַאֲבֹתֶיךָ; וּנְתָנָהּ, לָךְ.	11 And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, as He swore unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,
13.12 יב  וְהַעֲבַרְתָּ כָל-פֶּטֶר-רֶחֶם, לַיהוָה; וְכָל-פֶּטֶר שֶׁגֶר בְּהֵמָה, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה לְךָ הַזְּכָרִים--לַיהוָה.	12 that thou shalt set apart unto the LORD all that openeth the womb; every firstling that is a male, which thou hast coming of a beast, shall be the LORD'S.
13.13 יג  וְכָל-פֶּטֶר חֲמֹר תִּפְדֶּה בְשֶׂה, וְאִם-לֹא תִפְדֶּה וַעֲרַפְתּוֹ; וְכֹל בְּכוֹר אָדָם בְּבָנֶיךָ, תִּפְדֶּה.	13 And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break its neck; and all the first-born of man among thy sons shalt thou redeem.
13.14 יד  וְהָיָה כִּי-יִשְׁאָלְךָ בִנְךָ, מָחָר--לֵאמֹר מַה-זֹּאת:  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו--בְּחֹזֶק יָד הוֹצִיאָנוּ יְהוָה מִמִּצְרַיִם, מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים.	14 And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying: What is this? that thou shalt say unto him: By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage;
13.15 טו  וַיְהִי, כִּי-הִקְשָׁה פַרְעֹה לְשַׁלְּחֵנוּ, וַיַּהֲרֹג יְהוָה כָּל-בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מִבְּכֹר אָדָם וְעַד-בְּכוֹר בְּהֵמָה; עַל-כֵּן אֲנִי זֹבֵחַ לַיהוָה, כָּל-פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם הַזְּכָרִים, וְכָל-בְּכוֹר בָּנַי, אֶפְדֶּה.	15 and it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go that the LORD slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the first-born of man, and the first-born of beast; therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all that openeth the womb, being males; but all the first-born of my sons I redeem.
13.16 טז  וְהָיָה לְאוֹת עַל-יָדְכָה, וּלְטוֹטָפֹת בֵּין עֵינֶיךָ:  כִּי בְּחֹזֶק יָד, הוֹצִיאָנוּ יְהוָה מִמִּצְרָיִם.  {ס}	16 And it shall be for a sign upon thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes; for by strength of hand the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt.' {S}
13.17 יז  וַיְהִי, בְּשַׁלַּח פַּרְעֹה אֶת-הָעָם, וְלֹא-נָחָם אֱלֹהִים דֶּרֶךְ אֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים, כִּי קָרוֹב הוּא:  כִּי אָמַר אֱלֹהִים, פֶּן-יִנָּחֵם הָעָם בִּרְאֹתָם מִלְחָמָה--וְשָׁבוּ מִצְרָיְמָה.	17 And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not by the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said: 'Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt.'
13.18 יח  וַיַּסֵּב אֱלֹהִים אֶת-הָעָם דֶּרֶךְ הַמִּדְבָּר, יַם-סוּף; וַחֲמֻשִׁים עָלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	18 But God led the people about, by the way of the wilderness by the Red Sea; and the children of Israel went up armed out of the land of Egypt.
13.19 יט  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-עַצְמוֹת יוֹסֵף, עִמּוֹ:  כִּי הַשְׁבֵּעַ הִשְׁבִּיעַ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר, פָּקֹד יִפְקֹד אֱלֹהִים אֶתְכֶם, וְהַעֲלִיתֶם אֶת-עַצְמֹתַי מִזֶּה אִתְּכֶם.	19 And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him; for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying: 'God will surely remember you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.'
13.20 כ  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִסֻּכֹּת; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְאֵתָם, בִּקְצֵה הַמִּדְבָּר.	20 And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.
13.21 כא  וַיהוָה הֹלֵךְ לִפְנֵיהֶם יוֹמָם בְּעַמּוּד עָנָן, לַנְחֹתָם הַדֶּרֶךְ, וְלַיְלָה בְּעַמּוּד אֵשׁ, לְהָאִיר לָהֶם--לָלֶכֶת, יוֹמָם וָלָיְלָה.	21 And the LORD went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; that they might go by day and by night:
13.22 כב  לֹא-יָמִישׁ עַמּוּד הֶעָנָן, יוֹמָם, וְעַמּוּד הָאֵשׁ, לָיְלָה--לִפְנֵי, הָעָם.  {פ}	22 the pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night, departed not from before the people. {P}
14.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
14.2 ב  דַּבֵּר, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיָשֻׁבוּ וְיַחֲנוּ לִפְנֵי פִּי הַחִירֹת, בֵּין מִגְדֹּל וּבֵין הַיָּם:  לִפְנֵי בַּעַל צְפֹן, נִכְחוֹ תַחֲנוּ עַל-הַיָּם.	2 'Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn back and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-zephon, over against it shall ye encamp by the sea.
14.3 ג  וְאָמַר פַּרְעֹה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, נְבֻכִים הֵם בָּאָרֶץ; סָגַר עֲלֵיהֶם, הַמִּדְבָּר.	3 And Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel: They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.
14.4 ד  וְחִזַּקְתִּי אֶת-לֵב-פַּרְעֹה, וְרָדַף אַחֲרֵיהֶם, וְאִכָּבְדָה בְּפַרְעֹה וּבְכָל-חֵילוֹ, וְיָדְעוּ מִצְרַיִם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן.	4 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and he shall follow after them; and I will get Me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; and the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD.' And they did so.
14.5 ה  וַיֻּגַּד לְמֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, כִּי בָרַח הָעָם; וַיֵּהָפֵךְ לְבַב פַּרְעֹה וַעֲבָדָיו, אֶל-הָעָם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ מַה-זֹּאת עָשִׂינוּ, כִּי-שִׁלַּחְנוּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵעָבְדֵנוּ.	5 And it was told the king of Egypt that the people were fled; and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned towards the people, and they said: 'What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
14.6 ו  וַיֶּאְסֹר, אֶת-רִכְבּוֹ; וְאֶת-עַמּוֹ, לָקַח עִמּוֹ.	6 And he made ready his chariots, and took his people with him.
14.7 ז  וַיִּקַּח, שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת רֶכֶב בָּחוּר, וְכֹל, רֶכֶב מִצְרָיִם; וְשָׁלִשִׁם, עַל-כֻּלּוֹ.	7 And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over all of them.
14.8 ח  וַיְחַזֵּק יְהוָה, אֶת-לֵב פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, וַיִּרְדֹּף, אַחֲרֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יֹצְאִים בְּיָד רָמָה.	8 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel; for the children of Israel went out with a high hand.
14.9 ט  וַיִּרְדְּפוּ מִצְרַיִם אַחֲרֵיהֶם, וַיַּשִּׂיגוּ אוֹתָם חֹנִים עַל-הַיָּם, כָּל-סוּס רֶכֶב פַּרְעֹה, וּפָרָשָׁיו וְחֵילוֹ--עַל-פִּי, הַחִירֹת, לִפְנֵי, בַּעַל צְפֹן.	9 And the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, in front of Baal-zephon.
14.10 י  וּפַרְעֹה, הִקְרִיב; וַיִּשְׂאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-עֵינֵיהֶם וְהִנֵּה מִצְרַיִם נֹסֵעַ אַחֲרֵיהֶם, וַיִּירְאוּ מְאֹד, וַיִּצְעֲקוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה.	10 And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians were marching after them; and they were sore afraid; and the children of Israel cried out unto the LORD.
14.11 יא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הֲמִבְּלִי אֵין-קְבָרִים בְּמִצְרַיִם, לְקַחְתָּנוּ לָמוּת בַּמִּדְבָּר:  מַה-זֹּאת עָשִׂיתָ לָּנוּ, לְהוֹצִיאָנוּ מִמִּצְרָיִם.	11 And they said unto Moses: 'Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to bring us forth out of Egypt?
14.12 יב  הֲלֹא-זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְנוּ אֵלֶיךָ בְמִצְרַיִם לֵאמֹר, חֲדַל מִמֶּנּוּ, וְנַעַבְדָה אֶת-מִצְרָיִם:  כִּי טוֹב לָנוּ עֲבֹד אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, מִמֻּתֵנוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר.	12 Is not this the word that we spoke unto thee in Egypt, saying: Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it were better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.'
14.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָעָם, אַל-תִּירָאוּ--הִתְיַצְּבוּ וּרְאוּ אֶת-יְשׁוּעַת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה לָכֶם הַיּוֹם:  כִּי, אֲשֶׁר רְאִיתֶם אֶת-מִצְרַיִם הַיּוֹם--לֹא תֹסִפוּ לִרְאֹתָם עוֹד, עַד-עוֹלָם.	13 And Moses said unto the people: 'Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD, which He will work for you to-day; for whereas ye have seen the Egyptians to-day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.
14.14 יד  יְהוָה, יִלָּחֵם לָכֶם; וְאַתֶּם, תַּחֲרִשׁוּן.  {פ}	14 The LORD will fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.' {P}
14.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, מַה-תִּצְעַק אֵלָי; דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִסָּעוּ.	15 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Wherefore criest thou unto Me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward.
14.16 טז  וְאַתָּה הָרֵם אֶת-מַטְּךָ, וּנְטֵה אֶת-יָדְךָ עַל-הַיָּם--וּבְקָעֵהוּ; וְיָבֹאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם, בַּיַּבָּשָׁה.	16 And lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the sea, and divide it; and the children of Israel shall go into the midst of the sea on dry ground.
14.17 יז  וַאֲנִי, הִנְנִי מְחַזֵּק אֶת-לֵב מִצְרַיִם, וְיָבֹאוּ, אַחֲרֵיהֶם; וְאִכָּבְדָה בְּפַרְעֹה וּבְכָל-חֵילוֹ, בְּרִכְבּוֹ וּבְפָרָשָׁיו.	17 And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall go in after them; and I will get Me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
14.18 יח  וְיָדְעוּ מִצְרַיִם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּהִכָּבְדִי בְּפַרְעֹה, בְּרִכְבּוֹ וּבְפָרָשָׁיו.	18 And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have gotten Me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.'
14.19 יט  וַיִּסַּע מַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים, הַהֹלֵךְ לִפְנֵי מַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֵּלֶךְ, מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם; וַיִּסַּע עַמּוּד הֶעָנָן, מִפְּנֵיהֶם, וַיַּעֲמֹד, מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם.	19 And the angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of cloud removed from before them, and stood behind them;
14.20 כ  וַיָּבֹא בֵּין מַחֲנֵה מִצְרַיִם, וּבֵין מַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְהִי הֶעָנָן וְהַחֹשֶׁךְ, וַיָּאֶר אֶת-הַלָּיְלָה; וְלֹא-קָרַב זֶה אֶל-זֶה, כָּל-הַלָּיְלָה.	20 and it came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel; and there was the cloud and the darkness here, yet gave it light by night there; and the one came not near the other all the night.
14.21 כא  וַיֵּט מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל-הַיָּם, וַיּוֹלֶךְ יְהוָה אֶת-הַיָּם בְּרוּחַ קָדִים עַזָּה כָּל-הַלַּיְלָה, וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַיָּם לֶחָרָבָה; וַיִּבָּקְעוּ, הַמָּיִם.	21 And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all the night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.
14.22 כב  וַיָּבֹאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם, בַּיַּבָּשָׁה; וְהַמַּיִם לָהֶם חוֹמָה, מִימִינָם וּמִשְּׂמֹאלָם.	22 And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
14.23 כג  וַיִּרְדְּפוּ מִצְרַיִם, וַיָּבֹאוּ אַחֲרֵיהֶם--כֹּל סוּס פַּרְעֹה, רִכְבּוֹ וּפָרָשָׁיו:  אֶל-תּוֹךְ, הַיָּם.	23 And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
14.24 כד  וַיְהִי, בְּאַשְׁמֹרֶת הַבֹּקֶר, וַיַּשְׁקֵף יְהוָה אֶל-מַחֲנֵה מִצְרַיִם, בְּעַמּוּד אֵשׁ וְעָנָן; וַיָּהָם, אֵת מַחֲנֵה מִצְרָיִם.	24 And it came to pass in the morning watch, that the LORD looked forth upon the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of cloud, and discomfited the host of the Egyptians.
14.25 כה  וַיָּסַר, אֵת אֹפַן מַרְכְּבֹתָיו, וַיְנַהֲגֵהוּ, בִּכְבֵדֻת; וַיֹּאמֶר מִצְרַיִם, אָנוּסָה מִפְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי יְהוָה, נִלְחָם לָהֶם בְּמִצְרָיִם.  {פ}	25 And He took off their chariot wheels, and made them to drive heavily; so that the Egyptians said: 'Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for them against the Egyptians.' {P}
14.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, נְטֵה אֶת-יָדְךָ עַל-הַיָּם; וְיָשֻׁבוּ הַמַּיִם עַל-מִצְרַיִם, עַל-רִכְבּוֹ וְעַל-פָּרָשָׁיו.	26 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Stretch out thy hand over the sea, that the waters may come back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.'
14.27 כז  וַיֵּט מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יָדוֹ עַל-הַיָּם, וַיָּשָׁב הַיָּם לִפְנוֹת בֹּקֶר לְאֵיתָנוֹ, וּמִצְרַיִם, נָסִים לִקְרָאתוֹ; וַיְנַעֵר יְהוָה אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם.	27 And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
14.28 כח  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ הַמַּיִם, וַיְכַסּוּ אֶת-הָרֶכֶב וְאֶת-הַפָּרָשִׁים, לְכֹל חֵיל פַּרְעֹה, הַבָּאִים אַחֲרֵיהֶם בַּיָּם:  לֹא-נִשְׁאַר בָּהֶם, עַד-אֶחָד.	28 And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the host of Pharaoh that went in after them into the sea; there remained not so much as one of them.
14.29 כט  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הָלְכוּ בַיַּבָּשָׁה, בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם; וְהַמַּיִם לָהֶם חֹמָה, מִימִינָם וּמִשְּׂמֹאלָם.	29 But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
14.30 ל  וַיּוֹשַׁע יְהוָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--מִיַּד מִצְרָיִם; וַיַּרְא יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, מֵת עַל-שְׂפַת הַיָּם.	30 Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore.
14.31 לא  וַיַּרְא יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַיָּד הַגְּדֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוָה בְּמִצְרַיִם, וַיִּירְאוּ הָעָם, אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיַּאֲמִינוּ, בַּיהוָה, וּבְמֹשֶׁה, עַבְדּוֹ.  {ר}  {ש}	31 And Israel saw the great work which the LORD did upon the Egyptians, and the people feared the LORD; and they believed in the LORD, and in His servant Moses. {P}
15.1 א  אָז יָשִׁיר-מֹשֶׁה וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַשִּׁירָה הַזֹּאת, לַיהוָה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ,  {ר}  לֵאמֹר:  {ס}  אָשִׁירָה לַיהוָה כִּי-גָאֹה גָּאָה,  {ס}  סוּס  {ר}  וְרֹכְבוֹ רָמָה בַיָּם.  {ס}	1 Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the LORD, and spoke, saying: I will sing unto the LORD, for He is highly exalted; the horse and his rider hath He thrown into the sea.
15.2 ב  עָזִּי וְזִמְרָת יָהּ, וַיְהִי-לִי  {ר}  לִישׁוּעָה;  {ס}  זֶה אֵלִי וְאַנְוֵהוּ,  {ס}  אֱלֹהֵי  {ר}  אָבִי וַאֲרֹמְמֶנְהוּ.  {ס}	2 The LORD is my strength and song, and He is become my salvation; this is my God, and I will glorify Him; my father's God, and I will exalt Him.
15.3 ג  יְהוָה, אִישׁ מִלְחָמָה; יְהוָה,  {ר}  שְׁמוֹ.  {ס}	3 The LORD is a man of war, The LORD is His name.
15.4 ד  מַרְכְּבֹת פַּרְעֹה וְחֵילוֹ, יָרָה בַיָּם;  {ס}  וּמִבְחַר  {ר}  שָׁלִשָׁיו, טֻבְּעוּ בְיַם-סוּף.  {ס}	4 Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath He cast into the sea, and his chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea.
15.5 ה  תְּהֹמֹת, יְכַסְיֻמוּ; יָרְדוּ בִמְצוֹלֹת, כְּמוֹ-  {ר}  אָבֶן.  {ס}	5 The deeps cover them--they went down into the depths like a stone.
15.6 ו  יְמִינְךָ יְהוָה, נֶאְדָּרִי בַּכֹּחַ;  {ס}  יְמִינְךָ  {ר}  יְהוָה, תִּרְעַץ אוֹיֵב.  {ס}	6 Thy right hand, O LORD, glorious in power, Thy right hand, O LORD, dasheth in pieces the enemy.
15.7 ז  וּבְרֹב גְּאוֹנְךָ, תַּהֲרֹס  {ר}  קָמֶיךָ;  {ס}  תְּשַׁלַּח, חֲרֹנְךָ--יֹאכְלֵמוֹ, כַּקַּשׁ.  {ס}	7 And in the greatness of Thine excellency Thou overthrowest them that rise up against Thee; Thou sendest forth Thy wrath, it consumeth them as stubble.
15.8 ח  וּבְרוּחַ  {ר}  אַפֶּיךָ נֶעֶרְמוּ מַיִם,  {ס}  נִצְּבוּ כְמוֹ-נֵד  {ר}  נֹזְלִים;  {ס}  קָפְאוּ תְהֹמֹת, בְּלֶב-יָם.  {ס}	8 And with the blast of Thy nostrils the waters were piled up--the floods stood upright as a heap; the deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea.
15.9 ט  אָמַר  {ר}  אוֹיֵב אֶרְדֹּף אַשִּׂיג,  {ס}  אֲחַלֵּק שָׁלָל; תִּמְלָאֵמוֹ  {ר}  נַפְשִׁי--  {ס}  אָרִיק חַרְבִּי, תּוֹרִישֵׁמוֹ יָדִי.  {ס}	9 The enemy said: 'I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.'
15.10 י  נָשַׁפְתָּ  {ר}  בְרוּחֲךָ, כִּסָּמוֹ יָם;  {ס}  צָלְלוּ, כַּעוֹפֶרֶת, בְּמַיִם,  {ר}  אַדִּירִים.  {ס}	10 Thou didst blow with Thy wind, the sea covered them; they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
15.11 יא  מִי-כָמֹכָה בָּאֵלִם יְהוָה,  {ס}  מִי  {ר}  כָּמֹכָה נֶאְדָּר בַּקֹּדֶשׁ;  {ס}  נוֹרָא תְהִלֹּת, עֹשֵׂה  {ר}  פֶלֶא.  {ס}	11 Who is like unto Thee, O LORD, among the mighty? who is like unto Thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
15.12 יב  נָטִיתָ, יְמִינְךָ--תִּבְלָעֵמוֹ, אָרֶץ.  {ס}	12 Thou stretchedst out Thy right hand--the earth swallowed them.
15.13 יג  נָחִיתָ  {ר}  בְחַסְדְּךָ, עַם-זוּ גָּאָלְתָּ;  {ס}  נֵהַלְתָּ בְעָזְּךָ, אֶל-נְוֵה  {ר}  קָדְשֶׁךָ.  {ס}	13 Thou in Thy love hast led the people that Thou hast redeemed; Thou hast guided them in Thy strength to Thy holy habitation.
15.14 יד  שָׁמְעוּ עַמִּים, יִרְגָּזוּן;  {ס}  חִיל  {ר}  אָחַז, יֹשְׁבֵי פְּלָשֶׁת.  {ס}	14 The peoples have heard, they tremble; pangs have taken hold on the inhabitants of Philistia.
15.15 טו  אָז נִבְהֲלוּ, אַלּוּפֵי  {ר}  אֱדוֹם--  {ס}  אֵילֵי מוֹאָב, יֹאחֲזֵמוֹ רָעַד;  {ס}  נָמֹגוּ,  {ר}  כֹּל יֹשְׁבֵי כְנָעַן.  {ס}	15 Then were the chiefs of Edom affrighted; the mighty men of Moab, trembling taketh hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan are melted away.
15.16 טז  תִּפֹּל עֲלֵיהֶם אֵימָתָה  {ר}  וָפַחַד,  {ס}  בִּגְדֹל זְרוֹעֲךָ יִדְּמוּ כָּאָבֶן:  {ס}  עַד-  {ר}  יַעֲבֹר עַמְּךָ יְהוָה,  {ס}  עַד-יַעֲבֹר עַם-זוּ  {ר}  קָנִיתָ.  {ס}	16 Terror and dread falleth upon them; by the greatness of Thine arm they are as still as a stone; till Thy people pass over, O LORD, till the people pass over that Thou hast gotten.
15.17 יז  תְּבִאֵמוֹ, וְתִטָּעֵמוֹ בְּהַר נַחֲלָתְךָ--  {ס}  מָכוֹן  {ר}  לְשִׁבְתְּךָ פָּעַלְתָּ, יְהוָה;  {ס}  מִקְּדָשׁ, אֲדֹנָי כּוֹנְנוּ  {ר}  יָדֶיךָ.  {ס}	17 Thou bringest them in, and plantest them in the mountain of Thine inheritance, the place, O LORD, which Thou hast made for Thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O Lord, which Thy hands have established.
15.18 יח  יְהוָה יִמְלֹךְ, לְעֹלָם וָעֶד.  {ס}	18 The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.
15.19 יט  כִּי  {ר}  בָא סוּס פַּרְעֹה בְּרִכְבּוֹ וּבְפָרָשָׁיו, בַּיָּם,  {ס}  וַיָּשֶׁב יְהוָה עֲלֵהֶם,  {ר}  אֶת-מֵי הַיָּם;  {ס}  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הָלְכוּ בַיַּבָּשָׁה, בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם.  {ר}  {ש}	19 For the horses of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought back the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel walked on dry land in the midst of the sea. {P}
15.20 כ  וַתִּקַּח מִרְיָם הַנְּבִיאָה אֲחוֹת אַהֲרֹן, אֶת-הַתֹּף--בְּיָדָהּ; וַתֵּצֶאןָ כָל-הַנָּשִׁים אַחֲרֶיהָ, בְּתֻפִּים וּבִמְחֹלֹת.	20 And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
15.21 כא  וַתַּעַן לָהֶם, מִרְיָם:  שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה כִּי-גָאֹה גָּאָה, סוּס וְרֹכְבוֹ רָמָה בַיָּם.  {ס}	21 And Miriam sang unto them: Sing ye to the LORD, for He is highly exalted: the horse and his rider hath He thrown into the sea. {S}
15.22 כב  וַיַּסַּע מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִיַּם-סוּף, וַיֵּצְאוּ אֶל-מִדְבַּר-שׁוּר; וַיֵּלְכוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת-יָמִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְלֹא-מָצְאוּ מָיִם.	22 And Moses led Israel onward from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
15.23 כג  וַיָּבֹאוּ מָרָתָה--וְלֹא יָכְלוּ לִשְׁתֹּת מַיִם מִמָּרָה, כִּי מָרִים הֵם; עַל-כֵּן קָרָא-שְׁמָהּ, מָרָה.	23 And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter. Therefore the name of it was called Marah.
15.24 כד  וַיִּלֹּנוּ הָעָם עַל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר, מַה-נִּשְׁתֶּה.	24 And the people murmured against Moses, saying: 'What shall we drink?'
15.25 כה  וַיִּצְעַק אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיּוֹרֵהוּ יְהוָה עֵץ, וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ אֶל-הַמַּיִם, וַיִּמְתְּקוּ הַמָּיִם; שָׁם שָׂם לוֹ חֹק וּמִשְׁפָּט, וְשָׁם נִסָּהוּ.	25 And he cried unto the LORD; and the LORD showed him a tree, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters were made sweet. There He made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there He proved them;
15.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר אִם-שָׁמוֹעַ תִּשְׁמַע לְקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, וְהַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינָיו תַּעֲשֶׂה, וְהַאֲזַנְתָּ לְמִצְוֺתָיו, וְשָׁמַרְתָּ כָּל-חֻקָּיו--כָּל-הַמַּחֲלָה אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי בְמִצְרַיִם, לֹא-אָשִׂים עָלֶיךָ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, רֹפְאֶךָ.  {ס}	26 and He said: 'If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is right in His eyes, and wilt give ear to His commandments, and keep all His statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon thee, which I have put upon the Egyptians; for I am the LORD that healeth thee.' {S}
15.27 כז  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֵילִמָה--וְשָׁם שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה עֵינֹת מַיִם, וְשִׁבְעִים תְּמָרִים; וַיַּחֲנוּ-שָׁם, עַל-הַמָּיִם.	27 And they came to Elim, where were twelve springs of water, and three score and ten palm-trees; and they encamped there by the waters.
16.1 א  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵאֵילִם, וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-מִדְבַּר-סִין, אֲשֶׁר בֵּין-אֵילִם וּבֵין סִינָי--בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, לְצֵאתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	1 And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
16.2 ב  וילינו (וַיִּלּוֹנוּ) כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן--בַּמִּדְבָּר.	2 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness;
16.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֲלֵהֶם בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִי-יִתֵּן מוּתֵנוּ בְיַד-יְהוָה בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, בְּשִׁבְתֵּנוּ עַל-סִיר הַבָּשָׂר, בְּאָכְלֵנוּ לֶחֶם לָשֹׂבַע:  כִּי-הוֹצֵאתֶם אֹתָנוּ אֶל-הַמִּדְבָּר הַזֶּה, לְהָמִית אֶת-כָּל-הַקָּהָל הַזֶּה בָּרָעָב.  {ס}	3 and the children of Israel said unto them: 'Would that we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.' {S}
16.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הִנְנִי מַמְטִיר לָכֶם לֶחֶם מִן-הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְיָצָא הָעָם וְלָקְטוּ דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ, לְמַעַן אֲנַסֶּנּוּ הֲיֵלֵךְ בְּתוֹרָתִי אִם-לֹא.	4 Then said the LORD unto Moses: 'Behold, I will cause to rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a day's portion every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in My law, or not.
16.5 ה  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַשִּׁשִּׁי, וְהֵכִינוּ אֵת אֲשֶׁר-יָבִיאוּ; וְהָיָה מִשְׁנֶה, עַל אֲשֶׁר-יִלְקְטוּ יוֹם יוֹם.	5 And it shall come to pass on the sixth day that they shall prepare that which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.'
16.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, אֶל-כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עֶרֶב--וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי יְהוָה הוֹצִיא אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	6 And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel: 'At even, then ye shall know that the LORD hath brought you out from the land of Egypt;
16.7 ז  וּבֹקֶר, וּרְאִיתֶם אֶת-כְּבוֹד יְהוָה, בְּשָׁמְעוֹ אֶת-תְּלֻנֹּתֵיכֶם, עַל-יְהוָה; וְנַחְנוּ מָה, כִּי תלונו (תַלִּינוּ) עָלֵינוּ.	7 and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the LORD; for that He hath heard your murmurings against the LORD; and what are we, that ye murmur against us?'
16.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, בְּתֵת יְהוָה לָכֶם בָּעֶרֶב בָּשָׂר לֶאֱכֹל וְלֶחֶם בַּבֹּקֶר לִשְׂבֹּעַ, בִּשְׁמֹעַ יְהוָה אֶת-תְּלֻנֹּתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם מַלִּינִם עָלָיו; וְנַחְנוּ מָה, לֹא-עָלֵינוּ תְלֻנֹּתֵיכֶם כִּי עַל-יְהוָה.	8 And Moses said: 'This shall be, when the LORD shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the LORD heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against Him; and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the LORD.'
16.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, אֱמֹר אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, קִרְבוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  כִּי שָׁמַע, אֵת תְּלֻנֹּתֵיכֶם.	9 And Moses said unto Aaron: 'Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel: Come near before the LORD; for He hath heard your murmurings.'
16.10 י  וַיְהִי, כְּדַבֵּר אַהֲרֹן אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּפְנוּ, אֶל-הַמִּדְבָּר; וְהִנֵּה כְּבוֹד יְהוָה, נִרְאָה בֶּעָנָן.  {פ}	10 And it came to pass, as Aaron spoke unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud. {P}
16.11 יא  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	11 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
16.12 יב  שָׁמַעְתִּי, אֶת-תְּלוּנֹּת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--דַּבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם לֵאמֹר בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם תֹּאכְלוּ בָשָׂר, וּבַבֹּקֶר תִּשְׂבְּעוּ-לָחֶם; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	12 'I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel. Speak unto them, saying: At dusk ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God.'
16.13 יג  וַיְהִי בָעֶרֶב--וַתַּעַל הַשְּׂלָו, וַתְּכַס אֶת-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וּבַבֹּקֶר, הָיְתָה שִׁכְבַת הַטַּל, סָבִיב, לַמַּחֲנֶה.	13 And it came to pass at even, that the quails came up, and covered the camp; and in the morning there was a layer of dew round about the camp.
16.14 יד  וַתַּעַל, שִׁכְבַת הַטָּל; וְהִנֵּה עַל-פְּנֵי הַמִּדְבָּר, דַּק מְחֻסְפָּס--דַּק כַּכְּפֹר, עַל-הָאָרֶץ.	14 And when the layer of dew was gone up, behold upon the face of the wilderness a fine, scale-like thing, fine as the hoar-frost on the ground.
16.15 טו  וַיִּרְאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו מָן הוּא--כִּי לֹא יָדְעוּ, מַה-הוּא; וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֲלֵהֶם, הוּא הַלֶּחֶם, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן יְהוָה לָכֶם לְאָכְלָה.	15 And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another: 'What is it?'--for they knew not what it was. And Moses said unto them: 'It is the bread which the LORD hath given you to eat.
16.16 טז  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, לִקְטוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, אִישׁ לְפִי אָכְלוֹ:  עֹמֶר לַגֻּלְגֹּלֶת, מִסְפַּר נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם--אִישׁ לַאֲשֶׁר בְּאָהֳלוֹ, תִּקָּחוּ.	16 This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded: Gather ye of it every man according to his eating; an omer a head, according to the number of your persons, shall ye take it, every man for them that are in his tent.'
16.17 יז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּלְקְטוּ, הַמַּרְבֶּה וְהַמַּמְעִיט.	17 And the children of Israel did so, and gathered some more, some less.
16.18 יח  וַיָּמֹדּוּ בָעֹמֶר--וְלֹא הֶעְדִּיף הַמַּרְבֶּה, וְהַמַּמְעִיט לֹא הֶחְסִיר:  אִישׁ לְפִי-אָכְלוֹ, לָקָטוּ.	18 And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
16.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֲלֵהֶם:  אִישׁ, אַל-יוֹתֵר מִמֶּנּוּ עַד-בֹּקֶר.	19 And Moses said unto them: 'Let no man leave of it till the morning.'
16.20 כ  וְלֹא-שָׁמְעוּ אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וַיּוֹתִרוּ אֲנָשִׁים מִמֶּנּוּ עַד-בֹּקֶר, וַיָּרֻם תּוֹלָעִים, וַיִּבְאַשׁ; וַיִּקְצֹף עֲלֵהֶם, מֹשֶׁה.	20 Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and rotted; and Moses was wroth with them.
16.21 כא  וַיִּלְקְטוּ אֹתוֹ בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר, אִישׁ כְּפִי אָכְלוֹ; וְחַם הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, וְנָמָס.	21 And they gathered it morning by morning, every man according to his eating; and as the sun waxed hot, it melted.
16.22 כב  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשִּׁשִּׁי, לָקְטוּ לֶחֶם מִשְׁנֶה--שְׁנֵי הָעֹמֶר, לָאֶחָד; וַיָּבֹאוּ כָּל-נְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה, וַיַּגִּידוּ לְמֹשֶׁה.	22 And it came to pass that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one; and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
16.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, הוּא אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה--שַׁבָּתוֹן שַׁבַּת-קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה, מָחָר:  אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תֹּאפוּ אֵפוּ, וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר-תְּבַשְּׁלוּ בַּשֵּׁלוּ, וְאֵת כָּל-הָעֹדֵף, הַנִּיחוּ לָכֶם לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת עַד-הַבֹּקֶר.	23 And he said unto them: 'This is that which the LORD hath spoken: To-morrow is a solemn rest, a holy sabbath unto the LORD. Bake that which ye will bake, and seethe that which ye will seethe; and all that remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.'
16.24 כד  וַיַּנִּיחוּ אֹתוֹ עַד-הַבֹּקֶר, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה; וְלֹא הִבְאִישׁ, וְרִמָּה לֹא-הָיְתָה בּוֹ.	24 And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade; and it did not rot, neither was there any worm therein.
16.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אִכְלֻהוּ הַיּוֹם, כִּי-שַׁבָּת הַיּוֹם לַיהוָה:  הַיּוֹם, לֹא תִמְצָאֻהוּ בַּשָּׂדֶה.	25 And Moses said: 'Eat that to-day; for to-day is a sabbath unto the LORD; to-day ye shall not find it in the field.
16.26 כו  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים, תִּלְקְטֻהוּ; וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי שַׁבָּת, לֹא יִהְיֶה-בּוֹ.	26 Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.'
16.27 כז  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, יָצְאוּ מִן-הָעָם לִלְקֹט; וְלֹא, מָצָאוּ.  {ס}	27 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that there went out some of the people to gather, and they found none. {S}
16.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  עַד-אָנָה, מֵאַנְתֶּם, לִשְׁמֹר מִצְוֺתַי, וְתוֹרֹתָי.	28 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'How long refuse ye to keep My commandments and My laws?
16.29 כט  רְאוּ, כִּי-יְהוָה נָתַן לָכֶם הַשַּׁבָּת--עַל-כֵּן הוּא נֹתֵן לָכֶם בַּיּוֹם הַשִּׁשִּׁי, לֶחֶם יוֹמָיִם; שְׁבוּ אִישׁ תַּחְתָּיו, אַל-יֵצֵא אִישׁ מִמְּקֹמוֹ--בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי.	29 See that the LORD hath given you the sabbath; therefore He giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.'
16.30 ל  וַיִּשְׁבְּתוּ הָעָם, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִעִי.	30 So the people rested on the seventh day.
16.31 לא  וַיִּקְרְאוּ בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, מָן; וְהוּא, כְּזֶרַע גַּד לָבָן, וְטַעְמוֹ, כְּצַפִּיחִת בִּדְבָשׁ.	31 And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna; and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
16.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, זֶה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה--מְלֹא הָעֹמֶר מִמֶּנּוּ, לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם:  לְמַעַן יִרְאוּ אֶת-הַלֶּחֶם, אֲשֶׁר הֶאֱכַלְתִּי אֶתְכֶם בַּמִּדְבָּר, בְּהוֹצִיאִי אֶתְכֶם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	32 And Moses said: 'This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded: Let an omerful of it be kept throughout your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.'
16.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, קַח צִנְצֶנֶת אַחַת, וְתֶן-שָׁמָּה מְלֹא-הָעֹמֶר, מָן; וְהַנַּח אֹתוֹ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.	33 And Moses said unto Aaron: 'Take a jar, and put an omerful of manna therein, and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept throughout your generations.'
16.34 לד  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיַּנִּיחֵהוּ אַהֲרֹן לִפְנֵי הָעֵדֻת, לְמִשְׁמָרֶת.	34 As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
16.35 לה  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָכְלוּ אֶת-הַמָּן אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה--עַד-בֹּאָם, אֶל-אֶרֶץ נוֹשָׁבֶת:  אֶת-הַמָּן, אָכְלוּ--עַד-בֹּאָם, אֶל-קְצֵה אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן.	35 And the children of Israel did eat the manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat the manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
16.36 לו  וְהָעֹמֶר, עֲשִׂרִית הָאֵיפָה הוּא.  {פ}	36 Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah. {P}
17.1 א  וַיִּסְעוּ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִמִּדְבַּר-סִין, לְמַסְעֵיהֶם--עַל-פִּי יְהוָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בִּרְפִידִים, וְאֵין מַיִם, לִשְׁתֹּת הָעָם.	1 And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, by their stages, according to the commandment of the LORD, and encamped in Rephidim; and there was no water for the people to drink.
17.2 ב  וַיָּרֶב הָעָם, עִם-מֹשֶׁה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, תְּנוּ-לָנוּ מַיִם וְנִשְׁתֶּה; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, מֹשֶׁה, מַה-תְּרִיבוּן עִמָּדִי, מַה-תְּנַסּוּן אֶת-יְהוָה.	2 Wherefore the people strove with Moses, and said: 'Give us water that we may drink.' And Moses said unto them: 'Why strive ye with me? wherefore do ye try the LORD?'
17.3 ג  וַיִּצְמָא שָׁם הָעָם לַמַּיִם, וַיָּלֶן הָעָם עַל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיֹּאמֶר, לָמָּה זֶּה הֶעֱלִיתָנוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, לְהָמִית אֹתִי וְאֶת-בָּנַי וְאֶת-מִקְנַי, בַּצָּמָא.	3 And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said: 'Wherefore hast thou brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?'
17.4 ד  וַיִּצְעַק מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה לָעָם הַזֶּה; עוֹד מְעַט, וּסְקָלֻנִי.	4 And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying: 'What shall I do unto this people? they are almost ready to stone me.'
17.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עֲבֹר לִפְנֵי הָעָם, וְקַח אִתְּךָ, מִזִּקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּמַטְּךָ, אֲשֶׁר הִכִּיתָ בּוֹ אֶת-הַיְאֹר--קַח בְּיָדְךָ, וְהָלָכְתָּ.	5 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Pass on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thy hand, and go.
17.6 ו  הִנְנִי עֹמֵד לְפָנֶיךָ שָּׁם עַל-הַצּוּר, בְּחֹרֵב, וְהִכִּיתָ בַצּוּר וְיָצְאוּ מִמֶּנּוּ מַיִם, וְשָׁתָה הָעָם; וַיַּעַשׂ כֵּן מֹשֶׁה, לְעֵינֵי זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink.' And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.
17.7 ז  וַיִּקְרָא שֵׁם הַמָּקוֹם, מַסָּה וּמְרִיבָה:  עַל-רִיב בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְעַל נַסֹּתָם אֶת-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, הֲיֵשׁ יְהוָה בְּקִרְבֵּנוּ, אִם-אָיִן.  {פ}	7 And the name of the place was called Massah, and Meribah, because of the striving of the children of Israel, and because they tried the LORD, saying: 'Is the LORD among us, or not?' {P}
17.8 ח  וַיָּבֹא, עֲמָלֵק; וַיִּלָּחֶם עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּרְפִידִם.	8 Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
17.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בְּחַר-לָנוּ אֲנָשִׁים, וְצֵא הִלָּחֵם בַּעֲמָלֵק; מָחָר, אָנֹכִי נִצָּב עַל-רֹאשׁ הַגִּבְעָה, וּמַטֵּה הָאֱלֹהִים, בְּיָדִי.	9 And Moses said unto Joshua: 'Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek; tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.'
17.10 י  וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, כַּאֲשֶׁר אָמַר-לוֹ מֹשֶׁה--לְהִלָּחֵם, בַּעֲמָלֵק; וּמֹשֶׁה אַהֲרֹן וְחוּר, עָלוּ רֹאשׁ הַגִּבְעָה.	10 So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
17.11 יא  וְהָיָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָרִים מֹשֶׁה יָדוֹ--וְגָבַר יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכַאֲשֶׁר יָנִיחַ יָדוֹ, וְגָבַר עֲמָלֵק.	11 And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
17.12 יב  וִידֵי מֹשֶׁה כְּבֵדִים, וַיִּקְחוּ-אֶבֶן וַיָּשִׂימוּ תַחְתָּיו וַיֵּשֶׁב עָלֶיהָ; וְאַהֲרֹן וְחוּר תָּמְכוּ בְיָדָיו, מִזֶּה אֶחָד וּמִזֶּה אֶחָד, וַיְהִי יָדָיו אֱמוּנָה, עַד-בֹּא הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.	12 But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
17.13 יג  וַיַּחֲלֹשׁ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-עֲמָלֵק וְאֶת-עַמּוֹ, לְפִי-חָרֶב.  {פ}	13 And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. {P}
17.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כְּתֹב זֹאת זִכָּרוֹן בַּסֵּפֶר, וְשִׂים, בְּאָזְנֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ:  כִּי-מָחֹה אֶמְחֶה אֶת-זֵכֶר עֲמָלֵק, מִתַּחַת הַשָּׁמָיִם.	14 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Write this for a memorial in the book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.'
17.15 טו  וַיִּבֶן מֹשֶׁה, מִזְבֵּחַ; וַיִּקְרָא שְׁמוֹ, יְהוָה נִסִּי.	15 And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Adonai-nissi.
17.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר, כִּי-יָד עַל-כֵּס יָהּ, מִלְחָמָה לַיהוָה, בַּעֲמָלֵק--מִדֹּר, דֹּר.  {פ}	16 And he said: 'The hand upon the throne of the LORD: the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.' {P}
18.1 א  וַיִּשְׁמַע יִתְרוֹ כֹהֵן מִדְיָן, חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֱלֹהִים לְמֹשֶׁה, וּלְיִשְׂרָאֵל עַמּוֹ:  כִּי-הוֹצִיא יְהוָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמִּצְרָיִם.	1 Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel His people, how that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt.
18.2 ב  וַיִּקַּח, יִתְרוֹ חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-צִפֹּרָה, אֵשֶׁת מֹשֶׁה--אַחַר, שִׁלּוּחֶיהָ.	2 And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her away,
18.3 ג  וְאֵת, שְׁנֵי בָנֶיהָ:  אֲשֶׁר שֵׁם הָאֶחָד, גֵּרְשֹׁם--כִּי אָמַר, גֵּר הָיִיתִי בְּאֶרֶץ נָכְרִיָּה.	3 and her two sons; of whom the name of the one was Gershom; for he said: 'I have been a stranger in a strange land';
18.4 ד  וְשֵׁם הָאֶחָד, אֱלִיעֶזֶר--כִּי-אֱלֹהֵי אָבִי בְּעֶזְרִי, וַיַּצִּלֵנִי מֵחֶרֶב פַּרְעֹה.	4 and the name of the other was Eliezer: 'for the God of my father was my help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.'
18.5 ה  וַיָּבֹא יִתְרוֹ חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, וּבָנָיו וְאִשְׁתּוֹ--אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  אֶל-הַמִּדְבָּר, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא חֹנֶה שָׁם--הַר הָאֱלֹהִים.	5 And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness where he was encamped, at the mount of God;
18.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֲנִי חֹתֶנְךָ יִתְרוֹ, בָּא אֵלֶיךָ; וְאִשְׁתְּךָ--וּשְׁנֵי בָנֶיהָ, עִמָּהּ.	6 and he said unto Moses: 'I thy father-in-law Jethro am coming unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.'
18.7 ז  וַיֵּצֵא מֹשֶׁה לִקְרַאת חֹתְנוֹ, וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ וַיִּשַּׁק-לוֹ, וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ אִישׁ-לְרֵעֵהוּ, לְשָׁלוֹם; וַיָּבֹאוּ, הָאֹהֱלָה.	7 And Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and bowed down and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.
18.8 ח  וַיְסַפֵּר מֹשֶׁה, לְחֹתְנוֹ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוָה לְפַרְעֹה וּלְמִצְרַיִם, עַל אוֹדֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֵת כָּל-הַתְּלָאָה אֲשֶׁר מְצָאָתַם בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וַיַּצִּלֵם יְהוָה.	8 And Moses told his father-in-law all that the LORD had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the LORD delivered them.
18.9 ט  וַיִּחַדְּ יִתְרוֹ--עַל כָּל-הַטּוֹבָה, אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה יְהוָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲשֶׁר הִצִּילוֹ, מִיַּד מִצְרָיִם.	9 And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the LORD had done to Israel, in that He had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians.
18.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, יִתְרוֹ, בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הִצִּיל אֶתְכֶם מִיַּד מִצְרַיִם וּמִיַּד פַּרְעֹה:  אֲשֶׁר הִצִּיל אֶת-הָעָם, מִתַּחַת יַד-מִצְרָיִם.	10 And Jethro said: 'Blessed be the LORD, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh; who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
18.11 יא  עַתָּה יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-גָדוֹל יְהוָה מִכָּל-הָאֱלֹהִים:  כִּי בַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר זָדוּ עֲלֵיהֶם.	11 Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods; yea, for that they dealt proudly against them.'
18.12 יב  וַיִּקַּח יִתְרוֹ חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, עֹלָה וּזְבָחִים--לֵאלֹהִים; וַיָּבֹא אַהֲרֹן וְכֹל זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֶאֱכָל-לֶחֶם עִם-חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה--לִפְנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים.	12 And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God; and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God.
18.13 יג  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיֵּשֶׁב מֹשֶׁה, לִשְׁפֹּט אֶת-הָעָם; וַיַּעֲמֹד הָעָם עַל-מֹשֶׁה, מִן-הַבֹּקֶר עַד-הָעָרֶב.	13 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people; and the people stood about Moses from the morning unto the evening.
18.14 יד  וַיַּרְא חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-הוּא עֹשֶׂה לָעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר, מָה-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה עֹשֶׂה לָעָם--מַדּוּעַ אַתָּה יוֹשֵׁב לְבַדֶּךָ, וְכָל-הָעָם נִצָּב עָלֶיךָ מִן-בֹּקֶר עַד-עָרֶב.	14 And when Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said: 'What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand about thee from morning unto even?'
18.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, לְחֹתְנוֹ:  כִּי-יָבֹא אֵלַי הָעָם, לִדְרֹשׁ אֱלֹהִים.	15 And Moses said unto his father-in-law: 'Because the people come unto me to inquire of God;
18.16 טז  כִּי-יִהְיֶה לָהֶם דָּבָר, בָּא אֵלַי, וְשָׁפַטְתִּי, בֵּין אִישׁ וּבֵין רֵעֵהוּ; וְהוֹדַעְתִּי אֶת-חֻקֵּי הָאֱלֹהִים, וְאֶת-תּוֹרֹתָיו.	16 when they have a matter, it cometh unto me; and I judge between a man and his neighbour, and I make them know the statutes of God, and His laws.'
18.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, אֵלָיו:  לֹא-טוֹב, הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה, עֹשֶׂה.	17 And Moses' father-in-law said unto him: 'The thing that thou doest is not good.
18.18 יח  נָבֹל תִּבֹּל--גַּם-אַתָּה, גַּם-הָעָם הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר עִמָּךְ:  כִּי-כָבֵד מִמְּךָ הַדָּבָר, לֹא-תוּכַל עֲשֹׂהוּ לְבַדֶּךָ.	18 Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee; for the thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.
18.19 יט  עַתָּה שְׁמַע בְּקֹלִי, אִיעָצְךָ, וִיהִי אֱלֹהִים, עִמָּךְ; הֱיֵה אַתָּה לָעָם, מוּל הָאֱלֹהִים, וְהֵבֵאתָ אַתָּה אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים.	19 Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God be with thee: be thou for the people before God, and bring thou the causes unto God.
18.20 כ  וְהִזְהַרְתָּה אֶתְהֶם, אֶת-הַחֻקִּים וְאֶת-הַתּוֹרֹת; וְהוֹדַעְתָּ לָהֶם, אֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ יֵלְכוּ בָהּ, וְאֶת-הַמַּעֲשֶׂה, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשׂוּן.	20 And thou shalt teach them the statutes and the laws, and shalt show them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.
18.21 כא  וְאַתָּה תֶחֱזֶה מִכָּל-הָעָם אַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל יִרְאֵי אֱלֹהִים, אַנְשֵׁי אֱמֶת--שֹׂנְאֵי בָצַע; וְשַׂמְתָּ עֲלֵהֶם, שָׂרֵי אֲלָפִים שָׂרֵי מֵאוֹת, שָׂרֵי חֲמִשִּׁים, וְשָׂרֵי עֲשָׂרֹת.	21 Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating unjust gain; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
18.22 כב  וְשָׁפְטוּ אֶת-הָעָם, בְּכָל-עֵת, וְהָיָה כָּל-הַדָּבָר הַגָּדֹל יָבִיאוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וְכָל-הַדָּבָר הַקָּטֹן יִשְׁפְּטוּ-הֵם; וְהָקֵל, מֵעָלֶיךָ, וְנָשְׂאוּ, אִתָּךְ.	22 And let them judge the people at all seasons; and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge themselves; so shall they make it easier for thee and bear the burden with thee.
18.23 כג  אִם אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, תַּעֲשֶׂה, וְצִוְּךָ אֱלֹהִים, וְיָכָלְתָּ עֲמֹד; וְגַם כָּל-הָעָם הַזֶּה, עַל-מְקֹמוֹ יָבֹא בְשָׁלוֹם.	23 If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people also shall go to their place in peace.'
18.24 כד  וַיִּשְׁמַע מֹשֶׁה, לְקוֹל חֹתְנוֹ; וַיַּעַשׂ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר אָמָר.	24 So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he had said.
18.25 כה  וַיִּבְחַר מֹשֶׁה אַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל מִכָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּתֵּן אֹתָם רָאשִׁים עַל-הָעָם--שָׂרֵי אֲלָפִים שָׂרֵי מֵאוֹת, שָׂרֵי חֲמִשִּׁים וְשָׂרֵי עֲשָׂרֹת.	25 And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
18.26 כו  וְשָׁפְטוּ אֶת-הָעָם, בְּכָל-עֵת:  אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַקָּשֶׁה יְבִיאוּן אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וְכָל-הַדָּבָר הַקָּטֹן יִשְׁפּוּטוּ הֵם.	26 And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.
18.27 כז  וַיְשַׁלַּח מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-חֹתְנוֹ; וַיֵּלֶךְ לוֹ, אֶל-אַרְצוֹ.  {פ}	27 And Moses let his father-in-law depart; and he went his way into his own land. {P}
19.1 א  בַּחֹדֶשׁ, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, לְצֵאת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--בַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה, בָּאוּ מִדְבַּר סִינָי.	1 In the third month after the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.
19.2 ב  וַיִּסְעוּ מֵרְפִידִים, וַיָּבֹאוּ מִדְבַּר סִינַי, וַיַּחֲנוּ, בַּמִּדְבָּר; וַיִּחַן-שָׁם יִשְׂרָאֵל, נֶגֶד הָהָר.	2 And when they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the wilderness of Sinai, they encamped in the wilderness; and there Israel encamped before the mount.
19.3 ג  וּמֹשֶׁה עָלָה, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיִּקְרָא אֵלָיו יְהוָה, מִן-הָהָר לֵאמֹר, כֹּה תֹאמַר לְבֵית יַעֲקֹב, וְתַגֵּיד לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 And Moses went up unto God, and the LORD called unto him out of the mountain, saying: 'Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel:
19.4 ד  אַתֶּם רְאִיתֶם, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי לְמִצְרָיִם; וָאֶשָּׂא אֶתְכֶם עַל-כַּנְפֵי נְשָׁרִים, וָאָבִא אֶתְכֶם אֵלָי.	4 Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto Myself.
19.5 ה  וְעַתָּה, אִם-שָׁמוֹעַ תִּשְׁמְעוּ בְּקֹלִי, וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֶת-בְּרִיתִי--וִהְיִיתֶם לִי סְגֻלָּה מִכָּל-הָעַמִּים, כִּי-לִי כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.	5 Now therefore, if ye will hearken unto My voice indeed, and keep My covenant, then ye shall be Mine own treasure from among all peoples; for all the earth is Mine;
19.6 ו  וְאַתֶּם תִּהְיוּ-לִי מַמְלֶכֶת כֹּהֲנִים, וְגוֹי קָדוֹשׁ:  אֵלֶּה, הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר תְּדַבֵּר, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 and ye shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.'
19.7 ז  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה, וַיִּקְרָא לְזִקְנֵי הָעָם; וַיָּשֶׂם לִפְנֵיהֶם, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּהוּ, יְהוָה.	7 And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and set before them all these words which the LORD commanded him.
19.8 ח  וַיַּעֲנוּ כָל-הָעָם יַחְדָּו וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה נַעֲשֶׂה; וַיָּשֶׁב מֹשֶׁה אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הָעָם, אֶל-יְהוָה.	8 And all the people answered together, and said: 'All that the LORD hath spoken we will do.' And Moses reported the words of the people unto the LORD.
19.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי בָּא אֵלֶיךָ בְּעַב הֶעָנָן, בַּעֲבוּר יִשְׁמַע הָעָם בְּדַבְּרִי עִמָּךְ, וְגַם-בְּךָ יַאֲמִינוּ לְעוֹלָם; וַיַּגֵּד מֹשֶׁה אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הָעָם, אֶל-יְהוָה.	9 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and may also believe thee for ever.' And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD.
19.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵךְ אֶל-הָעָם, וְקִדַּשְׁתָּם הַיּוֹם וּמָחָר; וְכִבְּסוּ, שִׂמְלֹתָם.	10 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Go unto the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their garments,
19.11 יא  וְהָיוּ נְכֹנִים, לַיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי:  כִּי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִשִׁי, יֵרֵד יְהוָה לְעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם--עַל-הַר סִינָי.	11 and be ready against the third day; for the third day the LORD will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.
19.12 יב  וְהִגְבַּלְתָּ אֶת-הָעָם סָבִיב לֵאמֹר, הִשָּׁמְרוּ לָכֶם עֲלוֹת בָּהָר וּנְגֹעַ בְּקָצֵהוּ:  כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בָּהָר, מוֹת יוּמָת.	12 And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying: Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death;
19.13 יג  לֹא-תִגַּע בּוֹ יָד, כִּי-סָקוֹל יִסָּקֵל אוֹ-יָרֹה יִיָּרֶה--אִם-בְּהֵמָה אִם-אִישׁ, לֹא יִחְיֶה; בִּמְשֹׁךְ, הַיֹּבֵל, הֵמָּה, יַעֲלוּ בָהָר.	13 no hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live; when the ram's horn soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.'
19.14 יד  וַיֵּרֶד מֹשֶׁה מִן-הָהָר, אֶל-הָעָם; וַיְקַדֵּשׁ, אֶת-הָעָם, וַיְכַבְּסוּ, שִׂמְלֹתָם.	14 And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their garments.
19.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-הָעָם, הֱיוּ נְכֹנִים, לִשְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים:  אַל-תִּגְּשׁוּ, אֶל-אִשָּׁה.	15 And he said unto the people: 'Be ready against the third day; come not near a woman.'
19.16 טז  וַיְהִי בַיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי בִּהְיֹת הַבֹּקֶר, וַיְהִי קֹלֹת וּבְרָקִים וְעָנָן כָּבֵד עַל-הָהָר, וְקֹל שֹׁפָר, חָזָק מְאֹד; וַיֶּחֱרַד כָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר בַּמַּחֲנֶה.	16 And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of a horn exceeding loud; and all the people that were in the camp trembled.
19.17 יז  וַיּוֹצֵא מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הָעָם לִקְרַאת הָאֱלֹהִים, מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וַיִּתְיַצְּבוּ, בְּתַחְתִּית הָהָר.	17 And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.
19.18 יח  וְהַר סִינַי, עָשַׁן כֻּלּוֹ, מִפְּנֵי אֲשֶׁר יָרַד עָלָיו יְהוָה, בָּאֵשׁ; וַיַּעַל עֲשָׁנוֹ כְּעֶשֶׁן הַכִּבְשָׁן, וַיֶּחֱרַד כָּל-הָהָר מְאֹד.	18 Now mount Sinai was altogether on smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.
19.19 יט  וַיְהִי קוֹל הַשֹּׁפָר, הוֹלֵךְ וְחָזֵק מְאֹד; מֹשֶׁה יְדַבֵּר, וְהָאֱלֹהִים יַעֲנֶנּוּ בְקוֹל.	19 And when the voice of the horn waxed louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice.
19.20 כ  וַיֵּרֶד יְהוָה עַל-הַר סִינַי, אֶל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר; וַיִּקְרָא יְהוָה לְמֹשֶׁה אֶל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר, וַיַּעַל מֹשֶׁה.	20 And the LORD came down upon mount Sinai, to the top of the mount; and the LORD called Moses to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.
19.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, רֵד הָעֵד בָּעָם:  פֶּן-יֶהֶרְסוּ אֶל-יְהוָה לִרְאוֹת, וְנָפַל מִמֶּנּוּ רָב.	21 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish.
19.22 כב  וְגַם הַכֹּהֲנִים הַנִּגָּשִׁים אֶל-יְהוָה, יִתְקַדָּשׁוּ:  פֶּן-יִפְרֹץ בָּהֶם, יְהוָה.	22 And let the priests also, that come near to the LORD, sanctify themselves, lest the LORD break forth upon them.'
19.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-יְהוָה, לֹא-יוּכַל הָעָם, לַעֲלֹת אֶל-הַר סִינָי:  כִּי-אַתָּה הַעֵדֹתָה בָּנוּ, לֵאמֹר, הַגְבֵּל אֶת-הָהָר, וְקִדַּשְׁתּוֹ.	23 And Moses said unto the LORD: 'The people cannot come up to mount Sinai; for thou didst charge us, saying: Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.'
19.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו יְהוָה לֶךְ-רֵד, וְעָלִיתָ אַתָּה וְאַהֲרֹן עִמָּךְ; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהָעָם, אַל-יֶהֶרְסוּ לַעֲלֹת אֶל-יְהוָה--פֶּן-יִפְרָץ-בָּם.	24 And the LORD said unto him: 'Go, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the LORD, lest He break forth upon them.'
19.25 כה  וַיֵּרֶד מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-הָעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֲלֵהֶם.  {ס}	25 So Moses went down unto the people, and told them. {S}
20.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר אֱלֹהִים, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה לֵאמֹר.  {ס}	1 And God spoke all these words, saying: {S}
20.2 ב  אָנֹכִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִיךָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים:  לֹא-יִהְיֶה לְךָ אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, עַל-פָּנָי.	2 I am the LORD thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.
20.3 /
20.4 ג  לֹא-תַעֲשֶׂה לְךָ פֶסֶל, וְכָל-תְּמוּנָה, אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׁמַיִם מִמַּעַל, וַאֲשֶׁר בָּאָרֶץ מִתָּחַת--וַאֲשֶׁר בַּמַּיִם, מִתַּחַת לָאָרֶץ.	3 Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, nor any manner of likeness, of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth;
20.5 ד  לֹא-תִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה לָהֶם, וְלֹא תָעָבְדֵם:  כִּי אָנֹכִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֵל קַנָּא--פֹּקֵד עֲוֺן אָבֹת עַל-בָּנִים עַל-שִׁלֵּשִׁים וְעַל-רִבֵּעִים, לְשֹׂנְאָי.	4 thou shalt not bow down unto them, nor serve them; for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate Me;
20.6 ה  וְעֹשֶׂה חֶסֶד, לַאֲלָפִים--לְאֹהֲבַי, וּלְשֹׁמְרֵי מִצְוֺתָי.  {ס}	5 and showing mercy unto the thousandth generation of them that love Me and keep My commandments. {S}
20.7 ו  לֹא תִשָּׂא אֶת-שֵׁם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, לַשָּׁוְא:  כִּי לֹא יְנַקֶּה יְהוָה, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-יִשָּׂא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ לַשָּׁוְא.  {פ}	6 Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain. {P}
20.8 ז  זָכוֹר אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, לְקַדְּשׁוֹ.	7 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
20.9 ח  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים תַּעֲבֹד, וְעָשִׂיתָ כָּל-מְלַאכְתֶּךָ.	8 Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work;
20.10 ט  וְיוֹם, הַשְּׁבִיעִי--שַׁבָּת, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ:  לֹא-תַעֲשֶׂה כָל-מְלָאכָה אַתָּה וּבִנְךָ וּבִתֶּךָ, עַבְדְּךָ וַאֲמָתְךָ וּבְהֶמְתֶּךָ, וְגֵרְךָ, אֲשֶׁר בִּשְׁעָרֶיךָ.	9 but the seventh day is a sabbath unto the LORD thy God, in it thou shalt not do any manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates;
20.11 י  כִּי שֵׁשֶׁת-יָמִים עָשָׂה יְהוָה אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-הַיָּם וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-בָּם, וַיָּנַח, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי; עַל-כֵּן, בֵּרַךְ יְהוָה אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת--וַיְקַדְּשֵׁהוּ.  {ס}	10 for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested on the seventh day; wherefore the LORD blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it. {S}
20.12 יא  כַּבֵּד אֶת-אָבִיךָ, וְאֶת-אִמֶּךָ--לְמַעַן, יַאֲרִכוּן יָמֶיךָ, עַל הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ נֹתֵן לָךְ.  {ס}	11 Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. {S}
20.13 יב  לֹא תִרְצָח,  {ס}  לֹא תִנְאָף;  {ס}  לֹא תִגְנֹב,  {ס}  לֹא-תַעֲנֶה בְרֵעֲךָ עֵד שָׁקֶר.  {ס}	12 Thou shalt not murder. {S} Thou shalt not commit adultery. {S} Thou shalt not steal. {S} Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. {S}
20.14 /
20.15 /
20.16 /
20.17 יג  לֹא תַחְמֹד, בֵּית רֵעֶךָ;  {ס}  לֹא-תַחְמֹד אֵשֶׁת רֵעֶךָ, וְעַבְדּוֹ וַאֲמָתוֹ וְשׁוֹרוֹ וַחֲמֹרוֹ, וְכֹל, אֲשֶׁר לְרֵעֶךָ.  {פ}	13 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house; {S} thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. {P}
20.18 יד  וְכָל-הָעָם רֹאִים אֶת-הַקּוֹלֹת וְאֶת-הַלַּפִּידִם, וְאֵת קוֹל הַשֹּׁפָר, וְאֶת-הָהָר, עָשֵׁן; וַיַּרְא הָעָם וַיָּנֻעוּ, וַיַּעַמְדוּ מֵרָחֹק.	14 And all the people perceived the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the voice of the horn, and the mountain smoking; and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off.
20.19 טו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, דַּבֵּר-אַתָּה עִמָּנוּ, וְנִשְׁמָעָה; וְאַל-יְדַבֵּר עִמָּנוּ אֱלֹהִים, פֶּן-נָמוּת.	15 And they said unto Moses: 'Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die.'
20.20 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָעָם, אַל-תִּירָאוּ, כִּי לְבַעֲבוּר נַסּוֹת אֶתְכֶם, בָּא הָאֱלֹהִים; וּבַעֲבוּר, תִּהְיֶה יִרְאָתוֹ עַל-פְּנֵיכֶם--לְבִלְתִּי תֶחֱטָאוּ.	16 And Moses said unto the people: 'Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that His fear may be before you, that ye sin not.'
20.21 יז  וַיַּעֲמֹד הָעָם, מֵרָחֹק; וּמֹשֶׁה נִגַּשׁ אֶל-הָעֲרָפֶל, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם הָאֱלֹהִים.  {ס}	17 And the people stood afar off; but Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was. {S}
20.22 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כֹּה תֹאמַר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אַתֶּם רְאִיתֶם--כִּי מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, דִּבַּרְתִּי עִמָּכֶם.	18 And the LORD said unto Moses: Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel: Ye yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
20.23 יט  לֹא תַעֲשׂוּן, אִתִּי:  אֱלֹהֵי כֶסֶף וֵאלֹהֵי זָהָב, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ לָכֶם.	19 Ye shall not make with Me--gods of silver, or gods of gold, ye shall not make unto you.
20.24 כ  מִזְבַּח אֲדָמָה, תַּעֲשֶׂה-לִּי, וְזָבַחְתָּ עָלָיו אֶת-עֹלֹתֶיךָ וְאֶת-שְׁלָמֶיךָ, אֶת-צֹאנְךָ וְאֶת-בְּקָרֶךָ; בְּכָל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר אַזְכִּיר אֶת-שְׁמִי, אָבוֹא אֵלֶיךָ וּבֵרַכְתִּיךָ.	20 An altar of earth thou shalt make unto Me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen; in every place where I cause My name to be mentioned I will come unto thee and bless thee.
20.25 כא  וְאִם-מִזְבַּח אֲבָנִים תַּעֲשֶׂה-לִּי, לֹא-תִבְנֶה אֶתְהֶן גָּזִית:  כִּי חַרְבְּךָ הֵנַפְתָּ עָלֶיהָ, וַתְּחַלְלֶהָ.	21 And if thou make Me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stones; for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast profaned it.
20.26 כב  וְלֹא-תַעֲלֶה בְמַעֲלֹת, עַל-מִזְבְּחִי:  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תִגָּלֶה עֶרְוָתְךָ, עָלָיו.  {פ}	22 Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto Mine altar, that thy nakedness be not uncovered thereon. {P}
21.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה, הַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, אֲשֶׁר תָּשִׂים, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	1 Now these are the ordinances which thou shalt set before them.
21.2 ב  כִּי תִקְנֶה עֶבֶד עִבְרִי, שֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים יַעֲבֹד; וּבַשְּׁבִעִת--יֵצֵא לַחָפְשִׁי, חִנָּם.	2 If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve; and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
21.3 ג  אִם-בְּגַפּוֹ יָבֹא, בְּגַפּוֹ יֵצֵא; אִם-בַּעַל אִשָּׁה הוּא, וְיָצְאָה אִשְׁתּוֹ עִמּוֹ.	3 If he come in by himself, he shall go out by himself; if he be married, then his wife shall go out with him.
21.4 ד  אִם-אֲדֹנָיו יִתֶּן-לוֹ אִשָּׁה, וְיָלְדָה-לוֹ בָנִים אוֹ בָנוֹת--הָאִשָּׁה וִילָדֶיהָ, תִּהְיֶה לַאדֹנֶיהָ, וְהוּא, יֵצֵא בְגַפּוֹ.	4 If his master give him a wife, and she bear him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself.
21.5 ה  וְאִם-אָמֹר יֹאמַר, הָעֶבֶד, אָהַבְתִּי אֶת-אֲדֹנִי, אֶת-אִשְׁתִּי וְאֶת-בָּנָי; לֹא אֵצֵא, חָפְשִׁי.	5 But if the servant shall plainly say: I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free;
21.6 ו  וְהִגִּישׁוֹ אֲדֹנָיו, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, וְהִגִּישׁוֹ אֶל-הַדֶּלֶת, אוֹ אֶל-הַמְּזוּזָה; וְרָצַע אֲדֹנָיו אֶת-אָזְנוֹ בַּמַּרְצֵעַ, וַעֲבָדוֹ לְעֹלָם.  {ס}	6 then his master shall bring him unto God, and shall bring him to the door, or unto the door-post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl; and he shall serve him for ever. {S}
21.7 ז  וְכִי-יִמְכֹּר אִישׁ אֶת-בִּתּוֹ, לְאָמָה--לֹא תֵצֵא, כְּצֵאת הָעֲבָדִים.	7 And if a man sell his daughter to be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do.
21.8 ח  אִם-רָעָה בְּעֵינֵי אֲדֹנֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר-לא (לוֹ) יְעָדָהּ--וְהֶפְדָּהּ:  לְעַם נָכְרִי לֹא-יִמְשֹׁל לְמָכְרָהּ, בְּבִגְדוֹ-בָהּ.	8 If she please not her master, who hath espoused her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed; to sell her unto a foreign people he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.
21.9 ט  וְאִם-לִבְנוֹ, יִיעָדֶנָּה--כְּמִשְׁפַּט הַבָּנוֹת, יַעֲשֶׂה-לָּהּ.	9 And if he espouse her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.
21.10 י  אִם-אַחֶרֶת, יִקַּח-לוֹ--שְׁאֵרָהּ כְּסוּתָהּ וְעֹנָתָהּ, לֹא יִגְרָע.	10 If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her conjugal rights, shall he not diminish.
21.11 יא  וְאִם-שְׁלָשׁ-אֵלֶּה--לֹא יַעֲשֶׂה, לָהּ:  וְיָצְאָה חִנָּם, אֵין כָּסֶף.  {ס}	11 And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out for nothing, without money. {S}
21.12 יב  מַכֵּה אִישׁ וָמֵת, מוֹת יוּמָת.	12 He that smiteth a man, so that he dieth, shall surely be put to death.
21.13 יג  וַאֲשֶׁר לֹא צָדָה, וְהָאֱלֹהִים אִנָּה לְיָדוֹ--וְשַׂמְתִּי לְךָ מָקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יָנוּס שָׁמָּה.  {ס}	13 And if a man lie not in wait, but God cause it to come to hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he may flee. {S}
21.14 יד  וְכִי-יָזִד אִישׁ עַל-רֵעֵהוּ, לְהָרְגוֹ בְעָרְמָה--מֵעִם מִזְבְּחִי, תִּקָּחֶנּוּ לָמוּת.  {ס}	14 And if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from Mine altar, that he may die. {S}
21.15 טו  וּמַכֵּה אָבִיו וְאִמּוֹ, מוֹת יוּמָת.  {ס}	15 And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death. {S}
21.16 טז  וְגֹנֵב אִישׁ וּמְכָרוֹ וְנִמְצָא בְיָדוֹ, מוֹת יוּמָת.  {ס}	16 And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. {S}
21.17 יז  וּמְקַלֵּל אָבִיו וְאִמּוֹ, מוֹת יוּמָת.  {ס}	17 And he that curseth his father or his mother, shall surely be put to death. {S}
21.18 יח  וְכִי-יְרִיבֻן אֲנָשִׁים--וְהִכָּה-אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ, בְּאֶבֶן אוֹ בְאֶגְרֹף; וְלֹא יָמוּת, וְנָפַל לְמִשְׁכָּב.	18 And if men contend, and one smite the other with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keep his bed;
21.19 יט  אִם-יָקוּם וְהִתְהַלֵּךְ בַּחוּץ, עַל-מִשְׁעַנְתּוֹ--וְנִקָּה הַמַּכֶּה:  רַק שִׁבְתּוֹ יִתֵּן, וְרַפֹּא יְרַפֵּא.  {ס}	19 if he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit; only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. {S}
21.20 כ  וְכִי-יַכֶּה אִישׁ אֶת-עַבְדּוֹ אוֹ אֶת-אֲמָתוֹ, בַּשֵּׁבֶט, וּמֵת, תַּחַת יָדוֹ--נָקֹם, יִנָּקֵם.	20 And if a man smite his bondman, or his bondwoman, with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall surely be punished.
21.21 כא  אַךְ אִם-יוֹם אוֹ יוֹמַיִם, יַעֲמֹד--לֹא יֻקַּם, כִּי כַסְפּוֹ הוּא.  {ס}	21 Notwithstanding if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished; for he is his money. {S}
21.22 כב  וְכִי-יִנָּצוּ אֲנָשִׁים, וְנָגְפוּ אִשָּׁה הָרָה וְיָצְאוּ יְלָדֶיהָ, וְלֹא יִהְיֶה, אָסוֹן--עָנוֹשׁ יֵעָנֵשׁ, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָשִׁית עָלָיו בַּעַל הָאִשָּׁה, וְנָתַן, בִּפְלִלִים.	22 And if men strive together, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart, and yet no harm follow, he shall be surely fined, according as the woman's husband shall lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.
21.23 כג  וְאִם-אָסוֹן, יִהְיֶה--וְנָתַתָּה נֶפֶשׁ, תַּחַת נָפֶשׁ.	23 But if any harm follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
21.24 כד  עַיִן תַּחַת עַיִן, שֵׁן תַּחַת שֵׁן, יָד תַּחַת יָד, רֶגֶל תַּחַת רָגֶל.	24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
21.25 כה  כְּוִיָּה תַּחַת כְּוִיָּה, פֶּצַע תַּחַת פָּצַע, חַבּוּרָה, תַּחַת חַבּוּרָה.  {ס}	25 burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. {S}
21.26 כו  וְכִי-יַכֶּה אִישׁ אֶת-עֵין עַבְדּוֹ, אוֹ-אֶת-עֵין אֲמָתוֹ--וְשִׁחֲתָהּ:  לַחָפְשִׁי יְשַׁלְּחֶנּוּ, תַּחַת עֵינוֹ.	26 And if a man smite the eye of his bondman, or the eye of his bondwoman, and destroy it, he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.
21.27 כז  וְאִם-שֵׁן עַבְדּוֹ אוֹ-שֵׁן אֲמָתוֹ, יַפִּיל--לַחָפְשִׁי יְשַׁלְּחֶנּוּ, תַּחַת שִׁנּוֹ.  {פ}	27 And if he smite out his bondman's tooth, or his bondwoman's tooth, he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake. {P}
21.28 כח  וְכִי-יִגַּח שׁוֹר אֶת-אִישׁ אוֹ אֶת-אִשָּׁה, וָמֵת--סָקוֹל יִסָּקֵל הַשּׁוֹר, וְלֹא יֵאָכֵל אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ, וּבַעַל הַשּׁוֹר, נָקִי.	28 And if an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die, the ox shall be surely stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.
21.29 כט  וְאִם שׁוֹר נַגָּח הוּא מִתְּמֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם, וְהוּעַד בִּבְעָלָיו וְלֹא יִשְׁמְרֶנּוּ, וְהֵמִית אִישׁ, אוֹ אִשָּׁה--הַשּׁוֹר, יִסָּקֵל, וְגַם-בְּעָלָיו, יוּמָת.	29 But if the ox was wont to gore in time past, and warning hath been given to its owner, and he hath not kept it in, but it hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and its owner also shall be put to death.
21.30 ל  אִם-כֹּפֶר, יוּשַׁת עָלָיו--וְנָתַן פִּדְיֹן נַפְשׁוֹ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יוּשַׁת עָלָיו.	30 If there be laid on him a ransom, then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.
21.31 לא  אוֹ-בֵן יִגָּח, אוֹ-בַת יִגָּח--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט הַזֶּה, יֵעָשֶׂה לּוֹ.	31 Whether it have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.
21.32 לב  אִם-עֶבֶד יִגַּח הַשּׁוֹר, אוֹ אָמָה--כֶּסֶף שְׁלֹשִׁים שְׁקָלִים, יִתֵּן לַאדֹנָיו, וְהַשּׁוֹר, יִסָּקֵל.  {ס}	32 If the ox gore a bondman or a bondwoman, he shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned. {S}
21.33 לג  וְכִי-יִפְתַּח אִישׁ בּוֹר, אוֹ כִּי-יִכְרֶה אִישׁ בֹּר--וְלֹא יְכַסֶּנּוּ; וְנָפַל-שָׁמָּה שּׁוֹר, אוֹ חֲמוֹר.	33 And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein,
21.34 לד  בַּעַל הַבּוֹר יְשַׁלֵּם, כֶּסֶף יָשִׁיב לִבְעָלָיו; וְהַמֵּת, יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ.  {ס}	34 the owner of the pit shall make it good; he shall give money unto the owner of them, and the dead beast shall be his. {S}
21.35 לה  וְכִי-יִגֹּף שׁוֹר-אִישׁ אֶת-שׁוֹר רֵעֵהוּ, וָמֵת--וּמָכְרוּ אֶת-הַשּׁוֹר הַחַי, וְחָצוּ אֶת-כַּסְפּוֹ, וְגַם אֶת-הַמֵּת, יֶחֱצוּן.	35 And if one man's ox hurt another's, so that it dieth; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the price of it; and the dead also they shall divide.
21.36 לו  אוֹ נוֹדַע, כִּי שׁוֹר נַגָּח הוּא מִתְּמוֹל שִׁלְשֹׁם, וְלֹא יִשְׁמְרֶנּוּ, בְּעָלָיו--שַׁלֵּם יְשַׁלֵּם שׁוֹר תַּחַת הַשּׁוֹר, וְהַמֵּת יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ.  {ס}	36 Or if it be known that the ox was wont to gore in time past, and its owner hath not kept it in; he shall surely pay ox for ox, and the dead beast shall be his own. {S}
22.37 לז  כִּי יִגְנֹב-אִישׁ שׁוֹר אוֹ-שֶׂה, וּטְבָחוֹ אוֹ מְכָרוֹ--חֲמִשָּׁה בָקָר, יְשַׁלֵּם תַּחַת הַשּׁוֹר, וְאַרְבַּע-צֹאן, תַּחַת הַשֶּׂה.	37 If a man steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.
22.1 א  אִם-בַּמַּחְתֶּרֶת יִמָּצֵא הַגַּנָּב, וְהֻכָּה וָמֵת--אֵין לוֹ, דָּמִים.	1 If a thief be found breaking in, and be smitten so that he dieth, there shall be no bloodguiltiness for him.
22.2 ב  אִם-זָרְחָה הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ עָלָיו, דָּמִים לוֹ:  שַׁלֵּם יְשַׁלֵּם--אִם-אֵין לוֹ, וְנִמְכַּר בִּגְנֵבָתוֹ.	2 If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be bloodguiltiness for him--he shall make restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
22.3 ג  אִם-הִמָּצֵא תִמָּצֵא בְיָדוֹ הַגְּנֵבָה, מִשּׁוֹר עַד-חֲמוֹר עַד-שֶׂה--חַיִּים:  שְׁנַיִם, יְשַׁלֵּם.  {ס}	3 If the theft be found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep, he shall pay double. {S}
22.4 ד  כִּי יַבְעֶר-אִישׁ, שָׂדֶה אוֹ-כֶרֶם, וְשִׁלַּח אֶת-בְּעִירֹה, וּבִעֵר בִּשְׂדֵה אַחֵר--מֵיטַב שָׂדֵהוּ וּמֵיטַב כַּרְמוֹ, יְשַׁלֵּם.  {ס}	4 If a man cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall let his beast loose, and it feed in another man's field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution. {S}
22.5 ה  כִּי-תֵצֵא אֵשׁ וּמָצְאָה קֹצִים, וְנֶאֱכַל גָּדִישׁ, אוֹ הַקָּמָה, אוֹ הַשָּׂדֶה--שַׁלֵּם יְשַׁלֵּם, הַמַּבְעִר אֶת-הַבְּעֵרָה.  {ס}	5 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the shocks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field are consumed; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution. {S}
22.6 ו  כִּי-יִתֵּן אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ כֶּסֶף אוֹ-כֵלִים, לִשְׁמֹר, וְגֻנַּב, מִבֵּית הָאִישׁ--אִם-יִמָּצֵא הַגַּנָּב, יְשַׁלֵּם שְׁנָיִם.	6 If a man deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, he shall pay double.
22.7 ז  אִם-לֹא יִמָּצֵא הַגַּנָּב, וְנִקְרַב בַּעַל-הַבַּיִת אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים:  אִם-לֹא שָׁלַח יָדוֹ, בִּמְלֶאכֶת רֵעֵהוּ.	7 If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall come near unto God, to see whether he have not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods.
22.8 ח  עַל-כָּל-דְּבַר-פֶּשַׁע עַל-שׁוֹר עַל-חֲמוֹר עַל-שֶׂה עַל-שַׂלְמָה עַל-כָּל-אֲבֵדָה, אֲשֶׁר יֹאמַר כִּי-הוּא זֶה--עַד הָאֱלֹהִים, יָבֹא דְּבַר-שְׁנֵיהֶם:  אֲשֶׁר יַרְשִׁיעֻן אֱלֹהִים, יְשַׁלֵּם שְׁנַיִם לְרֵעֵהוּ.  {ס}	8 For every matter of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, whereof one saith: 'This is it,' the cause of both parties shall come before God; he whom God shall condemn shall pay double unto his neighbour. {S}
22.9 ט  כִּי-יִתֵּן אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ חֲמוֹר אוֹ-שׁוֹר אוֹ-שֶׂה, וְכָל-בְּהֵמָה--לִשְׁמֹר; וּמֵת אוֹ-נִשְׁבַּר אוֹ-נִשְׁבָּה, אֵין רֹאֶה.	9 If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it;
22.10 י  שְׁבֻעַת יְהוָה, תִּהְיֶה בֵּין שְׁנֵיהֶם--אִם-לֹא שָׁלַח יָדוֹ, בִּמְלֶאכֶת רֵעֵהוּ; וְלָקַח בְּעָלָיו, וְלֹא יְשַׁלֵּם.	10 the oath of the LORD shall be between them both, to see whether he have not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and the owner thereof shall accept it, and he shall not make restitution.
22.11 יא  וְאִם-גָּנֹב יִגָּנֵב, מֵעִמּוֹ--יְשַׁלֵּם, לִבְעָלָיו.	11 But if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.
22.12 יב  אִם-טָרֹף יִטָּרֵף, יְבִאֵהוּ עֵד:  הַטְּרֵפָה, לֹא יְשַׁלֵּם.  {פ}	12 If it be torn in pieces, let him bring it for witness; he shall not make good that which was torn. {P}
22.13 יג  וְכִי-יִשְׁאַל אִישׁ מֵעִם רֵעֵהוּ, וְנִשְׁבַּר אוֹ-מֵת; בְּעָלָיו אֵין-עִמּוֹ, שַׁלֵּם יְשַׁלֵּם.	13 And if a man borrow aught of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof not being with it, he shall surely make restitution.
22.14 יד  אִם-בְּעָלָיו עִמּוֹ, לֹא יְשַׁלֵּם:  אִם-שָׂכִיר הוּא, בָּא בִּשְׂכָרוֹ.  {ס}	14 If the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good; if it be a hireling, he loseth his hire. {S}
22.15 טו  וְכִי-יְפַתֶּה אִישׁ, בְּתוּלָה אֲשֶׁר לֹא-אֹרָשָׂה--וְשָׁכַב עִמָּהּ:  מָהֹר יִמְהָרֶנָּה לּוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה.	15 And if a man entice a virgin that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely pay a dowry for her to be his wife.
22.16 טז  אִם-מָאֵן יְמָאֵן אָבִיהָ, לְתִתָּהּ לוֹ--כֶּסֶף יִשְׁקֹל, כְּמֹהַר הַבְּתוּלֹת.  {ס}	16 If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins. {S}
22.17 יז  מְכַשֵּׁפָה, לֹא תְחַיֶּה.	17 Thou shalt not suffer a sorceress to live.
22.18 יח  כָּל-שֹׁכֵב עִם-בְּהֵמָה, מוֹת יוּמָת.  {ס}	18 Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death. {S}
22.19 יט  זֹבֵחַ לָאֱלֹהִים, יָחֳרָם--בִּלְתִּי לַיהוָה, לְבַדּוֹ.	19 He that sacrificeth unto the gods, save unto the LORD only, shall be utterly destroyed.
22.20 כ  וְגֵר לֹא-תוֹנֶה, וְלֹא תִלְחָצֶנּוּ:  כִּי-גֵרִים הֱיִיתֶם, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	20 And a stranger shalt thou not wrong, neither shalt thou oppress him; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
22.21 כא  כָּל-אַלְמָנָה וְיָתוֹם, לֹא תְעַנּוּן.	21 Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
22.22 כב  אִם-עַנֵּה תְעַנֶּה, אֹתוֹ--כִּי אִם-צָעֹק יִצְעַק אֵלַי, שָׁמֹעַ אֶשְׁמַע צַעֲקָתוֹ.	22 If thou afflict them in any wise--for if they cry at all unto Me, I will surely hear their cry--
22.23 כג  וְחָרָה אַפִּי, וְהָרַגְתִּי אֶתְכֶם בֶּחָרֶב; וְהָיוּ נְשֵׁיכֶם אַלְמָנוֹת, וּבְנֵיכֶם יְתֹמִים.  {פ}	23 My wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. {P}
22.24 כד  אִם-כֶּסֶף תַּלְוֶה אֶת-עַמִּי, אֶת-הֶעָנִי עִמָּךְ--לֹא-תִהְיֶה לוֹ, כְּנֹשֶׁה; לֹא-תְשִׂימוּן עָלָיו, נֶשֶׁךְ.	24 If thou lend money to any of My people, even to the poor with thee, thou shalt not be to him as a creditor; neither shall ye lay upon him interest.
22.25 כה  אִם-חָבֹל תַּחְבֹּל, שַׂלְמַת רֵעֶךָ--עַד-בֹּא הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, תְּשִׁיבֶנּוּ לוֹ.	25 If thou at all take thy neighbour's garment to pledge, thou shalt restore it unto him by that the sun goeth down;
22.26 כו  כִּי הִוא כְסוּתֹה לְבַדָּהּ, הִוא שִׂמְלָתוֹ לְעֹרוֹ; בַּמֶּה יִשְׁכָּב--וְהָיָה כִּי-יִצְעַק אֵלַי, וְשָׁמַעְתִּי כִּי-חַנּוּן אָנִי.  {ס}	26 for that is his only covering, it is his garment for his skin; wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto Me, that I will hear; for I am gracious. {S}
22.27 כז  אֱלֹהִים, לֹא תְקַלֵּל; וְנָשִׂיא בְעַמְּךָ, לֹא תָאֹר.	27 Thou shalt not revile God, nor curse a ruler of thy people.
22.28 כח  מְלֵאָתְךָ וְדִמְעֲךָ, לֹא תְאַחֵר; בְּכוֹר בָּנֶיךָ, תִּתֶּן-לִי.	28 Thou shalt not delay to offer of the fulness of thy harvest, and of the outflow of thy presses. The first-born of thy sons shalt thou give unto Me.
22.29 כט  כֵּן-תַּעֲשֶׂה לְשֹׁרְךָ, לְצֹאנֶךָ:  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים יִהְיֶה עִם-אִמּוֹ, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי תִּתְּנוֹ-לִי.	29 Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep; seven days it shall be with its dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it Me.
22.30 ל  וְאַנְשֵׁי-קֹדֶשׁ, תִּהְיוּן לִי; וּבָשָׂר בַּשָּׂדֶה טְרֵפָה לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ, לַכֶּלֶב תַּשְׁלִכוּן אֹתוֹ.  {ס}	30 And ye shall be holy men unto Me; therefore ye shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs. {S}
23.1 א  לֹא תִשָּׂא, שֵׁמַע שָׁוְא; אַל-תָּשֶׁת יָדְךָ עִם-רָשָׁע, לִהְיֹת עֵד חָמָס.	1 Thou shalt not utter a false report; put not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.
23.2 ב  לֹא-תִהְיֶה אַחֲרֵי-רַבִּים, לְרָעֹת; וְלֹא-תַעֲנֶה עַל-רִב, לִנְטֹת אַחֲרֵי רַבִּים--לְהַטֹּת.	2 Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou bear witness in a cause to turn aside after a multitude to pervert justice;
23.3 ג  וְדָל, לֹא תֶהְדַּר בְּרִיבוֹ.  {ס}	3 neither shalt thou favour a poor man in his cause. {S}
23.4 ד  כִּי תִפְגַּע שׁוֹר אֹיִבְךָ, אוֹ חֲמֹרוֹ--תֹּעֶה:  הָשֵׁב תְּשִׁיבֶנּוּ, לוֹ.  {ס}	4 If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again. {S}
23.5 ה  כִּי-תִרְאֶה חֲמוֹר שֹׂנַאֲךָ, רֹבֵץ תַּחַת מַשָּׂאוֹ, וְחָדַלְתָּ, מֵעֲזֹב לוֹ--עָזֹב תַּעֲזֹב, עִמּוֹ.  {ס}	5 If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under its burden, thou shalt forbear to pass by him; thou shalt surely release it with him. {S}
23.6 ו  לֹא תַטֶּה מִשְׁפַּט אֶבְיֹנְךָ, בְּרִיבוֹ.	6 Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
23.7 ז  מִדְּבַר-שֶׁקֶר, תִּרְחָק; וְנָקִי וְצַדִּיק אַל-תַּהֲרֹג, כִּי לֹא-אַצְדִּיק רָשָׁע.	7 Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not; for I will not justify the wicked.
23.8 ח  וְשֹׁחַד, לֹא תִקָּח:  כִּי הַשֹּׁחַד יְעַוֵּר פִּקְחִים, וִיסַלֵּף דִּבְרֵי צַדִּיקִים.	8 And thou shalt take no gift; for a gift blindeth them that have sight, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
23.9 ט  וְגֵר, לֹא תִלְחָץ; וְאַתֶּם, יְדַעְתֶּם אֶת-נֶפֶשׁ הַגֵּר--כִּי-גֵרִים הֱיִיתֶם, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	9 And a stranger shalt thou not oppress; for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
23.10 י  וְשֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים, תִּזְרַע אֶת-אַרְצֶךָ; וְאָסַפְתָּ, אֶת-תְּבוּאָתָהּ.	10 And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and gather in the increase thereof;
23.11 יא  וְהַשְּׁבִיעִת תִּשְׁמְטֶנָּה וּנְטַשְׁתָּהּ, וְאָכְלוּ אֶבְיֹנֵי עַמֶּךָ, וְיִתְרָם, תֹּאכַל חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה; כֵּן-תַּעֲשֶׂה לְכַרְמְךָ, לְזֵיתֶךָ.	11 but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie fallow, that the poor of thy people may eat; and what they leave the beast of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.
23.12 יב  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים תַּעֲשֶׂה מַעֲשֶׂיךָ, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי תִּשְׁבֹּת--לְמַעַן יָנוּחַ, שׁוֹרְךָ וַחֲמֹרֶךָ, וְיִנָּפֵשׁ בֶּן-אֲמָתְךָ, וְהַגֵּר.	12 Six days thou shalt do thy work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest; that thine ox and thine ass may have rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.
23.13 יג  וּבְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-אָמַרְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם, תִּשָּׁמֵרוּ; וְשֵׁם אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים לֹא תַזְכִּירוּ, לֹא יִשָּׁמַע עַל-פִּיךָ.	13 And in all things that I have said unto you take ye heed; and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
23.14 יד  שָׁלֹשׁ רְגָלִים, תָּחֹג לִי בַּשָּׁנָה.	14 Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto Me in the year.
23.15 טו  אֶת-חַג הַמַּצּוֹת, תִּשְׁמֹר--שִׁבְעַת יָמִים תֹּאכַל מַצּוֹת כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִךָ לְמוֹעֵד חֹדֶשׁ הָאָבִיב, כִּי-בוֹ יָצָאתָ מִמִּצְרָיִם; וְלֹא-יֵרָאוּ פָנַי, רֵיקָם.	15 The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep; seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib--for in it thou camest out from Egypt; and none shall appear before Me empty;
23.16 טז  וְחַג הַקָּצִיר בִּכּוּרֵי מַעֲשֶׂיךָ, אֲשֶׁר תִּזְרַע בַּשָּׂדֶה; וְחַג הָאָסִף בְּצֵאת הַשָּׁנָה, בְּאָסְפְּךָ אֶת-מַעֲשֶׂיךָ מִן-הַשָּׂדֶה.	16 and the feast of harvest, the first-fruits of thy labours, which thou sowest in the field; and the feast of ingathering, at the end of the year, when thou gatherest in thy labours out of the field.
23.17 יז  שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים, בַּשָּׁנָה--יֵרָאֶה, כָּל-זְכוּרְךָ, אֶל-פְּנֵי, הָאָדֹן יְהוָה.	17 Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord GOD.
23.18 יח  לֹא-תִזְבַּח עַל-חָמֵץ, דַּם-זִבְחִי; וְלֹא-יָלִין חֵלֶב-חַגִּי, עַד-בֹּקֶר.	18 Thou shalt not offer the blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of My feast remain all night until the morning.
23.19 יט  רֵאשִׁית, בִּכּוּרֵי אַדְמָתְךָ, תָּבִיא, בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ; לֹא-תְבַשֵּׁל גְּדִי, בַּחֲלֵב אִמּוֹ.  {פ}	19 The choicest first-fruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in its mother's milk. {P}
23.20 כ  הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי שֹׁלֵחַ מַלְאָךְ, לְפָנֶיךָ, לִשְׁמָרְךָ, בַּדָּרֶךְ; וְלַהֲבִיאֲךָ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר הֲכִנֹתִי.	20 Behold, I send an angel before thee, to keep thee by the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
23.21 כא  הִשָּׁמֶר מִפָּנָיו וּשְׁמַע בְּקֹלוֹ, אַל-תַּמֵּר בּוֹ:  כִּי לֹא יִשָּׂא לְפִשְׁעֲכֶם, כִּי שְׁמִי בְּקִרְבּוֹ.	21 Take heed of him, and hearken unto his voice; be not rebellious against him; for he will not pardon your transgression; for My name is in him.
23.22 כב  כִּי אִם-שָׁמוֹעַ תִּשְׁמַע, בְּקֹלוֹ, וְעָשִׂיתָ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר אֲדַבֵּר--וְאָיַבְתִּי, אֶת-אֹיְבֶיךָ, וְצַרְתִּי, אֶת-צֹרְרֶיךָ.	22 But if thou shalt indeed hearken unto his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.
23.23 כג  כִּי-יֵלֵךְ מַלְאָכִי, לְפָנֶיךָ, וֶהֱבִיאֲךָ אֶל-הָאֱמֹרִי וְהַחִתִּי, וְהַפְּרִזִּי וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי הַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי; וְהִכְחַדְתִּיו.	23 For Mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; and I will cut them off.
23.24 כד  לֹא-תִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה לֵאלֹהֵיהֶם וְלֹא תָעָבְדֵם, וְלֹא תַעֲשֶׂה כְּמַעֲשֵׂיהֶם:  כִּי הָרֵס תְּהָרְסֵם, וְשַׁבֵּר תְּשַׁבֵּר מַצֵּבֹתֵיהֶם.	24 Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their doings; but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and break in pieces their pillars.
23.25 כה  וַעֲבַדְתֶּם, אֵת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וּבֵרַךְ אֶת-לַחְמְךָ, וְאֶת-מֵימֶיךָ; וַהֲסִרֹתִי מַחֲלָה, מִקִּרְבֶּךָ.  {ס}	25 And ye shall serve the LORD your God, and He will bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee. {S}
23.26 כו  לֹא תִהְיֶה מְשַׁכֵּלָה וַעֲקָרָה, בְּאַרְצֶךָ; אֶת-מִסְפַּר יָמֶיךָ, אֲמַלֵּא.	26 None shall miscarry, nor be barren, in thy land; the number of thy days I will fulfil.
23.27 כז  אֶת-אֵימָתִי, אֲשַׁלַּח לְפָנֶיךָ, וְהַמֹּתִי אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר תָּבֹא בָּהֶם; וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-כָּל-אֹיְבֶיךָ אֵלֶיךָ, עֹרֶף.	27 I will send My terror before thee, and will discomfit all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.
23.28 כח  וְשָׁלַחְתִּי אֶת-הַצִּרְעָה, לְפָנֶיךָ; וְגֵרְשָׁה, אֶת-הַחִוִּי אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְאֶת-הַחִתִּי--מִלְּפָנֶיךָ.	28 And I will send the hornet before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.
23.29 כט  לֹא אֲגָרְשֶׁנּוּ מִפָּנֶיךָ, בְּשָׁנָה אֶחָת:  פֶּן-תִּהְיֶה הָאָרֶץ שְׁמָמָה, וְרַבָּה עָלֶיךָ חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה.	29 I will not drive them out from before thee in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the beasts of the field multiply against thee.
23.30 ל  מְעַט מְעַט אֲגָרְשֶׁנּוּ, מִפָּנֶיךָ, עַד אֲשֶׁר תִּפְרֶה, וְנָחַלְתָּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	30 By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.
23.31 לא  וְשַׁתִּי אֶת-גְּבֻלְךָ, מִיַּם-סוּף וְעַד-יָם פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּמִמִּדְבָּר, עַד-הַנָּהָר:  כִּי אֶתֵּן בְּיֶדְכֶם, אֵת יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, וְגֵרַשְׁתָּמוֹ, מִפָּנֶיךָ.	31 And I will set thy border from the Red Sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness unto the River; for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee.
23.32 לב  לֹא-תִכְרֹת לָהֶם וְלֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, בְּרִית.	32 Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
23.33 לג  לֹא יֵשְׁבוּ בְּאַרְצְךָ, פֶּן-יַחֲטִיאוּ אֹתְךָ לִי:  כִּי תַעֲבֹד אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, כִּי-יִהְיֶה לְךָ לְמוֹקֵשׁ.  {פ}	33 They shall not dwell in thy land--lest they make thee sin against Me, for thou wilt serve their gods--for they will be a snare unto thee. {P}
24.1 א  וְאֶל-מֹשֶׁה אָמַר עֲלֵה אֶל-יְהוָה, אַתָּה וְאַהֲרֹן נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא, וְשִׁבְעִים, מִזִּקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוִיתֶם, מֵרָחֹק.	1 And unto Moses He said: 'Come up unto the LORD, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off;
24.2 ב  וְנִגַּשׁ מֹשֶׁה לְבַדּוֹ אֶל-יְהוָה, וְהֵם לֹא יִגָּשׁוּ; וְהָעָם, לֹא יַעֲלוּ עִמּוֹ.	2 and Moses alone shall come near unto the LORD; but they shall not come near; neither shall the people go up with him.'
24.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה, וַיְסַפֵּר לָעָם אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה, וְאֵת, כָּל-הַמִּשְׁפָּטִים; וַיַּעַן כָּל-הָעָם קוֹל אֶחָד, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, נַעֲשֶׂה.	3 And Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD, and all the ordinances; and all the people answered with one voice, and said: 'All the words which the LORD hath spoken will we do.'
24.4 ד  וַיִּכְתֹּב מֹשֶׁה, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה, וַיַּשְׁכֵּם בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיִּבֶן מִזְבֵּחַ תַּחַת הָהָר; וּשְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה מַצֵּבָה, לִשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 And Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the mount, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
24.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח, אֶת-נַעֲרֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּעֲלוּ, עֹלֹת; וַיִּזְבְּחוּ זְבָחִים שְׁלָמִים, לַיהוָה--פָּרִים.	5 And he sent the young men of the children of Israel, who offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace-offerings of oxen unto the LORD.
24.6 ו  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה חֲצִי הַדָּם, וַיָּשֶׂם בָּאַגָּנֹת; וַחֲצִי הַדָּם, זָרַק עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	6 And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basins; and half of the blood he dashed against the altar.
24.7 ז  וַיִּקַּח סֵפֶר הַבְּרִית, וַיִּקְרָא בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה נַעֲשֶׂה וְנִשְׁמָע.	7 And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the hearing of the people; and they said: 'All that the LORD hath spoken will we do, and obey.'
24.8 ח  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַדָּם, וַיִּזְרֹק עַל-הָעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה דַם-הַבְּרִית אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת יְהוָה עִמָּכֶם, עַל כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה.	8 And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said: 'Behold the blood of the covenant, which the LORD hath made with you in agreement with all these words.'
24.9 ט  וַיַּעַל מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן--נָדָב, וַאֲבִיהוּא, וְשִׁבְעִים, מִזִּקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	9 Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel;
24.10 י  וַיִּרְאוּ, אֵת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְתַחַת רַגְלָיו, כְּמַעֲשֵׂה לִבְנַת הַסַּפִּיר, וּכְעֶצֶם הַשָּׁמַיִם, לָטֹהַר.	10 and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under His feet the like of a paved work of sapphire stone, and the like of the very heaven for clearness.
24.11 יא  וְאֶל-אֲצִילֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא שָׁלַח יָדוֹ; וַיֶּחֱזוּ, אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֹּאכְלוּ, וַיִּשְׁתּוּ.  {ס}	11 And upon the nobles of the children of Israel He laid not His hand; and they beheld God, and did eat and drink. {S}
24.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עֲלֵה אֵלַי הָהָרָה--וֶהְיֵה-שָׁם; וְאֶתְּנָה לְךָ אֶת-לֻחֹת הָאֶבֶן, וְהַתּוֹרָה וְהַמִּצְוָה, אֲשֶׁר כָּתַבְתִּי, לְהוֹרֹתָם.	12 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Come up to Me into the mount and be there; and I will give thee the tables of stone, and the law and the commandment, which I have written, that thou mayest teach them.'
24.13 יג  וַיָּקָם מֹשֶׁה, וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ מְשָׁרְתוֹ; וַיַּעַל מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-הַר הָאֱלֹהִים.	13 And Moses rose up, and Joshua his minister; and Moses went up into the mount of God.
24.14 יד  וְאֶל-הַזְּקֵנִים אָמַר שְׁבוּ-לָנוּ בָזֶה, עַד אֲשֶׁר-נָשׁוּב אֲלֵיכֶם; וְהִנֵּה אַהֲרֹן וְחוּר עִמָּכֶם, מִי-בַעַל דְּבָרִים יִגַּשׁ אֲלֵהֶם.	14 And unto the elders he said: 'Tarry ye here for us, until we come back unto you; and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you; whosoever hath a cause, let him come near unto them.'
24.15 טו  וַיַּעַל מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-הָהָר; וַיְכַס הֶעָנָן, אֶת-הָהָר.	15 And Moses went up into the mount, and the cloud covered the mount.
24.16 טז  וַיִּשְׁכֹּן כְּבוֹד-יְהוָה עַל-הַר סִינַי, וַיְכַסֵּהוּ הֶעָנָן שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים; וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-מֹשֶׁה בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, מִתּוֹךְ הֶעָנָן.	16 And the glory of the LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days; and the seventh day He called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
24.17 יז  וּמַרְאֵה כְּבוֹד יְהוָה, כְּאֵשׁ אֹכֶלֶת בְּרֹאשׁ הָהָר, לְעֵינֵי, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	17 And the appearance of the glory of the LORD was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.
24.18 יח  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה בְּתוֹךְ הֶעָנָן, וַיַּעַל אֶל-הָהָר; וַיְהִי מֹשֶׁה, בָּהָר, אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם, וְאַרְבָּעִים לָיְלָה.  {פ}	18 And Moses entered into the midst of the cloud, and went up into the mount; and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights. {P}
25.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
25.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִקְחוּ-לִי תְּרוּמָה:  מֵאֵת כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר יִדְּבֶנּוּ לִבּוֹ, תִּקְחוּ אֶת-תְּרוּמָתִי.	2 'Speak unto the children of Israel, that they take for Me an offering; of every man whose heart maketh him willing ye shall take My offering.
25.3 ג  וְזֹאת, הַתְּרוּמָה, אֲשֶׁר תִּקְחוּ, מֵאִתָּם:  זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, וּנְחֹשֶׁת.	3 And this is the offering which ye shall take of them: gold, and silver, and brass;
25.4 ד  וּתְכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ וְעִזִּים.	4 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair;
25.5 ה  וְעֹרֹת אֵילִם מְאָדָּמִים וְעֹרֹת תְּחָשִׁים, וַעֲצֵי שִׁטִּים.	5 and rams' skins dyed red, and sealskins, and acacia-wood;
25.6 ו  שֶׁמֶן, לַמָּאֹר; בְּשָׂמִים לְשֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְלִקְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים.	6 oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense;
25.7 ז  אַבְנֵי-שֹׁהַם, וְאַבְנֵי מִלֻּאִים, לָאֵפֹד, וְלַחֹשֶׁן.	7 onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
25.8 ח  וְעָשׂוּ לִי, מִקְדָּשׁ; וְשָׁכַנְתִּי, בְּתוֹכָם.	8 And let them make Me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them.
25.9 ט  כְּכֹל, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מַרְאֶה אוֹתְךָ, אֵת תַּבְנִית הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וְאֵת תַּבְנִית כָּל-כֵּלָיו; וְכֵן, תַּעֲשׂוּ.  {ס}	9 According to all that I show thee, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the furniture thereof, even so shall ye make it. {S}
25.10 י  וְעָשׂוּ אֲרוֹן, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  אַמָּתַיִם וָחֵצִי אָרְכּוֹ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי רָחְבּוֹ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי, קֹמָתוֹ.	10 And they shall make an ark of acacia-wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
25.11 יא  וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתוֹ זָהָב טָהוֹר, מִבַּיִת וּמִחוּץ תְּצַפֶּנּוּ; וְעָשִׂיתָ עָלָיו זֵר זָהָב, סָבִיב.	11 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.
25.12 יב  וְיָצַקְתָּ לּוֹ, אַרְבַּע טַבְּעֹת זָהָב, וְנָתַתָּה, עַל אַרְבַּע פַּעֲמֹתָיו; וּשְׁתֵּי טַבָּעֹת, עַל-צַלְעוֹ הָאֶחָת, וּשְׁתֵּי טַבָּעֹת, עַל-צַלְעוֹ הַשֵּׁנִית.	12 And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four feet thereof; and two rings shall be on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it.
25.13 יג  וְעָשִׂיתָ בַדֵּי, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים; וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתָם, זָהָב.	13 And thou shalt make staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with gold.
25.14 יד  וְהֵבֵאתָ אֶת-הַבַּדִּים בַּטַּבָּעֹת, עַל צַלְעֹת הָאָרֹן, לָשֵׂאת אֶת-הָאָרֹן, בָּהֶם.	14 And thou shalt put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, wherewith to bear the ark.
25.15 טו  בְּטַבְּעֹת, הָאָרֹן, יִהְיוּ, הַבַּדִּים:  לֹא יָסֻרוּ, מִמֶּנּוּ.	15 The staves shall be in the rings of the ark; they shall not be taken from it.
25.16 טז  וְנָתַתָּ, אֶל-הָאָרֹן--אֵת, הָעֵדֻת, אֲשֶׁר אֶתֵּן, אֵלֶיךָ.	16 And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
25.17 יז  וְעָשִׂיתָ כַפֹּרֶת, זָהָב טָהוֹר:  אַמָּתַיִם וָחֵצִי אָרְכָּהּ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי רָחְבָּהּ.	17 And thou shalt make an ark-cover of pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
25.18 יח  וְעָשִׂיתָ שְׁנַיִם כְּרֻבִים, זָהָב; מִקְשָׁה תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם, מִשְּׁנֵי קְצוֹת הַכַּפֹּרֶת.	18 And thou shalt make two cherubim of gold; of beaten work shalt thou make them, at the two ends of the ark-cover.
25.19 יט  וַעֲשֵׂה כְּרוּב אֶחָד מִקָּצָה, מִזֶּה, וּכְרוּב-אֶחָד מִקָּצָה, מִזֶּה; מִן-הַכַּפֹּרֶת תַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-הַכְּרֻבִים, עַל-שְׁנֵי קְצוֹתָיו.	19 And make one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end; of one piece with the ark-cover shall ye make the cherubim of the two ends thereof.
25.20 כ  וְהָיוּ הַכְּרֻבִים פֹּרְשֵׂי כְנָפַיִם לְמַעְלָה, סֹכְכִים בְּכַנְפֵיהֶם עַל-הַכַּפֹּרֶת, וּפְנֵיהֶם, אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו; אֶל-הַכַּפֹּרֶת--יִהְיוּ, פְּנֵי הַכְּרֻבִים.	20 And the cherubim shall spread out their wings on high, screening the ark-cover with their wings, with their faces one to another; toward the ark-cover shall the faces of the cherubim be.
25.21 כא  וְנָתַתָּ אֶת-הַכַּפֹּרֶת עַל-הָאָרֹן, מִלְמָעְלָה; וְאֶל-הָאָרֹן--תִּתֵּן אֶת-הָעֵדֻת, אֲשֶׁר אֶתֵּן אֵלֶיךָ.	21 And thou shalt put the ark-cover above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.
25.22 כב  וְנוֹעַדְתִּי לְךָ, שָׁם, וְדִבַּרְתִּי אִתְּךָ מֵעַל הַכַּפֹּרֶת מִבֵּין שְׁנֵי הַכְּרֻבִים, אֲשֶׁר עַל-אֲרוֹן הָעֵדֻת--אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֲצַוֶּה אוֹתְךָ, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	22 And there I will meet with thee, and I will speak with thee from above the ark-cover, from between the two cherubim which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel. {P}
25.23 כג  וְעָשִׂיתָ שֻׁלְחָן, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  אַמָּתַיִם אָרְכּוֹ וְאַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי קֹמָתוֹ.	23 And thou shalt make a table of acacia-wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
25.24 כד  וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתוֹ, זָהָב טָהוֹר; וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ זֵר זָהָב, סָבִיב.	24 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
25.25 כה  וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ מִסְגֶּרֶת טֹפַח, סָבִיב; וְעָשִׂיתָ זֵר-זָהָב לְמִסְגַּרְתּוֹ, סָבִיב.	25 And thou shalt make unto it a border of a handbreadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
25.26 כו  וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ, אַרְבַּע טַבְּעֹת זָהָב; וְנָתַתָּ, אֶת-הַטַּבָּעֹת, עַל אַרְבַּע הַפֵּאֹת, אֲשֶׁר לְאַרְבַּע רַגְלָיו.	26 And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.
25.27 כז  לְעֻמַּת, הַמִּסְגֶּרֶת, תִּהְיֶיןָ, הַטַּבָּעֹת--לְבָתִּים לְבַדִּים, לָשֵׂאת אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן.	27 Close by the border shall the rings be, for places for the staves to bear the table.
25.28 כח  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַבַּדִּים עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתָם זָהָב; וְנִשָּׂא-בָם, אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן.	28 And thou shalt make the staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.
25.29 כט  וְעָשִׂיתָ קְּעָרֹתָיו וְכַפֹּתָיו, וּקְשׂוֹתָיו וּמְנַקִּיֹּתָיו, אֲשֶׁר יֻסַּךְ, בָּהֵן; זָהָב טָהוֹר, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם.	29 And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and the pans thereof, and the jars thereof, and the bowls thereof, wherewith to pour out; of pure gold shalt thou make them.
25.30 ל  וְנָתַתָּ עַל-הַשֻּׁלְחָן לֶחֶם פָּנִים, לְפָנַי תָּמִיד.  {פ}	30 And thou shalt set upon the table showbread before Me alway. {P}
25.31 לא  וְעָשִׂיתָ מְנֹרַת, זָהָב טָהוֹר; מִקְשָׁה תֵּעָשֶׂה הַמְּנוֹרָה, יְרֵכָהּ וְקָנָהּ, גְּבִיעֶיהָ כַּפְתֹּרֶיהָ וּפְרָחֶיהָ, מִמֶּנָּה יִהְיוּ.	31 And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made, even its base, and its shaft; its cups, its knops, and its flowers, shall be of one piece with it.
25.32 לב  וְשִׁשָּׁה קָנִים, יֹצְאִים מִצִּדֶּיהָ:  שְׁלֹשָׁה קְנֵי מְנֹרָה, מִצִּדָּהּ הָאֶחָד, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה קְנֵי מְנֹרָה, מִצִּדָּהּ הַשֵּׁנִי.	32 And there shall be six branches going out of the sides thereof: three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candle-stick out of the other side thereof;
25.33 לג  שְׁלֹשָׁה גְבִעִים מְשֻׁקָּדִים בַּקָּנֶה הָאֶחָד, כַּפְתֹּר וָפֶרַח, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה גְבִעִים מְשֻׁקָּדִים בַּקָּנֶה הָאֶחָד, כַּפְתֹּר וָפָרַח; כֵּן לְשֵׁשֶׁת הַקָּנִים, הַיֹּצְאִים מִן-הַמְּנֹרָה.	33 three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knop and a flower; so for the six branches going out of the candlestick.
25.34 לד  וּבַמְּנֹרָה, אַרְבָּעָה גְבִעִים:  מְשֻׁקָּדִים--כַּפְתֹּרֶיהָ, וּפְרָחֶיהָ.	34 And in the candlestick four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knops thereof, and the flowers thereof.
25.35 לה  וְכַפְתֹּר תַּחַת שְׁנֵי הַקָּנִים מִמֶּנָּה, וְכַפְתֹּר תַּחַת שְׁנֵי הַקָּנִים מִמֶּנָּה, וְכַפְתֹּר, תַּחַת-שְׁנֵי הַקָּנִים מִמֶּנָּה--לְשֵׁשֶׁת, הַקָּנִים, הַיֹּצְאִים, מִן-הַמְּנֹרָה.	35 And a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of the candlestick.
25.36 לו  כַּפְתֹּרֵיהֶם וּקְנֹתָם, מִמֶּנָּה יִהְיוּ; כֻּלָּהּ מִקְשָׁה אַחַת, זָהָב טָהוֹר.	36 Their knops and their branches shall be of one piece with it; the whole of it one beaten work of pure gold.
25.37 לז  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ, שִׁבְעָה; וְהֶעֱלָה, אֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ, וְהֵאִיר, עַל-עֵבֶר פָּנֶיהָ.	37 And thou shalt make the lamps thereof, seven; and they shall light the lamps thereof, to give light over against it.
25.38 לח  וּמַלְקָחֶיהָ וּמַחְתֹּתֶיהָ, זָהָב טָהוֹר.	38 And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.
25.39 לט  כִּכָּר זָהָב טָהוֹר, יַעֲשֶׂה אֹתָהּ--אֵת כָּל-הַכֵּלִים, הָאֵלֶּה.	39 Of a talent of pure gold shall it be made, with all these vessels.
25.40 מ  וּרְאֵה, וַעֲשֵׂה:  בְּתַבְנִיתָם--אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה מָרְאֶה, בָּהָר.  {ס}	40 And see that thou make them after their pattern, which is being shown thee in the mount. {S}
26.1 א  וְאֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן תַּעֲשֶׂה, עֶשֶׂר יְרִיעֹת:  שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, וּתְכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--כְּרֻבִים מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם.	1 Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains: of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim the work of the skilful workman shalt thou make them.
26.2 ב  אֹרֶךְ הַיְרִיעָה הָאַחַת, שְׁמֹנֶה וְעֶשְׂרִים בָּאַמָּה, וְרֹחַב אַרְבַּע בָּאַמָּה, הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת; מִדָּה אַחַת, לְכָל-הַיְרִיעֹת.	2 The length of each curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits; all the curtains shall have one measure.
26.3 ג  חֲמֵשׁ הַיְרִיעֹת, תִּהְיֶיןָ חֹבְרֹת, אִשָּׁה, אֶל-אֲחֹתָהּ; וְחָמֵשׁ יְרִיעֹת חֹבְרֹת, אִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחֹתָהּ.	3 Five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and the other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.
26.4 ד  וְעָשִׂיתָ לֻלְאֹת תְּכֵלֶת, עַל שְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת, מִקָּצָה, בַּחֹבָרֶת; וְכֵן תַּעֲשֶׂה, בִּשְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה, הַקִּיצוֹנָה, בַּמַּחְבֶּרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית.	4 And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the first set; and likewise shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is outmost in the second set.
26.5 ה  חֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת, תַּעֲשֶׂה בַּיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת, וַחֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת תַּעֲשֶׂה בִּקְצֵה הַיְרִיעָה, אֲשֶׁר בַּמַּחְבֶּרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית:  מַקְבִּילֹת, הַלֻּלָאֹת, אִשָּׁה, אֶל-אֲחֹתָהּ.	5 Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the second set; the loops shall be opposite one to another.
26.6 ו  וְעָשִׂיתָ, חֲמִשִּׁים קַרְסֵי זָהָב; וְחִבַּרְתָּ אֶת-הַיְרִיעֹת אִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחֹתָהּ, בַּקְּרָסִים, וְהָיָה הַמִּשְׁכָּן, אֶחָד.	6 And thou shalt make fifty clasps of gold, and couple the curtains one to another with the clasps, that the tabernacle may be one whole.
26.7 ז  וְעָשִׂיתָ יְרִיעֹת עִזִּים, לְאֹהֶל עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן; עַשְׁתֵּי-עֶשְׂרֵה יְרִיעֹת, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם.	7 And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven curtains shalt thou make them.
26.8 ח  אֹרֶךְ הַיְרִיעָה הָאַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים בָּאַמָּה, וְרֹחַב אַרְבַּע בָּאַמָּה, הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת; מִדָּה אַחַת, לְעַשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה יְרִיעֹת.	8 The length of each curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits; the eleven curtains shall have one measure.
26.9 ט  וְחִבַּרְתָּ אֶת-חֲמֵשׁ הַיְרִיעֹת, לְבָד, וְאֶת-שֵׁשׁ הַיְרִיעֹת, לְבָד; וְכָפַלְתָּ אֶת-הַיְרִיעָה הַשִּׁשִּׁית, אֶל-מוּל פְּנֵי הָאֹהֶל.	9 And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double over the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tent.
26.10 י  וְעָשִׂיתָ חֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת, עַל שְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת, הַקִּיצֹנָה, בַּחֹבָרֶת; וַחֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת, עַל שְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה, הַחֹבֶרֶת, הַשֵּׁנִית.	10 And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the first set, and fifty loops upon the edge of the curtain which is outmost in the second set.
26.11 יא  וְעָשִׂיתָ קַרְסֵי נְחֹשֶׁת, חֲמִשִּׁים; וְהֵבֵאתָ אֶת-הַקְּרָסִים בַּלֻּלָאֹת, וְחִבַּרְתָּ אֶת-הָאֹהֶל וְהָיָה אֶחָד.	11 And thou shalt make fifty clasps of brass, and put the clasps into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.
26.12 יב  וְסֶרַח, הָעֹדֵף, בִּירִיעֹת, הָאֹהֶל--חֲצִי הַיְרִיעָה, הָעֹדֶפֶת, תִּסְרַח, עַל אֲחֹרֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	12 And as for the overhanging part that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth over shall hang over the back of the tabernacle.
26.13 יג  וְהָאַמָּה מִזֶּה וְהָאַמָּה מִזֶּה, בָּעֹדֵף, בְּאֹרֶךְ, יְרִיעֹת הָאֹהֶל:  יִהְיֶה סָרוּחַ עַל-צִדֵּי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה--לְכַסֹּתוֹ.	13 And the cubit on the one side, and the cubit on the other side, of that which remaineth over in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
26.14 יד  וְעָשִׂיתָ מִכְסֶה לָאֹהֶל, עֹרֹת אֵילִם מְאָדָּמִים, וּמִכְסֵה עֹרֹת תְּחָשִׁים, מִלְמָעְלָה.  {פ}	14 And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red and a covering of sealskins above. {P}
26.15 טו  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַקְּרָשִׁים, לַמִּשְׁכָּן, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, עֹמְדִים.	15 And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle of acacia-wood, standing up.
26.16 טז  עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת, אֹרֶךְ הַקָּרֶשׁ; וְאַמָּה וַחֲצִי הָאַמָּה, רֹחַב הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד.	16 Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
26.17 יז  שְׁתֵּי יָדוֹת, לַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד--מְשֻׁלָּבֹת, אִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחֹתָהּ; כֵּן תַּעֲשֶׂה, לְכֹל קַרְשֵׁי הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	17 Two tenons shall there be in each board, joined one to another; thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
26.18 יח  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַקְּרָשִׁים, לַמִּשְׁכָּן, עֶשְׂרִים קֶרֶשׁ, לִפְאַת נֶגְבָּה תֵימָנָה.	18 And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward:
26.19 יט  וְאַרְבָּעִים, אַדְנֵי-כֶסֶף, תַּעֲשֶׂה, תַּחַת עֶשְׂרִים הַקָּרֶשׁ:  שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים תַּחַת-הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, לִשְׁתֵּי יְדֹתָיו, וּשְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים תַּחַת-הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, לִשְׁתֵּי יְדֹתָיו.	19 And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards: two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons;
26.20 כ  וּלְצֶלַע הַמִּשְׁכָּן הַשֵּׁנִית, לִפְאַת צָפוֹן, עֶשְׂרִים, קָרֶשׁ.	20 and for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, twenty boards.
26.21 כא  וְאַרְבָּעִים אַדְנֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף:  שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, וּשְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד.	21 And their forty sockets of silver: two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
26.22 כב  וּלְיַרְכְּתֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יָמָּה, תַּעֲשֶׂה, שִׁשָּׁה קְרָשִׁים.	22 And for the hinder part of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.
26.23 כג  וּשְׁנֵי קְרָשִׁים תַּעֲשֶׂה, לִמְקֻצְעֹת הַמִּשְׁכָּן--בַּיַּרְכָתָיִם.	23 And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part.
26.24 כד  וְיִהְיוּ תֹאֲמִם, מִלְּמַטָּה, וְיַחְדָּו יִהְיוּ תַמִּים עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, אֶל-הַטַּבַּעַת הָאֶחָת; כֵּן יִהְיֶה לִשְׁנֵיהֶם, לִשְׁנֵי הַמִּקְצֹעֹת יִהְיוּ.	24 And they shall be double beneath, and in like manner they shall be complete unto the top thereof unto the first ring; thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.
26.25 כה  וְהָיוּ, שְׁמֹנָה קְרָשִׁים, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם כֶּסֶף, שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר אֲדָנִים:  שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, וּשְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד.	25 Thus there shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets: two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
26.26 כו  וְעָשִׂיתָ בְרִיחִם, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, חֲמִשָּׁה, לְקַרְשֵׁי צֶלַע-הַמִּשְׁכָּן הָאֶחָד.	26 And thou shalt make bars of acacia-wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
26.27 כז  וַחֲמִשָּׁה בְרִיחִם, לְקַרְשֵׁי צֶלַע-הַמִּשְׁכָּן הַשֵּׁנִית; וַחֲמִשָּׁה בְרִיחִם, לְקַרְשֵׁי צֶלַע הַמִּשְׁכָּן, לַיַּרְכָתַיִם, יָמָּה.	27 and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the hinder part westward;
26.28 כח  וְהַבְּרִיחַ הַתִּיכֹן, בְּתוֹךְ הַקְּרָשִׁים, מַבְרִחַ, מִן-הַקָּצֶה אֶל-הַקָּצֶה.	28 and the middle bar in the midst of the boards, which shall pass through from end to end.
26.29 כט  וְאֶת-הַקְּרָשִׁים תְּצַפֶּה זָהָב, וְאֶת-טַבְּעֹתֵיהֶם תַּעֲשֶׂה זָהָב--בָּתִּים, לַבְּרִיחִם; וְצִפִּיתָ אֶת-הַבְּרִיחִם, זָהָב.	29 And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for holders for the bars; and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.
26.30 ל  וַהֲקֵמֹתָ, אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן:  כְּמִשְׁפָּטוֹ--אֲשֶׁר הָרְאֵיתָ, בָּהָר.  {ס}	30 And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which hath been shown thee in the mount. {S}
26.31 לא  וְעָשִׂיתָ פָרֹכֶת, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר; מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב יַעֲשֶׂה אֹתָהּ, כְּרֻבִים.	31 And thou shalt make a veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; with cherubim the work of the skilful workman shall it be made.
26.32 לב  וְנָתַתָּה אֹתָהּ, עַל-אַרְבָּעָה עַמּוּדֵי שִׁטִּים, מְצֻפִּים זָהָב, וָוֵיהֶם זָהָב--עַל-אַרְבָּעָה, אַדְנֵי-כָסֶף.	32 And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold, their hooks being of gold, upon four sockets of silver.
26.33 לג  וְנָתַתָּה אֶת-הַפָּרֹכֶת, תַּחַת הַקְּרָסִים, וְהֵבֵאתָ שָׁמָּה מִבֵּית לַפָּרֹכֶת, אֵת אֲרוֹן הָעֵדוּת; וְהִבְדִּילָה הַפָּרֹכֶת, לָכֶם, בֵּין הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וּבֵין קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים.	33 And thou shalt hang up the veil under the clasps, and shalt bring in thither within the veil the ark of the testimony; and the veil shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy.
26.34 לד  וְנָתַתָּ, אֶת-הַכַּפֹּרֶת, עַל, אֲרוֹן הָעֵדֻת--בְּקֹדֶשׁ, הַקֳּדָשִׁים.	34 And thou shalt put the ark-cover upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
26.35 לה  וְשַׂמְתָּ אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, מִחוּץ לַפָּרֹכֶת, וְאֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה נֹכַח הַשֻּׁלְחָן, עַל צֶלַע הַמִּשְׁכָּן תֵּימָנָה; וְהַשֻּׁלְחָן--תִּתֵּן, עַל-צֶלַע צָפוֹן.	35 And thou shalt set the table without the veil, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south; and thou shalt put the table on the north side.
26.36 לו  וְעָשִׂיתָ מָסָךְ לְפֶתַח הָאֹהֶל, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, מַעֲשֵׂה, רֹקֵם.	36 And thou shalt make a screen for the door of the Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the weaver in colours.
26.37 לז  וְעָשִׂיתָ לַמָּסָךְ, חֲמִשָּׁה עַמּוּדֵי שִׁטִּים, וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתָם זָהָב, וָוֵיהֶם זָהָב; וְיָצַקְתָּ לָהֶם, חֲמִשָּׁה אַדְנֵי נְחֹשֶׁת.  {ס}	37 And thou shalt make for the screen five pillars of acacia, and overlay them with gold; their hooks shall be of gold; and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them. {S}
27.1 א  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת אֹרֶךְ וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת רֹחַב, רָבוּעַ יִהְיֶה הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְשָׁלֹשׁ אַמּוֹת, קֹמָתוֹ.	1 And thou shalt make the altar of acacia-wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be four-square; and the height thereof shall be three cubits.
27.2 ב  וְעָשִׂיתָ קַרְנֹתָיו, עַל אַרְבַּע פִּנֹּתָיו--מִמֶּנּוּ, תִּהְיֶיןָ קַרְנֹתָיו; וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתוֹ, נְחֹשֶׁת.	2 And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof; the horns thereof shall be of one piece with it; and thou shalt overlay it with brass.
27.3 ג  וְעָשִׂיתָ סִּירֹתָיו, לְדַשְּׁנוֹ, וְיָעָיו וּמִזְרְקֹתָיו, וּמִזְלְגֹתָיו וּמַחְתֹּתָיו; לְכָל-כֵּלָיו, תַּעֲשֶׂה נְחֹשֶׁת.	3 And thou shalt make its pots to take away its ashes, and its shovels, and its basins, and its flesh-hooks, and its fire-pans; all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.
27.4 ד  וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ מִכְבָּר, מַעֲשֵׂה רֶשֶׁת נְחֹשֶׁת; וְעָשִׂיתָ עַל-הָרֶשֶׁת, אַרְבַּע טַבְּעֹת נְחֹשֶׁת, עַל, אַרְבַּע קְצוֹתָיו.	4 And thou shalt make for it a grating of network of brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brazen rings in the four corners thereof.
27.5 ה  וְנָתַתָּה אֹתָהּ, תַּחַת כַּרְכֹּב הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--מִלְּמָטָּה; וְהָיְתָה הָרֶשֶׁת, עַד חֲצִי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	5 And thou shalt put it under the ledge round the altar beneath, that the net may reach halfway up the altar.
27.6 ו  וְעָשִׂיתָ בַדִּים לַמִּזְבֵּחַ, בַּדֵּי עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים; וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתָם, נְחֹשֶׁת.	6 And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with brass.
27.7 ז  וְהוּבָא אֶת-בַּדָּיו, בַּטַּבָּעֹת; וְהָיוּ הַבַּדִּים, עַל-שְׁתֵּי צַלְעֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--בִּשְׂאֵת אֹתוֹ.	7 And the staves thereof shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, in bearing it.
27.8 ח  נְבוּב לֻחֹת, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתוֹ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר הֶרְאָה אֹתְךָ בָּהָר, כֵּן יַעֲשׂוּ.  {ס}	8 Hollow with planks shalt thou make it; as it hath been shown thee in the mount, so shall they make it. {S}
27.9 ט  וְעָשִׂיתָ, אֵת חֲצַר הַמִּשְׁכָּן--לִפְאַת נֶגֶב-תֵּימָנָה קְלָעִים לֶחָצֵר שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, מֵאָה בָאַמָּה אֹרֶךְ, לַפֵּאָה, הָאֶחָת.	9 And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen a hundred cubits long for one side.
27.10 י  וְעַמֻּדָיו עֶשְׂרִים, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם עֶשְׂרִים נְחֹשֶׁת; וָוֵי הָעַמֻּדִים וַחֲשֻׁקֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף.	10 And the pillars thereof shall be twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.
27.11 יא  וְכֵן לִפְאַת צָפוֹן בָּאֹרֶךְ, קְלָעִים מֵאָה אֹרֶךְ; וְעַמֻּדָו עֶשְׂרִים, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם עֶשְׂרִים נְחֹשֶׁת, וָוֵי הָעַמֻּדִים וַחֲשֻׁקֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף.	11 And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings a hundred cubits long, and the pillars thereof twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
27.12 יב  וְרֹחַב הֶחָצֵר לִפְאַת-יָם, קְלָעִים חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה; עַמֻּדֵיהֶם עֲשָׂרָה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם עֲשָׂרָה.	12 And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
27.13 יג  וְרֹחַב הֶחָצֵר, לִפְאַת קֵדְמָה מִזְרָחָה--חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה.	13 And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.
27.14 יד  וַחֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה קְלָעִים, לַכָּתֵף; עַמֻּדֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה.	14 The hangings for the one side [of the gate] shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.
27.15 טו  וְלַכָּתֵף, הַשֵּׁנִית--חֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה, קְלָעִים; עַמֻּדֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה.	15 And for the other side shall be hangings of fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.
27.16 טז  וּלְשַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר מָסָךְ עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר--מַעֲשֵׂה רֹקֵם; עַמֻּדֵיהֶם, אַרְבָּעָה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם, אַרְבָּעָה.	16 And for the gate of the court shall be a screen of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the weaver in colours: their pillars four, and their sockets four.
27.17 יז  כָּל-עַמּוּדֵי הֶחָצֵר סָבִיב מְחֻשָּׁקִים כֶּסֶף, וָוֵיהֶם כָּסֶף; וְאַדְנֵיהֶם, נְחֹשֶׁת.	17 All the pillars of the court round about shall be filleted with silver; their hooks of silver, and their sockets of brass.
27.18 יח  אֹרֶךְ הֶחָצֵר מֵאָה בָאַמָּה וְרֹחַב חֲמִשִּׁים בַּחֲמִשִּׁים, וְקֹמָה חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת--שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר; וְאַדְנֵיהֶם, נְחֹשֶׁת.	18 The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits, of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.
27.19 יט  לְכֹל כְּלֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, בְּכֹל עֲבֹדָתוֹ, וְכָל-יְתֵדֹתָיו וְכָל-יִתְדֹת הֶחָצֵר, נְחֹשֶׁת.  {ס}	19 All the instruments of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass. {S}
27.20 כ  וְאַתָּה תְּצַוֶּה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִקְחוּ אֵלֶיךָ שֶׁמֶן זַיִת זָךְ כָּתִית--לַמָּאוֹר:  לְהַעֲלֹת נֵר, תָּמִיד.	20 And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure olive oil beaten for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually.
27.21 כא  בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד מִחוּץ לַפָּרֹכֶת אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָעֵדֻת, יַעֲרֹךְ אֹתוֹ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו מֵעֶרֶב עַד-בֹּקֶר--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתָם, מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	21 In the tent of meeting, without the veil which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall set it in order, to burn from evening to morning before the LORD; it shall be a statute for ever throughout their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel. {S}
28.1 א  וְאַתָּה הַקְרֵב אֵלֶיךָ אֶת-אַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ וְאֶת-בָּנָיו אִתּוֹ, מִתּוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְכַהֲנוֹ-לִי:  אַהֲרֹן--נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא אֶלְעָזָר וְאִיתָמָר, בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן.	1 And bring thou near unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that they may minister unto Me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.
28.2 ב  וְעָשִׂיתָ בִגְדֵי-קֹדֶשׁ, לְאַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ, לְכָבוֹד, וּלְתִפְאָרֶת.	2 And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for splendour and for beauty.
28.3 ג  וְאַתָּה, תְּדַבֵּר אֶל-כָּל-חַכְמֵי-לֵב, אֲשֶׁר מִלֵּאתִיו, רוּחַ חָכְמָה; וְעָשׂוּ אֶת-בִּגְדֵי אַהֲרֹן, לְקַדְּשׁוֹ--לְכַהֲנוֹ-לִי.	3 And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they make Aaron's garments to sanctify him, that he may minister unto Me in the priest's office.
28.4 ד  וְאֵלֶּה הַבְּגָדִים אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשׂוּ, חֹשֶׁן וְאֵפוֹד וּמְעִיל, וּכְתֹנֶת תַּשְׁבֵּץ, מִצְנֶפֶת וְאַבְנֵט; וְעָשׂוּ בִגְדֵי-קֹדֶשׁ לְאַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ, וּלְבָנָיו--לְכַהֲנוֹ-לִי.	4 And these are the garments which they shall make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a tunic of chequer work, a mitre, and a girdle; and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto Me in the priest's office.
28.5 ה  וְהֵם יִקְחוּ אֶת-הַזָּהָב, וְאֶת-הַתְּכֵלֶת וְאֶת-הָאַרְגָּמָן, וְאֶת-תּוֹלַעַת הַשָּׁנִי, וְאֶת-הַשֵּׁשׁ.  {פ}	5 And they shall take the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the fine linen. {P}
28.6 ו  וְעָשׂוּ, אֶת-הָאֵפֹד:  זָהָב תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן תּוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר--מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב.	6 And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the skilful workman.
28.7 ז  שְׁתֵּי כְתֵפֹת חֹבְרֹת, יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ אֶל-שְׁנֵי קְצוֹתָיו--וְחֻבָּר.	7 It shall have two shoulder-pieces joined to the two ends thereof, that it may be joined together.
28.8 ח  וְחֵשֶׁב אֲפֻדָּתוֹ אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו, כְּמַעֲשֵׂהוּ מִמֶּנּוּ יִהְיֶה:  זָהָב, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר.	8 And the skilfully woven band, which is upon it, wherewith to gird it on, shall be like the work thereof and of the same piece: of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
28.9 ט  וְלָקַחְתָּ, אֶת-שְׁתֵּי אַבְנֵי-שֹׁהַם; וּפִתַּחְתָּ עֲלֵיהֶם, שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	9 And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel:
28.10 י  שִׁשָּׁה, מִשְּׁמֹתָם, עַל, הָאֶבֶן הָאֶחָת; וְאֶת-שְׁמוֹת הַשִּׁשָּׁה הַנּוֹתָרִים, עַל-הָאֶבֶן הַשֵּׁנִית--כְּתוֹלְדֹתָם.	10 six of their names on the one stone, and the names of the six that remain on the other stone, according to their birth.
28.11 יא  מַעֲשֵׂה חָרַשׁ, אֶבֶן--פִּתּוּחֵי חֹתָם תְּפַתַּח אֶת-שְׁתֵּי הָאֲבָנִים, עַל-שְׁמֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; מֻסַבֹּת מִשְׁבְּצוֹת זָהָב, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם.	11 With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones, according to the names of the children of Israel; thou shalt make them to be inclosed in settings of gold.
28.12 יב  וְשַׂמְתָּ אֶת-שְׁתֵּי הָאֲבָנִים, עַל כִּתְפֹת הָאֵפֹד, אַבְנֵי זִכָּרֹן, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְנָשָׂא אַהֲרֹן אֶת-שְׁמוֹתָם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, עַל-שְׁתֵּי כְתֵפָיו--לְזִכָּרֹן.  {ס}	12 And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children of Israel; and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a memorial. {S}
28.13 יג  וְעָשִׂיתָ מִשְׁבְּצֹת, זָהָב.	13 And thou shalt make settings of gold;
28.14 יד  וּשְׁתֵּי שַׁרְשְׁרֹת זָהָב טָהוֹר, מִגְבָּלֹת תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם מַעֲשֵׂה עֲבֹת; וְנָתַתָּה אֶת-שַׁרְשְׁרֹת הָעֲבֹתֹת, עַל-הַמִּשְׁבְּצֹת.  {ס}	14 and two chains of pure gold; of plaited thread shalt thou make them, of wreathen work; and thou shalt put the wreathen chains on the settings. {S}
28.15 טו  וְעָשִׂיתָ חֹשֶׁן מִשְׁפָּט, מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב--כְּמַעֲשֵׂה אֵפֹד, תַּעֲשֶׂנּוּ; זָהָב תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר--תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתוֹ.	15 And thou shalt make a breastplate of judgment, the work of the skilful workman; like the work of the ephod thou shalt make it: of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, shalt thou make it.
28.16 טז  רָבוּעַ יִהְיֶה, כָּפוּל; זֶרֶת אָרְכּוֹ, וְזֶרֶת רָחְבּוֹ.	16 Four-square it shall be and double: a span shall be the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof.
28.17 יז  וּמִלֵּאתָ בוֹ מִלֻּאַת אֶבֶן, אַרְבָּעָה טוּרִים אָבֶן:  טוּר, אֹדֶם פִּטְדָה וּבָרֶקֶת--הַטּוּר, הָאֶחָד.	17 And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, four rows of stones: a row of carnelian, topaz, and smaragd shall be the first row;
28.18 יח  וְהַטּוּר, הַשֵּׁנִי--נֹפֶךְ סַפִּיר, וְיָהֲלֹם.	18 and the second row a carbuncle, a sapphire, and an emerald;
28.19 יט  וְהַטּוּר, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי--לֶשֶׁם שְׁבוֹ, וְאַחְלָמָה.	19 and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;
28.20 כ  וְהַטּוּר, הָרְבִיעִי--תַּרְשִׁישׁ וְשֹׁהַם, וְיָשְׁפֵה; מְשֻׁבָּצִים זָהָב יִהְיוּ, בְּמִלּוּאֹתָם.	20 and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper; they shall be inclosed in gold in their settings.
28.21 כא  וְהָאֲבָנִים תִּהְיֶיןָ עַל-שְׁמֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה--עַל-שְׁמֹתָם; פִּתּוּחֵי חוֹתָם, אִישׁ עַל-שְׁמוֹ, תִּהְיֶיןָ, לִשְׁנֵי עָשָׂר שָׁבֶט.	21 And the stones shall be according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names; like the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name, they shall be for the twelve tribes.
28.22 כב  וְעָשִׂיתָ עַל-הַחֹשֶׁן שַׁרְשֹׁת גַּבְלֻת, מַעֲשֵׂה עֲבֹת, זָהָב, טָהוֹר.	22 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate plaited chains of wreathen work of pure gold.
28.23 כג  וְעָשִׂיתָ, עַל-הַחֹשֶׁן, שְׁתֵּי, טַבְּעוֹת זָהָב; וְנָתַתָּ, אֶת-שְׁתֵּי הַטַּבָּעוֹת, עַל-שְׁנֵי, קְצוֹת הַחֹשֶׁן.	23 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
28.24 כד  וְנָתַתָּה, אֶת-שְׁתֵּי עֲבֹתֹת הַזָּהָב, עַל-שְׁתֵּי, הַטַּבָּעֹת--אֶל-קְצוֹת, הַחֹשֶׁן.	24 And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold on the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.
28.25 כה  וְאֵת שְׁתֵּי קְצוֹת שְׁתֵּי הָעֲבֹתֹת, תִּתֵּן עַל-שְׁתֵּי הַמִּשְׁבְּצוֹת; וְנָתַתָּה עַל-כִּתְפוֹת הָאֵפֹד, אֶל-מוּל פָּנָיו.	25 And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the forepart thereof.
28.26 כו  וְעָשִׂיתָ, שְׁתֵּי טַבְּעוֹת זָהָב, וְשַׂמְתָּ אֹתָם, עַל-שְׁנֵי קְצוֹת הַחֹשֶׁן--עַל-שְׂפָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר אֶל-עֵבֶר הָאֵפֹד בָּיְתָה.	26 And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge thereof, which is toward the side of the ephod inward.
28.27 כז  וְעָשִׂיתָ, שְׁתֵּי טַבְּעוֹת זָהָב, וְנָתַתָּה אֹתָם עַל-שְׁתֵּי כִתְפוֹת הָאֵפוֹד מִלְּמַטָּה מִמּוּל פָּנָיו, לְעֻמַּת מַחְבַּרְתּוֹ--מִמַּעַל, לְחֵשֶׁב הָאֵפוֹד.	27 And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and shalt put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the skilfully woven band of the ephod.
28.28 כח  וְיִרְכְּסוּ אֶת-הַחֹשֶׁן מִטַּבְּעֹתָו אֶל-טַבְּעֹת הָאֵפוֹד, בִּפְתִיל תְּכֵלֶת, לִהְיוֹת, עַל-חֵשֶׁב הָאֵפוֹד; וְלֹא-יִזַּח הַחֹשֶׁן, מֵעַל הָאֵפוֹד.	28 And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a thread of blue, that it may be upon the skilfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
28.29 כט  וְנָשָׂא אַהֲרֹן אֶת-שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּחֹשֶׁן הַמִּשְׁפָּט, עַל-לִבּוֹ--בְּבֹאוֹ אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  לְזִכָּרֹן לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה, תָּמִיד.	29 And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the LORD continually.
28.30 ל  וְנָתַתָּ אֶל-חֹשֶׁן הַמִּשְׁפָּט, אֶת-הָאוּרִים וְאֶת-הַתֻּמִּים, וְהָיוּ עַל-לֵב אַהֲרֹן, בְּבֹאוֹ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְנָשָׂא אַהֲרֹן אֶת-מִשְׁפַּט בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל עַל-לִבּוֹ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--תָּמִיד.  {ס}	30 And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before the LORD; and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD continually. {S}
28.31 לא  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-מְעִיל הָאֵפוֹד, כְּלִיל תְּכֵלֶת.	31 And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.
28.32 לב  וְהָיָה פִי-רֹאשׁוֹ, בְּתוֹכוֹ; שָׂפָה יִהְיֶה לְפִיו סָבִיב מַעֲשֵׂה אֹרֵג, כְּפִי תַחְרָא יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ--לֹא יִקָּרֵעַ.	32 And it shall have a hole for the head in the midst thereof; it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of a coat of mail that it be not rent.
28.33 לג  וְעָשִׂיתָ עַל-שׁוּלָיו, רִמֹּנֵי תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--עַל-שׁוּלָיו, סָבִיב; וּפַעֲמֹנֵי זָהָב בְּתוֹכָם, סָבִיב.	33 And upon the skirts of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the skirts thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:
28.34 לד  פַּעֲמֹן זָהָב וְרִמּוֹן, פַּעֲמֹן זָהָב וְרִמּוֹן, עַל-שׁוּלֵי הַמְּעִיל, סָבִיב.	34 a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about.
28.35 לה  וְהָיָה עַל-אַהֲרֹן, לְשָׁרֵת; וְנִשְׁמַע קוֹלוֹ בְּבֹאוֹ אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וּבְצֵאתוֹ--וְלֹא יָמוּת.  {ס}	35 And it shall be upon Aaron to minister; and the sound thereof shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the LORD, and when he cometh out, that he die not. {S}
28.36 לו  וְעָשִׂיתָ צִּיץ, זָהָב טָהוֹר; וּפִתַּחְתָּ עָלָיו פִּתּוּחֵי חֹתָם, קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה.	36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and engrave upon it, like the engravings of a signet: HOLY TO THE LORD.
28.37 לז  וְשַׂמְתָּ אֹתוֹ עַל-פְּתִיל תְּכֵלֶת, וְהָיָה עַל-הַמִּצְנָפֶת; אֶל-מוּל פְּנֵי-הַמִּצְנֶפֶת, יִהְיֶה.	37 And thou shalt put it on a thread of blue, and it shall be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.
28.38 לח  וְהָיָה, עַל-מֵצַח אַהֲרֹן, וְנָשָׂא אַהֲרֹן אֶת-עֲוֺן הַקֳּדָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר יַקְדִּישׁוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְכָל-מַתְּנֹת קָדְשֵׁיהֶם; וְהָיָה עַל-מִצְחוֹ תָּמִיד, לְרָצוֹן לָהֶם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	38 And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, and Aaron shall bear the iniquity committed in the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow, even in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.
28.39 לט  וְשִׁבַּצְתָּ הַכְּתֹנֶת שֵׁשׁ, וְעָשִׂיתָ מִצְנֶפֶת שֵׁשׁ; וְאַבְנֵט תַּעֲשֶׂה, מַעֲשֵׂה רֹקֵם.	39 And thou shalt weave the tunic in chequer work of fine linen, and thou shalt make a mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make a girdle, the work of the weaver in colours.
28.40 מ  וְלִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן תַּעֲשֶׂה כֻתֳּנֹת, וְעָשִׂיתָ לָהֶם אַבְנֵטִים; וּמִגְבָּעוֹת תַּעֲשֶׂה לָהֶם, לְכָבוֹד וּלְתִפְאָרֶת.	40 And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make tunics, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and head-tires shalt thou make for them, for splendour and for beauty.
28.41 מא  וְהִלְבַּשְׁתָּ אֹתָם אֶת-אַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ, וְאֶת-בָּנָיו אִתּוֹ; וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֹתָם וּמִלֵּאתָ אֶת-יָדָם, וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֹתָם--וְכִהֲנוּ לִי.	41 And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and upon his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto Me in the priest's office.
28.42 מב  וַעֲשֵׂה לָהֶם מִכְנְסֵי-בָד, לְכַסּוֹת בְּשַׂר עֶרְוָה; מִמָּתְנַיִם וְעַד-יְרֵכַיִם, יִהְיוּ.	42 And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover the flesh of their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach.
28.43 מג  וְהָיוּ עַל-אַהֲרֹן וְעַל-בָּנָיו בְּבֹאָם אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, אוֹ בְגִשְׁתָּם אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ לְשָׁרֵת בַּקֹּדֶשׁ, וְלֹא-יִשְׂאוּ עָוֺן, וָמֵתוּ:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לוֹ, וּלְזַרְעוֹ אַחֲרָיו.  {ס}	43 And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they go in unto the tent of meeting, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity, and die; it shall be a statute for ever unto him and unto his seed after him. {S}
29.1 א  וְזֶה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-תַּעֲשֶׂה לָהֶם, לְקַדֵּשׁ אֹתָם--לְכַהֵן לִי:  לְקַח פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, וְאֵילִם שְׁנַיִם--תְּמִימִם.	1 And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto Me in the priest's office: take one young bullock and two rams without blemish,
29.2 ב  וְלֶחֶם מַצּוֹת, וְחַלֹּת מַצֹּת בְּלוּלֹת בַּשֶּׁמֶן, וּרְקִיקֵי מַצּוֹת, מְשֻׁחִים בַּשָּׁמֶן; סֹלֶת חִטִּים, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם.	2 and unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened mingled with oil, and wafers unleavened spread with oil; of fine wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
29.3 ג  וְנָתַתָּ אוֹתָם עַל-סַל אֶחָד, וְהִקְרַבְתָּ אֹתָם בַּסָּל; וְאֶת-הַפָּר--וְאֵת, שְׁנֵי הָאֵילִם.	3 And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.
29.4 ד  וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו תַּקְרִיב, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְרָחַצְתָּ אֹתָם, בַּמָּיִם.	4 And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tent of meeting, and shalt wash them with water.
29.5 ה  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-הַבְּגָדִים, וְהִלְבַּשְׁתָּ אֶת-אַהֲרֹן אֶת-הַכֻּתֹּנֶת, וְאֵת מְעִיל הָאֵפֹד, וְאֶת-הָאֵפֹד וְאֶת-הַחֹשֶׁן; וְאָפַדְתָּ לוֹ, בְּחֵשֶׁב הָאֵפֹד.	5 And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the tunic, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the skilfully woven band of the ephod.
29.6 ו  וְשַׂמְתָּ הַמִּצְנֶפֶת, עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וְנָתַתָּ אֶת-נֵזֶר הַקֹּדֶשׁ, עַל-הַמִּצְנָפֶת.	6 And thou shalt set the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.
29.7 ז  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְיָצַקְתָּ עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וּמָשַׁחְתָּ, אֹתוֹ.	7 Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.
29.8 ח  וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, תַּקְרִיב; וְהִלְבַּשְׁתָּם, כֻּתֳּנֹת.	8 And thou shalt bring his sons, and put tunics upon them.
29.9 ט  וְחָגַרְתָּ אֹתָם אַבְנֵט אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, וְחָבַשְׁתָּ לָהֶם מִגְבָּעֹת, וְהָיְתָה לָהֶם כְּהֻנָּה, לְחֻקַּת עוֹלָם; וּמִלֵּאתָ יַד-אַהֲרֹן, וְיַד-בָּנָיו.	9 And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and bind head-tires on them; and they shall have the priesthood by a perpetual statute; and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.
29.10 י  וְהִקְרַבְתָּ, אֶת-הַפָּר, לִפְנֵי, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְסָמַךְ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל-רֹאשׁ הַפָּר.	10 And thou shalt bring the bullock before the tent of meeting; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock.
29.11 יא  וְשָׁחַטְתָּ אֶת-הַפָּר, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	11 And thou shalt kill the bullock before the LORD, at the door of the tent of meeting.
29.12 יב  וְלָקַחְתָּ מִדַּם הַפָּר, וְנָתַתָּה עַל-קַרְנֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ בְּאֶצְבָּעֶךָ; וְאֶת-כָּל-הַדָּם תִּשְׁפֹּךְ, אֶל-יְסוֹד הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	12 And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger; and thou shalt pour out all the remaining blood at the base of the altar.
29.13 יג  וְלָקַחְתָּ, אֶת-כָּל-הַחֵלֶב הַמְכַסֶּה אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת הַיֹּתֶרֶת עַל-הַכָּבֵד, וְאֵת שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵיהֶן; וְהִקְטַרְתָּ, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.	13 And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the lobe above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and make them smoke upon the altar.
29.14 יד  וְאֶת-בְּשַׂר הַפָּר, וְאֶת-עֹרוֹ וְאֶת-פִּרְשׁוֹ, תִּשְׂרֹף בָּאֵשׁ, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה:  חַטָּאת, הוּא.	14 But the flesh of the bullock, and its skin, and its dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp; it is a sin-offering.
29.15 טו  וְאֶת-הָאַיִל הָאֶחָד, תִּקָּח; וְסָמְכוּ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם--עַל-רֹאשׁ הָאָיִל.	15 Thou shalt also take the one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
29.16 טז  וְשָׁחַטְתָּ, אֶת-הָאָיִל; וְלָקַחְתָּ, אֶת-דָּמוֹ, וְזָרַקְתָּ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.	16 And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take its blood, and dash it round about against the altar.
29.17 יז  וְאֶת-הָאַיִל--תְּנַתֵּחַ, לִנְתָחָיו; וְרָחַצְתָּ קִרְבּוֹ וּכְרָעָיו, וְנָתַתָּ עַל-נְתָחָיו וְעַל-רֹאשׁוֹ.	17 And thou shalt cut the ram into its pieces, and wash its inwards, and its legs, and put them with its pieces, and with its head.
29.18 יח  וְהִקְטַרְתָּ אֶת-כָּל-הָאַיִל הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עֹלָה הוּא לַיהוָה; רֵיחַ נִיחוֹחַ, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה הוּא.	18 And thou shalt make the whole ram smoke upon the altar; it is a burnt-offering unto the LORD; it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
29.19 יט  וְלָקַחְתָּ, אֵת הָאַיִל הַשֵּׁנִי; וְסָמַךְ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל-רֹאשׁ הָאָיִל.	19 And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
29.20 כ  וְשָׁחַטְתָּ אֶת-הָאַיִל, וְלָקַחְתָּ מִדָּמוֹ וְנָתַתָּה עַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן אַהֲרֹן וְעַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן בָּנָיו הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדָם הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלָם הַיְמָנִית; וְזָרַקְתָּ אֶת-הַדָּם עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.	20 Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of its blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and dash the blood against the altar round about.
29.21 כא  וְלָקַחְתָּ מִן-הַדָּם אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וּמִשֶּׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְהִזֵּיתָ עַל-אַהֲרֹן וְעַל-בְּגָדָיו, וְעַל-בָּנָיו וְעַל-בִּגְדֵי בָנָיו אִתּוֹ; וְקָדַשׁ הוּא וּבְגָדָיו, וּבָנָיו וּבִגְדֵי בָנָיו אִתּוֹ.	21 And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him; and he and his garments shall be hallowed, and his sons and his sons' garments with him.
29.22 כב  וְלָקַחְתָּ מִן-הָאַיִל הַחֵלֶב וְהָאַלְיָה וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב הַמְכַסֶּה אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת יֹתֶרֶת הַכָּבֵד וְאֵת שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵיהֶן, וְאֵת, שׁוֹק הַיָּמִין:  כִּי אֵיל מִלֻּאִים, הוּא.	22 Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat, and the fat tail, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right thigh; for it is a ram of consecration;
29.23 כג  וְכִכַּר לֶחֶם אַחַת, וְחַלַּת לֶחֶם שֶׁמֶן אַחַת--וְרָקִיק אֶחָד:  מִסַּל, הַמַּצּוֹת, אֲשֶׁר, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	23 and one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before the LORD.
29.24 כד  וְשַׂמְתָּ הַכֹּל--עַל כַּפֵּי אַהֲרֹן, וְעַל כַּפֵּי בָנָיו; וְהֵנַפְתָּ אֹתָם תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	24 And thou shalt put the whole upon the hands of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave-offering before the LORD.
29.25 כה  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֹתָם מִיָּדָם, וְהִקְטַרְתָּ הַמִּזְבֵּחָה עַל-הָעֹלָה; לְרֵיחַ נִיחוֹחַ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אִשֶּׁה הוּא לַיהוָה.	25 And thou shalt take them from their hands, and make them smoke on the altar upon the burnt-offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD; it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
29.26 כו  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-הֶחָזֶה, מֵאֵיל הַמִּלֻּאִים אֲשֶׁר לְאַהֲרֹן, וְהֵנַפְתָּ אֹתוֹ תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְהָיָה לְךָ, לְמָנָה.	26 And thou shalt take the breast of Aaron's ram of consecration, and wave it for a wave-offering before the LORD; and it shall be thy portion.
29.27 כז  וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֵת חֲזֵה הַתְּנוּפָה, וְאֵת שׁוֹק הַתְּרוּמָה, אֲשֶׁר הוּנַף, וַאֲשֶׁר הוּרָם:  מֵאֵיל, הַמִּלֻּאִים--מֵאֲשֶׁר לְאַהֲרֹן, וּמֵאֲשֶׁר לְבָנָיו.	27 And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave-offering, and the thigh of the heave-offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of consecration, even of that which is Aaron's, and of that which is his sons'.
29.28 כח  וְהָיָה לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו לְחָק-עוֹלָם, מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי תְרוּמָה, הוּא; וּתְרוּמָה יִהְיֶה מֵאֵת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִזִּבְחֵי שַׁלְמֵיהֶם--תְּרוּמָתָם, לַיהוָה.	28 And it shall be for Aaron and his sons as a due for ever from the children of Israel; for it is a heave-offering; and it shall be a heave-offering from the children of Israel of their sacrifices of peace-offerings, even their heave-offering unto the LORD.
29.29 כט  וּבִגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר לְאַהֲרֹן, יִהְיוּ לְבָנָיו אַחֲרָיו, לְמָשְׁחָה בָהֶם, וּלְמַלֵּא-בָם אֶת-יָדָם.	29 And the holy garments of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to be consecrated in them.
29.30 ל  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, יִלְבָּשָׁם הַכֹּהֵן תַּחְתָּיו--מִבָּנָיו:  אֲשֶׁר יָבֹא אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לְשָׁרֵת בַּקֹּדֶשׁ.	30 Seven days shall the son that is priest in his stead put them on, even he who cometh into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place.
29.31 לא  וְאֵת אֵיל הַמִּלֻּאִים, תִּקָּח; וּבִשַּׁלְתָּ אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ, בְּמָקֹם קָדֹשׁ.	31 And thou shalt take the ram of consecration, and seethe its flesh in a holy place.
29.32 לב  וְאָכַל אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו אֶת-בְּשַׂר הָאַיִל, וְאֶת-הַלֶּחֶם אֲשֶׁר בַּסָּל, פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	32 And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, at the door of the tent of meeting.
29.33 לג  וְאָכְלוּ אֹתָם אֲשֶׁר כֻּפַּר בָּהֶם, לְמַלֵּא אֶת-יָדָם לְקַדֵּשׁ אֹתָם; וְזָר לֹא-יֹאכַל, כִּי-קֹדֶשׁ הֵם.	33 And they shall eat those things wherewith atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them; but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.
29.34 לד  וְאִם-יִוָּתֵר מִבְּשַׂר הַמִּלֻּאִים, וּמִן-הַלֶּחֶם--עַד-הַבֹּקֶר:  וְשָׂרַפְתָּ אֶת-הַנּוֹתָר בָּאֵשׁ, לֹא יֵאָכֵל כִּי-קֹדֶשׁ הוּא.	34 And if aught of the flesh of the consecration, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire; it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
29.35 לה  וְעָשִׂיתָ לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו, כָּכָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתִי, אֹתָכָה; שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, תְּמַלֵּא יָדָם.	35 And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee; seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
29.36 לו  וּפַר חַטָּאת תַּעֲשֶׂה לַיּוֹם, עַל-הַכִּפֻּרִים, וְחִטֵּאתָ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, בְּכַפֶּרְךָ עָלָיו; וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֹתוֹ, לְקַדְּשׁוֹ.	36 And every day shalt thou offer the bullock of sin-offering, beside the other offerings of atonement; and thou shalt do the purification upon the altar when thou makest atonement for it; and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.
29.37 לז  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, תְּכַפֵּר עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ, אֹתוֹ; וְהָיָה הַמִּזְבֵּחַ קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בַּמִּזְבֵּחַ יִקְדָּשׁ.  {ס}	37 Seven days thou shalt make atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; thus shall the altar be most holy; whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy. {S}
29.38 לח  וְזֶה, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שְׁנַיִם לַיּוֹם, תָּמִיד.	38 Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar: two lambs of the first year day by day continually.
29.39 לט  אֶת-הַכֶּבֶשׂ הָאֶחָד, תַּעֲשֶׂה בַבֹּקֶר; וְאֵת הַכֶּבֶשׂ הַשֵּׁנִי, תַּעֲשֶׂה בֵּין הָעַרְבָּיִם.	39 The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at dusk.
29.40 מ  וְעִשָּׂרֹן סֹלֶת בָּלוּל בְּשֶׁמֶן כָּתִית, רֶבַע הַהִין, וְנֵסֶךְ, רְבִיעִת הַהִין יָיִן--לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד.	40 And with the one lamb a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink-offering.
29.41 מא  וְאֵת הַכֶּבֶשׂ הַשֵּׁנִי, תַּעֲשֶׂה בֵּין הָעַרְבָּיִם:  כְּמִנְחַת הַבֹּקֶר וּכְנִסְכָּהּ, תַּעֲשֶׂה-לָּהּ, לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.	41 And the other lamb thou shalt offer at dusk, and shalt do thereto according to the meal-offering of the morning, and according to the drink-offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
29.42 מב  עֹלַת תָּמִיד לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר אִוָּעֵד לָכֶם שָׁמָּה, לְדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ שָׁם.	42 It shall be a continual burnt-offering throughout your generations at the door of the tent of meeting before the LORD, where I will meet with you, to speak there unto thee.
29.43 מג  וְנֹעַדְתִּי שָׁמָּה, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְנִקְדַּשׁ, בִּכְבֹדִי.	43 And there I will meet with the children of Israel; and [the Tent] shall be sanctified by My glory.
29.44 מד  וְקִדַּשְׁתִּי אֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו אֲקַדֵּשׁ, לְכַהֵן לִי.	44 And I will sanctify the tent of meeting, and the altar; Aaron also and his sons will I sanctify, to minister to Me in the priest's office.
29.45 מה  וְשָׁכַנְתִּי, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהָיִיתִי לָהֶם, לֵאלֹהִים.	45 And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.
29.46 מו  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִי אֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לְשָׁכְנִי בְתוֹכָם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.  {פ}	46 And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them. I am the LORD their God. {P}
30.1 א  וְעָשִׂיתָ מִזְבֵּחַ, מִקְטַר קְטֹרֶת; עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתוֹ.	1 And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon; of acacia-wood shalt thou make it.
30.2 ב  אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ וְאַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ, רָבוּעַ יִהְיֶה, וְאַמָּתַיִם, קֹמָתוֹ; מִמֶּנּוּ, קַרְנֹתָיו.	2 A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be; and two cubits shall be the height thereof; the horns thereof shall be of one piece with it.
30.3 ג  וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתוֹ זָהָב טָהוֹר, אֶת-גַּגּוֹ וְאֶת-קִירֹתָיו סָבִיב--וְאֶת-קַרְנֹתָיו; וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ זֵר זָהָב, סָבִיב.	3 And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
30.4 ד  וּשְׁתֵּי טַבְּעֹת זָהָב תַּעֲשֶׂה-לּוֹ מִתַּחַת לְזֵרוֹ, עַל שְׁתֵּי צַלְעֹתָיו--תַּעֲשֶׂה, עַל-שְׁנֵי צִדָּיו; וְהָיָה לְבָתִּים לְבַדִּים, לָשֵׂאת אֹתוֹ בָּהֵמָּה.	4 And two golden rings shalt thou make for it under the crown thereof, upon the two ribs thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make them; and they shall be for places for staves wherewith to bear it.
30.5 ה  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַבַּדִּים, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים; וְצִפִּיתָ אֹתָם, זָהָב.	5 And thou shalt make the staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with gold.
30.6 ו  וְנָתַתָּה אֹתוֹ לִפְנֵי הַפָּרֹכֶת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-אֲרֹן הָעֵדֻת--לִפְנֵי הַכַּפֹּרֶת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָעֵדֻת, אֲשֶׁר אִוָּעֵד לְךָ, שָׁמָּה.	6 And thou shalt put it before the veil that is by the ark of the testimony, before the ark-cover that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
30.7 ז  וְהִקְטִיר עָלָיו אַהֲרֹן, קְטֹרֶת סַמִּים; בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר, בְּהֵיטִיבוֹ אֶת-הַנֵּרֹת--יַקְטִירֶנָּה.	7 And Aaron shall burn thereon incense of sweet spices; every morning, when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn it.
30.8 ח  וּבְהַעֲלֹת אַהֲרֹן אֶת-הַנֵּרֹת בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם, יַקְטִירֶנָּה--קְטֹרֶת תָּמִיד לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.	8 And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at dusk, he shall burn it, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your generations.
30.9 ט  לֹא-תַעֲלוּ עָלָיו קְטֹרֶת זָרָה, וְעֹלָה וּמִנְחָה; וְנֵסֶךְ, לֹא תִסְּכוּ עָלָיו.	9 Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt-offering, nor meal-offering; and ye shall pour no drink-offering thereon.
30.10 י  וְכִפֶּר אַהֲרֹן עַל-קַרְנֹתָיו, אַחַת בַּשָּׁנָה:  מִדַּם חַטַּאת הַכִּפֻּרִים, אַחַת בַּשָּׁנָה יְכַפֵּר עָלָיו לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם--קֹדֶשׁ-קָדָשִׁים הוּא, לַיהוָה.  {פ}	10 And Aaron shall make atonement upon the horns of it once in the year; with the blood of the sin-offering of atonement once in the year shall he make atonement for it throughout your generations; it is most holy unto the LORD.' {P}
30.11 יא  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	11 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
30.12 יב  כִּי תִשָּׂא אֶת-רֹאשׁ בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם, וְנָתְנוּ אִישׁ כֹּפֶר נַפְשׁוֹ לַיהוָה, בִּפְקֹד אֹתָם; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה בָהֶם נֶגֶף, בִּפְקֹד אֹתָם.	12 'When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel, according to their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.
30.13 יג  זֶה יִתְּנוּ, כָּל-הָעֹבֵר עַל-הַפְּקֻדִים--מַחֲצִית הַשֶּׁקֶל, בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  עֶשְׂרִים גֵּרָה, הַשֶּׁקֶל--מַחֲצִית הַשֶּׁקֶל, תְּרוּמָה לַיהוָה.	13 This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary--the shekel is twenty gerahs--half a shekel for an offering to the LORD.
30.14 יד  כֹּל, הָעֹבֵר עַל-הַפְּקֻדִים, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וָמָעְלָה--יִתֵּן, תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה.	14 Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the offering of the LORD.
30.15 טו  הֶעָשִׁיר לֹא-יַרְבֶּה, וְהַדַּל לֹא יַמְעִיט, מִמַּחֲצִית, הַשָּׁקֶל--לָתֵת אֶת-תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה, לְכַפֵּר עַל-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם.	15 The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less, than the half shekel, when they give the offering of the LORD, to make atonement for your souls.
30.16 טז  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-כֶּסֶף הַכִּפֻּרִים, מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְנָתַתָּ אֹתוֹ, עַל-עֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְהָיָה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לְזִכָּרוֹן לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְכַפֵּר עַל-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם.  {פ}	16 And thou shalt take the atonement money from the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tent of meeting, that it may be a memorial for the children of Israel before the LORD, to make atonement for your souls.' {P}
30.17 יז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	17 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
30.18 יח  וְעָשִׂיתָ כִּיּוֹר נְחֹשֶׁת, וְכַנּוֹ נְחֹשֶׁת--לְרָחְצָה; וְנָתַתָּ אֹתוֹ, בֵּין-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד וּבֵין הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְנָתַתָּ שָׁמָּה, מָיִם.	18 'Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and the base thereof of brass, whereat to wash; and thou shalt put it between the tent of meeting and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.
30.19 יט  וְרָחֲצוּ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, מִמֶּנּוּ, אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, וְאֶת-רַגְלֵיהֶם.	19 And Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat;
30.20 כ  בְּבֹאָם אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, יִרְחֲצוּ-מַיִם--וְלֹא יָמֻתוּ; אוֹ בְגִשְׁתָּם אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ לְשָׁרֵת, לְהַקְטִיר אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.	20 when they go into the tent of meeting, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to cause an offering made by fire to smoke unto the LORD;
30.21 כא  וְרָחֲצוּ יְדֵיהֶם וְרַגְלֵיהֶם, וְלֹא יָמֻתוּ; וְהָיְתָה לָהֶם חָק-עוֹלָם לוֹ וּלְזַרְעוֹ, לְדֹרֹתָם.  {פ}	21 so they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not; and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.' {P}
30.22 כב  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	22 Moreover the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
30.23 כג  וְאַתָּה קַח-לְךָ, בְּשָׂמִים רֹאשׁ, מָר-דְּרוֹר חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת, וְקִנְּמָן-בֶּשֶׂם מַחֲצִיתוֹ חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתָיִם; וּקְנֵה-בֹשֶׂם, חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתָיִם.	23 'Take thou also unto thee the chief spices, of flowing myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty,
30.24 כד  וְקִדָּה, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וְשֶׁמֶן זַיִת, הִין.	24 and of cassia five hundred, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of olive oil a hin.
30.25 כה  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֹתוֹ, שֶׁמֶן מִשְׁחַת-קֹדֶשׁ--רֹקַח מִרְקַחַת, מַעֲשֵׂה רֹקֵחַ; שֶׁמֶן מִשְׁחַת-קֹדֶשׁ, יִהְיֶה.	25 And thou shalt make it a holy anointing oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer; it shall be a holy anointing oil.
30.26 כו  וּמָשַׁחְתָּ בוֹ, אֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֵת, אֲרוֹן הָעֵדֻת.	26 And thou shalt anoint therewith the tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony,
30.27 כז  וְאֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְאֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה, וְאֶת-כֵּלֶיהָ; וְאֵת, מִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת.	27 and the table and all the vessels thereof, and the candlestick and the vessels thereof, and the altar of incense,
30.28 כח  וְאֶת-מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; וְאֶת-הַכִּיֹּר, וְאֶת-כַּנּוֹ.	28 and the altar of burnt-offering with all the vessels thereof, and the laver and the base thereof.
30.29 כט  וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֹתָם, וְהָיוּ קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים; כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בָּהֶם, יִקְדָּשׁ.	29 And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy; whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.
30.30 ל  וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, תִּמְשָׁח; וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֹתָם, לְכַהֵן לִי.	30 And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto Me in the priest's office.
30.31 לא  וְאֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, תְּדַבֵּר לֵאמֹר:  שֶׁמֶן מִשְׁחַת-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה זֶה, לִי--לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.	31 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying: This shall be a holy anointing oil unto Me throughout your generations.
30.32 לב  עַל-בְּשַׂר אָדָם, לֹא יִיסָךְ, וּבְמַתְכֻּנְתּוֹ, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ כָּמֹהוּ; קֹדֶשׁ הוּא, קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם.	32 Upon the flesh of man shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any like it, according to the composition thereof; it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you.
30.33 לג  אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר יִרְקַח כָּמֹהוּ, וַאֲשֶׁר יִתֵּן מִמֶּנּוּ עַל-זָר--וְנִכְרַת, מֵעַמָּיו.  {ס}	33 Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut off from his people.' {S}
30.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה קַח-לְךָ סַמִּים, נָטָף וּשְׁחֵלֶת וְחֶלְבְּנָה, סַמִּים, וּלְבֹנָה זַכָּה:  בַּד בְּבַד, יִהְיֶה.	34 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; sweet spices with pure frankincense; of each shall there be a like weight.
30.35 לה  וְעָשִׂיתָ אֹתָהּ קְטֹרֶת, רֹקַח מַעֲשֵׂה רוֹקֵחַ, מְמֻלָּח, טָהוֹר קֹדֶשׁ.	35 And thou shalt make of it incense, a perfume after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure and holy.
30.36 לו  וְשָׁחַקְתָּ מִמֶּנָּה, הָדֵק, וְנָתַתָּה מִמֶּנָּה לִפְנֵי הָעֵדֻת בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, אֲשֶׁר אִוָּעֵד לְךָ שָׁמָּה; קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, תִּהְיֶה לָכֶם.	36 And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will meet with thee; it shall be unto you most holy.
30.37 לז  וְהַקְּטֹרֶת, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה--בְּמַתְכֻּנְתָּהּ, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ לָכֶם; קֹדֶשׁ תִּהְיֶה לְךָ, לַיהוָה.	37 And the incense which thou shalt make, according to the composition thereof ye shall not make for yourselves; it shall be unto thee holy for the LORD.
30.38 לח  אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה כָמוֹהָ, לְהָרִיחַ בָּהּ--וְנִכְרַת, מֵעַמָּיו.  {ס}	38 Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereof, he shall be cut off from his people.' {S}
31.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
31.2 ב  רְאֵה, קָרָאתִי בְשֵׁם, בְּצַלְאֵל בֶּן-אוּרִי בֶן-חוּר, לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה.	2 'See, I have called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;
31.3 ג  וָאֲמַלֵּא אֹתוֹ, רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים, בְּחָכְמָה וּבִתְבוּנָה וּבְדַעַת, וּבְכָל-מְלָאכָה.	3 and I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
31.4 ד  לַחְשֹׁב, מַחֲשָׁבֹת; לַעֲשׂוֹת בַּזָּהָב וּבַכֶּסֶף, וּבַנְּחֹשֶׁת.	4 to devise skilful works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
31.5 ה  וּבַחֲרֹשֶׁת אֶבֶן לְמַלֹּאת, וּבַחֲרֹשֶׁת עֵץ; לַעֲשׂוֹת, בְּכָל-מְלָאכָה.	5 and in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all manner of workmanship.
31.6 ו  וַאֲנִי הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי אִתּוֹ, אֵת אָהֳלִיאָב בֶּן-אֲחִיסָמָךְ לְמַטֵּה-דָן, וּבְלֵב כָּל-חֲכַם-לֵב, נָתַתִּי חָכְמָה; וְעָשׂוּ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִךָ.	6 And I, behold, I have appointed with him Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; and in the hearts of all that are wise-hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee:
31.7 ז  אֵת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֶת-הָאָרֹן לָעֵדֻת, וְאֶת-הַכַּפֹּרֶת, אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו; וְאֵת, כָּל-כְּלֵי הָאֹהֶל.	7 the tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony, and the ark-cover that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the Tent;
31.8 ח  וְאֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, וְאֶת-כֵּלָיו, וְאֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה הַטְּהֹרָה, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלֶיהָ; וְאֵת, מִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת.	8 and the table and its vessels, and the pure candlestick with all its vessels, and the altar of incense;
31.9 ט  וְאֶת-מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; וְאֶת-הַכִּיּוֹר, וְאֶת-כַּנּוֹ.	9 and the altar of burnt-offering with all its vessels, and the laver and its base;
31.10 י  וְאֵת, בִּגְדֵי הַשְּׂרָד; וְאֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ לְאַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶת-בִּגְדֵי בָנָיו לְכַהֵן.	10 and the plaited garments, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office;
31.11 יא  וְאֵת שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה וְאֶת-קְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים, לַקֹּדֶשׁ:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתִךָ, יַעֲשׂוּ.  {פ}	11 and the anointing oil, and the incense of sweet spices for the holy place; according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.' {P}
31.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	12 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
31.13 יג  וְאַתָּה דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר, אַךְ אֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתַי, תִּשְׁמֹרוּ:  כִּי אוֹת הִוא בֵּינִי וּבֵינֵיכֶם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם--לָדַעַת, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה מְקַדִּשְׁכֶם.	13 'Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying: Verily ye shall keep My sabbaths, for it is a sign between Me and you throughout your generations, that ye may know that I am the LORD who sanctify you.
31.14 יד  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֶת-הַשַּׁבָּת, כִּי קֹדֶשׁ הִוא, לָכֶם; מְחַלְלֶיהָ, מוֹת יוּמָת--כִּי כָּל-הָעֹשֶׂה בָהּ מְלָאכָה, וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא מִקֶּרֶב עַמֶּיהָ.	14 Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you; every one that profaneth it shall surely be put to death; for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
31.15 טו  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים, יֵעָשֶׂה מְלָאכָה, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן קֹדֶשׁ, לַיהוָה; כָּל-הָעֹשֶׂה מְלָאכָה בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, מוֹת יוּמָת.	15 Six days shall work be done; but on the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to the LORD; whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
31.16 טז  וְשָׁמְרוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַשַּׁבָּת, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-הַשַּׁבָּת לְדֹרֹתָם, בְּרִית עוֹלָם.	16 Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.
31.17 יז  בֵּינִי, וּבֵין בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אוֹת הִוא, לְעֹלָם:  כִּי-שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים, עָשָׂה יְהוָה אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, שָׁבַת וַיִּנָּפַשׁ.  {ס}	17 It is a sign between Me and the children of Israel for ever; for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day He ceased from work and rested.' {S}
31.18 יח  וַיִּתֵּן אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כְּכַלֹּתוֹ לְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ בְּהַר סִינַי, שְׁנֵי, לֻחֹת הָעֵדֻת--לֻחֹת אֶבֶן, כְּתֻבִים בְּאֶצְבַּע אֱלֹהִים.	18 And He gave unto Moses, when He had made an end of speaking with him upon mount Sinai, the two tables of the testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.
32.1 א  וַיַּרְא הָעָם, כִּי-בֹשֵׁשׁ מֹשֶׁה לָרֶדֶת מִן-הָהָר; וַיִּקָּהֵל הָעָם עַל-אַהֲרֹן, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו קוּם עֲשֵׂה-לָנוּ אֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר יֵלְכוּ לְפָנֵינוּ--כִּי-זֶה מֹשֶׁה הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָנוּ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לֹא יָדַעְנוּ מֶה-הָיָה לוֹ.	1 And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him: 'Up, make us a god who shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.'
32.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, אַהֲרֹן, פָּרְקוּ נִזְמֵי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר בְּאָזְנֵי נְשֵׁיכֶם בְּנֵיכֶם וּבְנֹתֵיכֶם; וְהָבִיאוּ, אֵלָי.	2 And Aaron said unto them: 'Break off the golden rings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me.'
32.3 ג  וַיִּתְפָּרְקוּ, כָּל-הָעָם, אֶת-נִזְמֵי הַזָּהָב, אֲשֶׁר בְּאָזְנֵיהֶם; וַיָּבִיאוּ, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן.	3 And all the people broke off the golden rings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.
32.4 ד  וַיִּקַּח מִיָּדָם, וַיָּצַר אֹתוֹ בַּחֶרֶט, וַיַּעֲשֵׂהוּ, עֵגֶל מַסֵּכָה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ--אֵלֶּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלוּךָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	4 And he received it at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, and made it a molten calf; and they said: 'This is thy god, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'
32.5 ה  וַיַּרְא אַהֲרֹן, וַיִּבֶן מִזְבֵּחַ לְפָנָיו; וַיִּקְרָא אַהֲרֹן וַיֹּאמַר, חַג לַיהוָה מָחָר.	5 And when Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said: 'To-morrow shall be a feast to the LORD.'
32.6 ו  וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיַּעֲלוּ עֹלֹת, וַיַּגִּשׁוּ שְׁלָמִים; וַיֵּשֶׁב הָעָם לֶאֱכֹל וְשָׁתוֹ, וַיָּקֻמוּ לְצַחֵק.  {פ}	6 And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt-offerings, and brought peace-offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to make merry. {P}
32.7 ז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  לֶךְ-רֵד--כִּי שִׁחֵת עַמְּךָ, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלֵיתָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	7 And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 'Go, get thee down; for thy people, that thou broughtest up out of the land of Egypt, have dealt corruptly;
32.8 ח  סָרוּ מַהֵר, מִן-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִם--עָשׂוּ לָהֶם, עֵגֶל מַסֵּכָה; וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ-לוֹ, וַיִּזְבְּחוּ-לוֹ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֵלֶּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלוּךָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	8 they have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed unto it, and said: This is thy god, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.'
32.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  רָאִיתִי אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, וְהִנֵּה עַם-קְשֵׁה-עֹרֶף הוּא.	9 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people.
32.10 י  וְעַתָּה הַנִּיחָה לִּי, וְיִחַר-אַפִּי בָהֶם וַאֲכַלֵּם; וְאֶעֱשֶׂה אוֹתְךָ, לְגוֹי גָּדוֹל.	10 Now therefore let Me alone, that My wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great nation.'
32.11 יא  וַיְחַל מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר, לָמָה יְהוָה יֶחֱרֶה אַפְּךָ בְּעַמֶּךָ, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, בְּכֹחַ גָּדוֹל וּבְיָד חֲזָקָה.	11 And Moses besought the LORD his God, and said: 'LORD, why doth Thy wrath wax hot against Thy people, that Thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand?
32.12 יב  לָמָּה יֹאמְרוּ מִצְרַיִם לֵאמֹר, בְּרָעָה הוֹצִיאָם לַהֲרֹג אֹתָם בֶּהָרִים, וּלְכַלֹּתָם, מֵעַל פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה; שׁוּב מֵחֲרוֹן אַפֶּךָ, וְהִנָּחֵם עַל-הָרָעָה לְעַמֶּךָ.	12 Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, saying: For evil did He bring them forth, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from Thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against Thy people.
32.13 יג  זְכֹר לְאַבְרָהָם לְיִצְחָק וּלְיִשְׂרָאֵל עֲבָדֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתָּ לָהֶם בָּךְ, וַתְּדַבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם, אַרְבֶּה אֶת-זַרְעֲכֶם כְּכוֹכְבֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְכָל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתִּי, אֶתֵּן לְזַרְעֲכֶם, וְנָחֲלוּ, לְעֹלָם.	13 Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, Thy servants, to whom Thou didst swear by Thine own self, and saidst unto them: I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.'
32.14 יד  וַיִּנָּחֶם, יְהוָה, עַל-הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר לַעֲשׂוֹת לְעַמּוֹ.  {פ}	14 And the LORD repented of the evil which He said He would do unto His people. {P}
32.15 טו  וַיִּפֶן וַיֵּרֶד מֹשֶׁה, מִן-הָהָר, וּשְׁנֵי לֻחֹת הָעֵדֻת, בְּיָדוֹ:  לֻחֹת, כְּתֻבִים מִשְּׁנֵי עֶבְרֵיהֶם--מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה, הֵם כְּתֻבִים.	15 And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, with the two tables of the testimony in his hand; tables that were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.
32.16 טז  וְהַלֻּחֹת--מַעֲשֵׂה אֱלֹהִים, הֵמָּה; וְהַמִּכְתָּב, מִכְתַּב אֱלֹהִים הוּא--חָרוּת, עַל-הַלֻּחֹת.	16 And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.
32.17 יז  וַיִּשְׁמַע יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-קוֹל הָעָם, בְּרֵעֹה; וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, קוֹל מִלְחָמָה, בַּמַּחֲנֶה.	17 And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses: 'There is a noise of war in the camp.'
32.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵין קוֹל עֲנוֹת גְּבוּרָה, וְאֵין קוֹל, עֲנוֹת חֲלוּשָׁה; קוֹל עַנּוֹת, אָנֹכִי שֹׁמֵעַ.	18 And he said: 'It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome, but the noise of them that sing do I hear.'
32.19 יט  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר קָרַב אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיַּרְא אֶת-הָעֵגֶל, וּמְחֹלֹת; וַיִּחַר-אַף מֹשֶׁה, וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ מִיָּדָו אֶת-הַלֻּחֹת, וַיְשַׁבֵּר אֹתָם, תַּחַת הָהָר.	19 And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf and the dancing; and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and broke them beneath the mount.
32.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הָעֵגֶל אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ, וַיִּשְׂרֹף בָּאֵשׁ, וַיִּטְחַן, עַד אֲשֶׁר-דָּק; וַיִּזֶר עַל-פְּנֵי הַמַּיִם, וַיַּשְׁקְ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	20 And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it with fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.
32.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, מֶה-עָשָׂה לְךָ הָעָם הַזֶּה:  כִּי-הֵבֵאתָ עָלָיו, חֲטָאָה גְדֹלָה.	21 And Moses said unto Aaron: 'What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought a great sin upon them?'
32.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר אַהֲרֹן, אַל-יִחַר אַף אֲדֹנִי; אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-הָעָם, כִּי בְרָע הוּא.	22 And Aaron said: 'Let not the anger of my lord wax hot; thou knowest the people, that they are set on evil.
32.23 כג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לִי--עֲשֵׂה-לָנוּ אֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר יֵלְכוּ לְפָנֵינוּ:  כִּי-זֶה מֹשֶׁה הָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָנוּ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם--לֹא יָדַעְנוּ, מֶה-הָיָה לוֹ.	23 So they said unto me: Make us a god, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.
32.24 כד  וָאֹמַר לָהֶם לְמִי זָהָב, הִתְפָּרָקוּ וַיִּתְּנוּ-לִי; וָאַשְׁלִכֵהוּ בָאֵשׁ, וַיֵּצֵא הָעֵגֶל הַזֶּה.	24 And I said unto them: Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off; so they gave it me; and I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.'
32.25 כה  וַיַּרְא מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הָעָם, כִּי פָרֻעַ הוּא:  כִּי-פְרָעֹה אַהֲרֹן, לְשִׁמְצָה בְּקָמֵיהֶם.	25 And when Moses saw that the people were broken loose--for Aaron had let them loose for a derision among their enemies--
32.26 כו  וַיַּעֲמֹד מֹשֶׁה, בְּשַׁעַר הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי לַיהוָה אֵלָי; וַיֵּאָסְפוּ אֵלָיו, כָּל-בְּנֵי לֵוִי.	26 then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said: 'Whoso is on the LORD'S side, let him come unto me.' And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
32.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׂימוּ אִישׁ-חַרְבּוֹ, עַל-יְרֵכוֹ; עִבְרוּ וָשׁוּבוּ מִשַּׁעַר לָשַׁעַר, בַּמַּחֲנֶה, וְהִרְגוּ אִישׁ-אֶת-אָחִיו וְאִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ, וְאִישׁ אֶת-קְרֹבוֹ.	27 And he said unto them: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Put ye every man his sword upon his thigh, and go to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.'
32.28 כח  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-לֵוִי, כִּדְבַר מֹשֶׁה; וַיִּפֹּל מִן-הָעָם בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כִּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אַלְפֵי אִישׁ.	28 And the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses; and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.
32.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, מִלְאוּ יֶדְכֶם הַיּוֹם לַיהוָה, כִּי אִישׁ בִּבְנוֹ, וּבְאָחִיו--וְלָתֵת עֲלֵיכֶם הַיּוֹם, בְּרָכָה.	29 And Moses said: 'Consecrate yourselves to-day to the LORD, for every man hath been against his son and against his brother; that He may also bestow upon you a blessing this day.'
32.30 ל  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָעָם, אַתֶּם חֲטָאתֶם חֲטָאָה גְדֹלָה; וְעַתָּה אֶעֱלֶה אֶל-יְהוָה, אוּלַי אֲכַפְּרָה בְּעַד חַטַּאתְכֶם.	30 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people: 'Ye have sinned a great sin; and now I will go up unto the LORD, peradventure I shall make atonement for your sin.'
32.31 לא  וַיָּשָׁב מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  אָנָּא, חָטָא הָעָם הַזֶּה חֲטָאָה גְדֹלָה, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ לָהֶם, אֱלֹהֵי זָהָב.	31 And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said: 'Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them a god of gold.
32.32 לב  וְעַתָּה, אִם-תִּשָּׂא חַטָּאתָם; וְאִם-אַיִן--מְחֵנִי נָא, מִסִּפְרְךָ אֲשֶׁר כָּתָבְתָּ.	32 Yet now, if Thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, I pray Thee, out of Thy book which Thou hast written.'
32.33 לג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  מִי אֲשֶׁר חָטָא-לִי, אֶמְחֶנּוּ מִסִּפְרִי.	33 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Whosoever hath sinned against Me, him will I blot out of My book.
32.34 לד  וְעַתָּה לֵךְ נְחֵה אֶת-הָעָם, אֶל אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי לָךְ--הִנֵּה מַלְאָכִי, יֵלֵךְ לְפָנֶיךָ; וּבְיוֹם פָּקְדִי, וּפָקַדְתִּי עֲלֵהֶם חַטָּאתָם.	34 And now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee; behold, Mine angel shall go before thee; nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them.'
32.35 לה  וַיִּגֹּף יְהוָה, אֶת-הָעָם, עַל אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֶת-הָעֵגֶל, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אַהֲרֹן.  {ס}	35 And the LORD smote the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made. {S}
33.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, לֵךְ עֲלֵה מִזֶּה--אַתָּה וְהָעָם, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלִיתָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי לְאַבְרָהָם לְיִצְחָק וּלְיַעֲקֹב לֵאמֹר, לְזַרְעֲךָ, אֶתְּנֶנָּה.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses: 'Depart, go up hence, thou and the people that thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land of which I swore unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying: Unto thy seed will I give it--
33.2 ב  וְשָׁלַחְתִּי לְפָנֶיךָ, מַלְאָךְ; וְגֵרַשְׁתִּי, אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי הָאֱמֹרִי, וְהַחִתִּי וְהַפְּרִזִּי, הַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי.	2 and I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite--
33.3 ג  אֶל-אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב, וּדְבָשׁ:  כִּי לֹא אֶעֱלֶה בְּקִרְבְּךָ, כִּי עַם-קְשֵׁה-עֹרֶף אַתָּה--פֶּן-אֲכֶלְךָ, בַּדָּרֶךְ.	3 unto a land flowing with milk and honey; for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people; lest I consume thee in the way.'
33.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁמַע הָעָם, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הָרָע הַזֶּה--וַיִּתְאַבָּלוּ; וְלֹא-שָׁתוּ אִישׁ עֶדְיוֹ, עָלָיו.	4 And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned; and no man did put on him his ornaments.
33.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֱמֹר אֶל-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אַתֶּם עַם-קְשֵׁה-עֹרֶף--רֶגַע אֶחָד אֶעֱלֶה בְקִרְבְּךָ, וְכִלִּיתִיךָ; וְעַתָּה, הוֹרֵד עֶדְיְךָ מֵעָלֶיךָ, וְאֵדְעָה, מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ.	5 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Say unto the children of Israel: Ye are a stiffnecked people; if I go up into the midst of thee for one moment, I shall consume thee; therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.'
33.6 ו  וַיִּתְנַצְּלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-עֶדְיָם, מֵהַר חוֹרֵב.	6 And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from mount Horeb onward.
33.7 ז  וּמֹשֶׁה יִקַּח אֶת-הָאֹהֶל וְנָטָה-לוֹ מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, הַרְחֵק מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וְקָרָא לוֹ, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְהָיָה, כָּל-מְבַקֵּשׁ יְהוָה, יֵצֵא אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, אֲשֶׁר מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה.	7 Now Moses used to take the tent and to pitch it without the camp, afar off from the camp; and he called it the tent of meeting. And it came to pass, that every one that sought the LORD went out unto the tent of meeting, which was without the camp.
33.8 ח  וְהָיָה, כְּצֵאת מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָאֹהֶל, יָקוּמוּ כָּל-הָעָם, וְנִצְּבוּ אִישׁ פֶּתַח אָהֳלוֹ; וְהִבִּיטוּ אַחֲרֵי מֹשֶׁה, עַד-בֹּאוֹ הָאֹהֱלָה.	8 And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the Tent, that all the people rose up, and stood, every man at his tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the Tent.
33.9 ט  וְהָיָה, כְּבֹא מֹשֶׁה הָאֹהֱלָה, יֵרֵד עַמּוּד הֶעָנָן, וְעָמַד פֶּתַח הָאֹהֶל; וְדִבֶּר, עִם-מֹשֶׁה.	9 And it came to pass, when Moses entered into the Tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the door of the Tent; and [the LORD] spoke with Moses.
33.10 י  וְרָאָה כָל-הָעָם אֶת-עַמּוּד הֶעָנָן, עֹמֵד פֶּתַח הָאֹהֶל; וְקָם כָּל-הָעָם וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ, אִישׁ פֶּתַח אָהֳלוֹ.	10 And when all the people saw the pillar of cloud stand at the door of the Tent, all the people rose up and worshipped, every man at his tent door.
33.11 יא  וְדִבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה פָּנִים אֶל-פָּנִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר יְדַבֵּר אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ; וְשָׁב, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וּמְשָׁרְתוֹ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן נַעַר, לֹא יָמִישׁ מִתּוֹךְ הָאֹהֶל.  {פ}	11 And the LORD spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he would return into the camp; but his minister Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the Tent. {P}
33.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, רְאֵה אַתָּה אֹמֵר אֵלַי הַעַל אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, וְאַתָּה לֹא הוֹדַעְתַּנִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תִּשְׁלַח עִמִּי; וְאַתָּה אָמַרְתָּ יְדַעְתִּיךָ בְשֵׁם, וְגַם-מָצָאתָ חֵן בְּעֵינָי.	12 And Moses said unto the LORD: 'See, Thou sayest unto me: Bring up this people; and Thou hast not let me know whom Thou wilt send with me. Yet Thou hast said: I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in My sight.
33.13 יג  וְעַתָּה אִם-נָא מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ, הוֹדִעֵנִי נָא אֶת-דְּרָכֶךָ, וְאֵדָעֲךָ, לְמַעַן אֶמְצָא-חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ; וּרְאֵה, כִּי עַמְּךָ הַגּוֹי הַזֶּה.	13 Now therefore, I pray Thee, if I have found grace in Thy sight, show me now Thy ways, that I may know Thee, to the end that I may find grace in Thy sight; and consider that this nation is Thy people.'
33.14 יד  וַיֹּאמַר:  פָּנַי יֵלֵכוּ, וַהֲנִחֹתִי לָךְ.	14 And He said: 'My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.'
33.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָיו:  אִם-אֵין פָּנֶיךָ הֹלְכִים, אַל-תַּעֲלֵנוּ מִזֶּה.	15 And he said unto Him: 'If Thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.
33.16 טז  וּבַמֶּה יִוָּדַע אֵפוֹא, כִּי-מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ אֲנִי וְעַמֶּךָ--הֲלוֹא, בְּלֶכְתְּךָ עִמָּנוּ; וְנִפְלִינוּ, אֲנִי וְעַמְּךָ, מִכָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.  {פ}	16 For wherein now shall it be known that I have found grace in Thy sight, I and Thy people? is it not in that Thou goest with us, so that we are distinguished, I and Thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth?' {P}
33.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, גַּם אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ אֶעֱשֶׂה:  כִּי-מָצָאתָ חֵן בְּעֵינַי, וָאֵדָעֲךָ בְּשֵׁם.	17 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken, for thou hast found grace in My sight, and I know thee by name.'
33.18 יח  וַיֹּאמַר:  הַרְאֵנִי נָא, אֶת-כְּבֹדֶךָ.	18 And he said: 'Show me, I pray Thee, Thy glory.'
33.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֲנִי אַעֲבִיר כָּל-טוּבִי עַל-פָּנֶיךָ, וְקָרָאתִי בְשֵׁם יְהוָה, לְפָנֶיךָ; וְחַנֹּתִי אֶת-אֲשֶׁר אָחֹן, וְרִחַמְתִּי אֶת-אֲשֶׁר אֲרַחֵם.	19 And He said: 'I will make all My goodness pass before thee, and will proclaim the name of the LORD before thee; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.'
33.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא תוּכַל לִרְאֹת אֶת-פָּנָי:  כִּי לֹא-יִרְאַנִי הָאָדָם, וָחָי.	20 And He said: 'Thou canst not see My face, for man shall not see Me and live.'
33.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה מָקוֹם אִתִּי; וְנִצַּבְתָּ, עַל-הַצּוּר.	21 And the LORD said: 'Behold, there is a place by Me, and thou shalt stand upon the rock.
33.22 כב  וְהָיָה בַּעֲבֹר כְּבֹדִי, וְשַׂמְתִּיךָ בְּנִקְרַת הַצּוּר; וְשַׂכֹּתִי כַפִּי עָלֶיךָ, עַד-עָבְרִי.	22 And it shall come to pass, while My glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with My hand until I have passed by.
33.23 כג  וַהֲסִרֹתִי, אֶת-כַּפִּי, וְרָאִיתָ, אֶת-אֲחֹרָי; וּפָנַי, לֹא יֵרָאוּ.  {פ}	23 And I will take away My hand, and thou shalt see My back; but My face shall not be seen.' {P}
34.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, פְּסָל-לְךָ שְׁנֵי-לֻחֹת אֲבָנִים כָּרִאשֹׁנִים; וְכָתַבְתִּי, עַל-הַלֻּחֹת, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ עַל-הַלֻּחֹת הָרִאשֹׁנִים אֲשֶׁר שִׁבַּרְתָּ.	1 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first; and I will write upon the tables the words that were on the first tables, which thou didst break.
34.2 ב  וֶהְיֵה נָכוֹן, לַבֹּקֶר; וְעָלִיתָ בַבֹּקֶר אֶל-הַר סִינַי, וְנִצַּבְתָּ לִי שָׁם עַל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר.	2 And be ready by the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to Me on the top of the mount.
34.3 ג  וְאִישׁ לֹא-יַעֲלֶה עִמָּךְ, וְגַם-אִישׁ אַל-יֵרָא בְּכָל-הָהָר; גַּם-הַצֹּאן וְהַבָּקָר אַל-יִרְעוּ, אֶל-מוּל הָהָר הַהוּא.	3 And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.'
34.4 ד  וַיִּפְסֹל שְׁנֵי-לֻחֹת אֲבָנִים כָּרִאשֹׁנִים, וַיַּשְׁכֵּם מֹשֶׁה בַבֹּקֶר וַיַּעַל אֶל-הַר סִינַי, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֹתוֹ; וַיִּקַּח בְּיָדוֹ, שְׁנֵי לֻחֹת אֲבָנִים.	4 And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand two tables of stone.
34.5 ה  וַיֵּרֶד יְהוָה בֶּעָנָן, וַיִּתְיַצֵּב עִמּוֹ שָׁם; וַיִּקְרָא בְשֵׁם, יְהוָה.	5 And the LORD descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD.
34.6 ו  וַיַּעֲבֹר יְהוָה עַל-פָּנָיו, וַיִּקְרָא, יְהוָה יְהוָה, אֵל רַחוּם וְחַנּוּן--אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם, וְרַב-חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת.	6 And the LORD passed by before him, and proclaimed: 'The LORD, the LORD, God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth;
34.7 ז  נֹצֵר חֶסֶד לָאֲלָפִים, נֹשֵׂא עָוֺן וָפֶשַׁע וְחַטָּאָה; וְנַקֵּה, לֹא יְנַקֶּה--פֹּקֵד עֲוֺן אָבוֹת עַל-בָּנִים וְעַל-בְּנֵי בָנִים, עַל-שִׁלֵּשִׁים וְעַל-רִבֵּעִים.	7 keeping mercy unto the thousandth generation, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin; and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and unto the fourth generation.'
34.8 ח  וַיְמַהֵר, מֹשֶׁה; וַיִּקֹּד אַרְצָה, וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ.	8 And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.
34.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אִם-נָא מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ, אֲדֹנָי, יֵלֶךְ-נָא אֲדֹנָי, בְּקִרְבֵּנוּ:  כִּי עַם-קְשֵׁה-עֹרֶף הוּא, וְסָלַחְתָּ לַעֲוֺנֵנוּ וּלְחַטָּאתֵנוּ וּנְחַלְתָּנוּ.	9 And he said: 'If now I have found grace in Thy sight, O Lord, let the Lord, I pray Thee, go in the midst of us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for Thine inheritance.'
34.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי כֹּרֵת בְּרִית, נֶגֶד כָּל-עַמְּךָ אֶעֱשֶׂה נִפְלָאֹת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נִבְרְאוּ בְכָל-הָאָרֶץ וּבְכָל-הַגּוֹיִם; וְרָאָה כָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה בְקִרְבּוֹ אֶת-מַעֲשֵׂה יְהוָה, כִּי-נוֹרָא הוּא, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי, עֹשֶׂה עִמָּךְ.	10 And He said: 'Behold, I make a covenant; before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been wrought in all the earth, nor in any nation; and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the LORD that I am about to do with thee, that it is tremendous.
34.11 יא  שְׁמָר-לְךָ--אֵת אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי, מְצַוְּךָ הַיּוֹם; הִנְנִי גֹרֵשׁ מִפָּנֶיךָ, אֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי, וְהַחִתִּי וְהַפְּרִזִּי, וְהַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי.	11 Observe thou that which I am commanding thee this day; behold, I am driving out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
34.12 יב  הִשָּׁמֶר לְךָ, פֶּן-תִּכְרֹת בְּרִית לְיוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה, בָּא עָלֶיהָ:  פֶּן-יִהְיֶה לְמוֹקֵשׁ, בְּקִרְבֶּךָ.	12 Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest they be for a snare in the midst of thee.
34.13 יג  כִּי אֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתָם תִּתֹּצוּן, וְאֶת-מַצֵּבֹתָם תְּשַׁבֵּרוּן; וְאֶת-אֲשֵׁרָיו, תִּכְרֹתוּן.	13 But ye shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and ye shall cut down their Asherim.
34.14 יד  כִּי לֹא תִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה, לְאֵל אַחֵר:  כִּי יְהוָה קַנָּא שְׁמוֹ, אֵל קַנָּא הוּא.	14 For thou shalt bow down to no other god; for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God;
34.15 טו  פֶּן-תִּכְרֹת בְּרִית, לְיוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ; וְזָנוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וְזָבְחוּ לֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, וְקָרָא לְךָ, וְאָכַלְתָּ מִזִּבְחוֹ.	15 lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go astray after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and they call thee, and thou eat of their sacrifice;
34.16 טז  וְלָקַחְתָּ מִבְּנֹתָיו, לְבָנֶיךָ; וְזָנוּ בְנֹתָיו, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהֵיהֶן, וְהִזְנוּ אֶת-בָּנֶיךָ, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהֵיהֶן.	16 and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go astray after their gods, and make thy sons go astray after their gods.
34.17 יז  אֱלֹהֵי מַסֵּכָה, לֹא תַעֲשֶׂה-לָּךְ.	17 Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.
34.18 יח  אֶת-חַג הַמַּצּוֹת, תִּשְׁמֹר--שִׁבְעַת יָמִים תֹּאכַל מַצּוֹת אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִךָ, לְמוֹעֵד חֹדֶשׁ הָאָבִיב:  כִּי בְּחֹדֶשׁ הָאָבִיב, יָצָאתָ מִמִּצְרָיִם.	18 The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.
34.19 יט  כָּל-פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם, לִי; וְכָל-מִקְנְךָ תִּזָּכָר, פֶּטֶר שׁוֹר וָשֶׂה.	19 All that openeth the womb is Mine; and of all thy cattle thou shalt sanctify the males, the firstlings of ox and sheep.
34.20 כ  וּפֶטֶר חֲמוֹר תִּפְדֶּה בְשֶׂה, וְאִם-לֹא תִפְדֶּה וַעֲרַפְתּוֹ; כֹּל בְּכוֹר בָּנֶיךָ תִּפְדֶּה, וְלֹא-יֵרָאוּ פָנַי רֵיקָם.	20 And the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break its neck. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before Me empty.
34.21 כא  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים תַּעֲבֹד, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי תִּשְׁבֹּת; בֶּחָרִישׁ וּבַקָּצִיר, תִּשְׁבֹּת.	21 Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest; in plowing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.
34.22 כב  וְחַג שָׁבֻעֹת תַּעֲשֶׂה לְךָ, בִּכּוּרֵי קְצִיר חִטִּים; וְחַג, הָאָסִיף--תְּקוּפַת, הַשָּׁנָה.	22 And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, even of the first-fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the turn of the year.
34.23 כג  שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים, בַּשָּׁנָה--יֵרָאֶה, כָּל-זְכוּרְךָ, אֶת-פְּנֵי הָאָדֹן יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel.
34.24 כד  כִּי-אוֹרִישׁ גּוֹיִם מִפָּנֶיךָ, וְהִרְחַבְתִּי אֶת-גְּבֻלֶךָ; וְלֹא-יַחְמֹד אִישׁ, אֶת-אַרְצְךָ, בַּעֲלֹתְךָ לֵרָאוֹת אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים בַּשָּׁנָה.	24 For I will cast out nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders; neither shall any man covet thy land, when thou goest up to appear before the LORD thy God three times in the year.
34.25 כה  לֹא-תִשְׁחַט עַל-חָמֵץ, דַּם-זִבְחִי; וְלֹא-יָלִין לַבֹּקֶר, זֶבַח חַג הַפָּסַח.	25 Thou shalt not offer the blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning.
34.26 כו  רֵאשִׁית, בִּכּוּרֵי אַדְמָתְךָ, תָּבִיא, בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ; לֹא-תְבַשֵּׁל גְּדִי, בַּחֲלֵב אִמּוֹ.  {פ}	26 The choicest first-fruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in its mother's milk.' {P}
34.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כְּתָב-לְךָ אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה:  כִּי עַל-פִּי הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, כָּרַתִּי אִתְּךָ בְּרִית--וְאֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	27 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Write thou these words, for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.'
34.28 כח  וַיְהִי-שָׁם עִם-יְהוָה, אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם וְאַרְבָּעִים לַיְלָה--לֶחֶם לֹא אָכַל, וּמַיִם לֹא שָׁתָה; וַיִּכְתֹּב עַל-הַלֻּחֹת, אֵת דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית--עֲשֶׂרֶת, הַדְּבָרִים.	28 And he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten words.
34.29 כט  וַיְהִי, בְּרֶדֶת מֹשֶׁה מֵהַר סִינַי, וּשְׁנֵי לֻחֹת הָעֵדֻת בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה, בְּרִדְתּוֹ מִן-הָהָר; וּמֹשֶׁה לֹא-יָדַע, כִּי קָרַן עוֹר פָּנָיו--בְּדַבְּרוֹ אִתּוֹ.	29 And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of the testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses knew not that the skin of his face sent forth beams while He talked with him.
34.30 ל  וַיַּרְא אַהֲרֹן וְכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, וְהִנֵּה קָרַן, עוֹר פָּנָיו; וַיִּירְאוּ, מִגֶּשֶׁת אֵלָיו.	30 And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face sent forth beams; and they were afraid to come nigh him.
34.31 לא  וַיִּקְרָא אֲלֵהֶם מֹשֶׁה, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ אֵלָיו אַהֲרֹן וְכָל-הַנְּשִׂאִים בָּעֵדָה; וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה, אֲלֵהֶם.	31 And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him; and Moses spoke to them.
34.32 לב  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן נִגְּשׁוּ, כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְצַוֵּם--אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אִתּוֹ, בְּהַר סִינָי.	32 And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh, and he gave them in commandment all that the LORD had spoken with him in mount Sinai.
34.33 לג  וַיְכַל מֹשֶׁה, מִדַּבֵּר אִתָּם; וַיִּתֵּן עַל-פָּנָיו, מַסְוֶה.	33 And when Moses had done speaking with them, he put a veil on his face.
34.34 לד  וּבְבֹא מֹשֶׁה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ, יָסִיר אֶת-הַמַּסְוֶה, עַד-צֵאתוֹ; וְיָצָא, וְדִבֶּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵת, אֲשֶׁר יְצֻוֶּה.	34 But when Moses went in before the LORD that He might speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out; and he came out; and spoke unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.
34.35 לה  וְרָאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-פְּנֵי מֹשֶׁה, כִּי קָרַן, עוֹר פְּנֵי מֹשֶׁה; וְהֵשִׁיב מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַמַּסְוֶה עַל-פָּנָיו, עַד-בֹּאוֹ לְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ.  {ס}	35 And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face sent forth beams; and Moses put the veil back upon his face, until he went in to speak with Him. {S}
35.1 א  וַיַּקְהֵל מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם:  אֵלֶּה, הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, לַעֲשֹׂת אֹתָם.	1 And Moses assembled all the congregation of the children of Israel, and said unto them: 'These are the words which the LORD hath commanded, that ye should do them.
35.2 ב  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים, תֵּעָשֶׂה מְלָאכָה, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי יִהְיֶה לָכֶם קֹדֶשׁ שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן, לַיהוָה; כָּל-הָעֹשֶׂה בוֹ מְלָאכָה, יוּמָת.	2 Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of solemn rest to the LORD; whosoever doeth any work therein shall be put to death.
35.3 ג  לֹא-תְבַעֲרוּ אֵשׁ, בְּכֹל מֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם, בְּיוֹם, הַשַּׁבָּת.  {פ}	3 Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.' {P}
35.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	4 And Moses spoke unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying: 'This is the thing which the LORD commanded, saying:
35.5 ה  קְחוּ מֵאִתְּכֶם תְּרוּמָה, לַיהוָה, כֹּל נְדִיב לִבּוֹ, יְבִיאֶהָ אֵת תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה:  זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, וּנְחֹשֶׁת.	5 Take ye from among you an offering unto the LORD, whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, the LORD'S offering: gold, and silver, and brass;
35.6 ו  וּתְכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ וְעִזִּים.	6 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair;
35.7 ז  וְעֹרֹת אֵילִם מְאָדָּמִים וְעֹרֹת תְּחָשִׁים, וַעֲצֵי שִׁטִּים.	7 and rams' skins dyed red, and sealskins, and acacia-wood;
35.8 ח  וְשֶׁמֶן, לַמָּאוֹר; וּבְשָׂמִים לְשֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְלִקְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים.	8 and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense;
35.9 ט  וְאַבְנֵי-שֹׁהַם--וְאַבְנֵי, מִלֻּאִים:  לָאֵפוֹד, וְלַחֹשֶׁן.	9 and onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
35.10 י  וְכָל-חֲכַם-לֵב, בָּכֶם, יָבֹאוּ וְיַעֲשׂוּ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה.	10 And let every wise-hearted man among you come, and make all that the LORD hath commanded:
35.11 יא  אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן--אֶת-אָהֳלוֹ, וְאֶת-מִכְסֵהוּ; אֶת-קְרָסָיו, וְאֶת-קְרָשָׁיו, אֶת-בְּרִיחָו, אֶת-עַמֻּדָיו וְאֶת-אֲדָנָיו.	11 the tabernacle, its tent, and its covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its sockets;
35.12 יב  אֶת-הָאָרֹן וְאֶת-בַּדָּיו, אֶת-הַכַּפֹּרֶת; וְאֵת, פָּרֹכֶת הַמָּסָךְ.	12 the ark, and the staves thereof, the ark-cover, and the veil of the screen;
35.13 יג  אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן וְאֶת-בַּדָּיו, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; וְאֵת, לֶחֶם הַפָּנִים.	13 the table, and its staves, and all its vessels, and the showbread;
35.14 יד  וְאֶת-מְנֹרַת הַמָּאוֹר וְאֶת-כֵּלֶיהָ, וְאֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ; וְאֵת, שֶׁמֶן הַמָּאוֹר.	14 the candlestick also for the light, and its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil for the light;
35.15 טו  וְאֶת-מִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת, וְאֶת-בַּדָּיו, וְאֵת שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְאֵת קְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים; וְאֶת-מָסַךְ הַפֶּתַח, לְפֶתַח הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	15 and the altar of incense, and its staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for the door, at the door of the tabernacle;
35.16 טז  אֵת מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, וְאֶת-מִכְבַּר הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, אֶת-בַּדָּיו, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; אֶת-הַכִּיֹּר, וְאֶת-כַּנּוֹ.	16 the altar of burnt-offering, with its grating of brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base;
35.17 יז  אֵת קַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר, אֶת-עַמֻּדָיו וְאֶת-אֲדָנֶיהָ; וְאֵת, מָסַךְ שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר.	17 the hangings of the court, the pillars thereof, and their sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court;
35.18 יח  אֶת-יִתְדֹת הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְאֶת-יִתְדֹת הֶחָצֵר, וְאֶת-מֵיתְרֵיהֶם.	18 the pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords;
35.19 יט  אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַשְּׂרָד, לְשָׁרֵת בַּקֹּדֶשׁ:  אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ לְאַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶת-בִּגְדֵי בָנָיו לְכַהֵן.	19 the plaited garments, for ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.'
35.20 כ  וַיֵּצְאוּ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִלִּפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה.	20 And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
35.21 כא  וַיָּבֹאוּ, כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-נְשָׂאוֹ לִבּוֹ; וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר נָדְבָה רוּחוֹ אֹתוֹ, הֵבִיאוּ אֶת-תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה לִמְלֶאכֶת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד וּלְכָל-עֲבֹדָתוֹ, וּלְבִגְדֵי, הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	21 And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and brought the LORD'S offering, for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all the service thereof, and for the holy garments.
35.22 כב  וַיָּבֹאוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, עַל-הַנָּשִׁים; כֹּל נְדִיב לֵב, הֵבִיאוּ חָח וָנֶזֶם וְטַבַּעַת וְכוּמָז כָּל-כְּלִי זָהָב, וְכָל-אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר הֵנִיף תְּנוּפַת זָהָב לַיהוָה.	22 And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought nose-rings, and ear-rings, and signet-rings, and girdles, all jewels of gold; even every man that brought an offering of gold unto the LORD.
35.23 כג  וְכָל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-נִמְצָא אִתּוֹ, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--וְשֵׁשׁ וְעִזִּים; וְעֹרֹת אֵילִם מְאָדָּמִים וְעֹרֹת תְּחָשִׁים, הֵבִיאוּ.	23 And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and rams' skins dyed red, and sealskins, brought them.
35.24 כד  כָּל-מֵרִים, תְּרוּמַת כֶּסֶף וּנְחֹשֶׁת, הֵבִיאוּ, אֵת תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה; וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר נִמְצָא אִתּוֹ עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, לְכָל-מְלֶאכֶת הָעֲבֹדָה--הֵבִיאוּ.	24 Every one that did set apart an offering of silver and brass brought the LORD'S offering; and every man, with whom was found acacia-wood for any work of the service, brought it.
35.25 כה  וְכָל-אִשָּׁה חַכְמַת-לֵב, בְּיָדֶיהָ טָווּ; וַיָּבִיאוּ מַטְוֶה, אֶת-הַתְּכֵלֶת וְאֶת-הָאַרְגָּמָן, אֶת-תּוֹלַעַת הַשָּׁנִי, וְאֶת-הַשֵּׁשׁ.	25 And all the women that were wise-hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, the blue, and the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen.
35.26 כו  וְכָל-הַנָּשִׁים--אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂא לִבָּן אֹתָנָה, בְּחָכְמָה:  טָווּ, אֶת-הָעִזִּים.	26 And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun the goats' hair.
35.27 כז  וְהַנְּשִׂאִם הֵבִיאוּ--אֵת אַבְנֵי הַשֹּׁהַם, וְאֵת אַבְנֵי הַמִּלֻּאִים:  לָאֵפוֹד, וְלַחֹשֶׁן.	27 And the rulers brought the onyx stones, and the stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;
35.28 כח  וְאֶת-הַבֹּשֶׂם, וְאֶת-הַשָּׁמֶן:  לְמָאוֹר--וּלְשֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְלִקְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים.	28 and the spice, and the oil, for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
35.29 כט  כָּל-אִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה, אֲשֶׁר נָדַב לִבָּם אֹתָם, לְהָבִיא לְכָל-הַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה לַעֲשׂוֹת בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה--הֵבִיאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל נְדָבָה, לַיהוָה.  {פ}	29 The children of Israel brought a freewill-offering unto the LORD; every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all the work, which the LORD had commanded by the hand of Moses to be made. {P}
35.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, רְאוּ קָרָא יְהוָה בְּשֵׁם, בְּצַלְאֵל בֶּן-אוּרִי בֶן-חוּר, לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה.	30 And Moses said unto the children of Israel: 'See, the LORD hath called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.
35.31 לא  וַיְמַלֵּא אֹתוֹ, רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים, בְּחָכְמָה בִּתְבוּנָה וּבְדַעַת, וּבְכָל-מְלָאכָה.	31 And He hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship.
35.32 לב  וְלַחְשֹׁב, מַחֲשָׁבֹת--לַעֲשֹׂת בַּזָּהָב וּבַכֶּסֶף, וּבַנְּחֹשֶׁת.	32 And to devise skilful works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
35.33 לג  וּבַחֲרֹשֶׁת אֶבֶן לְמַלֹּאת, וּבַחֲרֹשֶׁת עֵץ; לַעֲשׂוֹת, בְּכָל-מְלֶאכֶת מַחֲשָׁבֶת.	33 and in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all manner of skilful workmanship.
35.34 לד  וּלְהוֹרֹת, נָתַן בְּלִבּוֹ:  הוּא, וְאָהֳלִיאָב בֶּן-אֲחִיסָמָךְ לְמַטֵּה-דָן.	34 And He hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.
35.35 לה  מִלֵּא אֹתָם חָכְמַת-לֵב, לַעֲשׂוֹת כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת חָרָשׁ וְחֹשֵׁב, וְרֹקֵם בַּתְּכֵלֶת וּבָאַרְגָּמָן בְּתוֹלַעַת הַשָּׁנִי וּבַשֵּׁשׁ, וְאֹרֵג; עֹשֵׂי, כָּל-מְלָאכָה, וְחֹשְׁבֵי, מַחֲשָׁבֹת.	35 Them hath He filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of workmanship, of the craftsman, and of the skilful workman, and of the weaver in colours, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any workmanship, and of those that devise skilful works.
36.1 א  וְעָשָׂה בְצַלְאֵל וְאָהֳלִיאָב וְכֹל אִישׁ חֲכַם-לֵב, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן יְהוָה חָכְמָה וּתְבוּנָה בָּהֵמָּה, לָדַעַת לַעֲשֹׂת, אֶת-כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ--לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה, יְהוָה.	1 And Bezalel and Oholiab shall work, and every wise-hearted man, in whom the LORD hath put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all the work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the LORD hath commanded.'
36.2 ב  וַיִּקְרָא מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-בְּצַלְאֵל וְאֶל-אָהֳלִיאָב, וְאֶל כָּל-אִישׁ חֲכַם-לֵב, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן יְהוָה חָכְמָה בְּלִבּוֹ--כֹּל אֲשֶׁר נְשָׂאוֹ לִבּוֹ, לְקָרְבָה אֶל-הַמְּלָאכָה לַעֲשֹׂת אֹתָהּ.	2 And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it.
36.3 ג  וַיִּקְחוּ מִלִּפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה, אֵת כָּל-הַתְּרוּמָה אֲשֶׁר הֵבִיאוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לִמְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ--לַעֲשֹׂת אֹתָהּ; וְהֵם הֵבִיאוּ אֵלָיו עוֹד, נְדָבָה--בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר.	3 And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, wherewith to make it. And they brought yet unto him freewill-offerings every morning.
36.4 ד  וַיָּבֹאוּ, כָּל-הַחֲכָמִים, הָעֹשִׂים, אֵת כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ--אִישׁ-אִישׁ מִמְּלַאכְתּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה עֹשִׂים.	4 And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they wrought.
36.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר, מַרְבִּים הָעָם לְהָבִיא, מִדֵּי הָעֲבֹדָה לַמְּלָאכָה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לַעֲשֹׂת אֹתָהּ.	5 And they spoke unto Moses, saying: 'The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the LORD commanded to make.'
36.6 ו  וַיְצַו מֹשֶׁה, וַיַּעֲבִירוּ קוֹל בַּמַּחֲנֶה לֵאמֹר, אִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה אַל-יַעֲשׂוּ-עוֹד מְלָאכָה, לִתְרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וַיִּכָּלֵא הָעָם, מֵהָבִיא.	6 And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying: 'Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary.' So the people were restrained from bringing.
36.7 ז  וְהַמְּלָאכָה, הָיְתָה דַיָּם לְכָל-הַמְּלָאכָה--לַעֲשׂוֹת אֹתָהּ; וְהוֹתֵר.  {ס}	7 For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much. {S}
36.8 ח  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ כָל-חֲכַם-לֵב בְּעֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה, אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן--עֶשֶׂר יְרִיעֹת:  שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, וּתְכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--כְּרֻבִים מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב, עָשָׂה אֹתָם.	8 And every wise-hearted man among them that wrought the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains: of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim the work of the skilful workman made he them.
36.9 ט  אֹרֶךְ הַיְרִיעָה הָאַחַת, שְׁמֹנֶה וְעֶשְׂרִים בָּאַמָּה, וְרֹחַב אַרְבַּע בָּאַמָּה, הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת:  מִדָּה אַחַת, לְכָל-הַיְרִיעֹת.	9 The length of each curtain was eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits; all the curtains had one measure.
36.10 י  וַיְחַבֵּר אֶת-חֲמֵשׁ הַיְרִיעֹת, אַחַת אֶל-אֶחָת; וְחָמֵשׁ יְרִיעֹת חִבַּר, אַחַת אֶל-אֶחָת.	10 And he coupled five curtains one to another; and the other five curtains he coupled one to another.
36.11 יא  וַיַּעַשׂ לֻלְאֹת תְּכֵלֶת, עַל שְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת, מִקָּצָה, בַּמַּחְבָּרֶת; כֵּן עָשָׂה, בִּשְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה, הַקִּיצוֹנָה, בַּמַּחְבֶּרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית.	11 And he made loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain that was outmost in the first set; likewise he made in the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the second set.
36.12 יב  חֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת, עָשָׂה בַּיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת, וַחֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת עָשָׂה בִּקְצֵה הַיְרִיעָה, אֲשֶׁר בַּמַּחְבֶּרֶת הַשֵּׁנִית:  מַקְבִּילֹת, הַלֻּלָאֹת--אַחַת, אֶל-אֶחָת.	12 Fifty loops made he in the one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain that was in the second set; the loops were opposite one to another.
36.13 יג  וַיַּעַשׂ, חֲמִשִּׁים קַרְסֵי זָהָב; וַיְחַבֵּר אֶת-הַיְרִיעֹת אַחַת אֶל-אַחַת, בַּקְּרָסִים, וַיְהִי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, אֶחָד.  {פ}	13 And he made fifty clasps of gold, and coupled the curtains one to another with the clasps; so the tabernacle was one. {P}
36.14 יד  וַיַּעַשׂ יְרִיעֹת עִזִּים, לְאֹהֶל עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן:  עַשְׁתֵּי-עֶשְׂרֵה יְרִיעֹת, עָשָׂה אֹתָם.	14 And he made curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle; eleven curtains he made them.
36.15 טו  אֹרֶךְ הַיְרִיעָה הָאַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים בָּאַמָּה, וְאַרְבַּע אַמּוֹת, רֹחַב הַיְרִיעָה הָאֶחָת:  מִדָּה אַחַת, לְעַשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה יְרִיעֹת.	15 The length of each curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits the breadth of each curtain; the eleven curtains had one measure.
36.16 טז  וַיְחַבֵּר אֶת-חֲמֵשׁ הַיְרִיעֹת, לְבָד; וְאֶת-שֵׁשׁ הַיְרִיעֹת, לְבָד.	16 And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
36.17 יז  וַיַּעַשׂ לֻלָאֹת חֲמִשִּׁים, עַל שְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה, הַקִּיצֹנָה, בַּמַּחְבָּרֶת; וַחֲמִשִּׁים לֻלָאֹת, עָשָׂה עַל-שְׂפַת הַיְרִיעָה, הַחֹבֶרֶת, הַשֵּׁנִית.	17 And he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the first set, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which was outmost in the second set.
36.18 יח  וַיַּעַשׂ קַרְסֵי נְחֹשֶׁת, חֲמִשִּׁים, לְחַבֵּר אֶת-הָאֹהֶל, לִהְיֹת אֶחָד.	18 And he made fifty clasps of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
36.19 יט  וַיַּעַשׂ מִכְסֶה לָאֹהֶל, עֹרֹת אֵילִם מְאָדָּמִים, וּמִכְסֵה עֹרֹת תְּחָשִׁים, מִלְמָעְלָה.  {ס}	19 And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of sealskins above. {S}
36.20 כ  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַקְּרָשִׁים, לַמִּשְׁכָּן, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, עֹמְדִים.	20 And he made the boards for the tabernacle of acacia-wood, standing up.
36.21 כא  עֶשֶׂר אַמֹּת, אֹרֶךְ הַקָּרֶשׁ; וְאַמָּה וַחֲצִי הָאַמָּה, רֹחַב הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד.	21 Ten cubits was the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
36.22 כב  שְׁתֵּי יָדֹת, לַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, מְשֻׁלָּבֹת, אַחַת אֶל-אֶחָת; כֵּן עָשָׂה, לְכֹל קַרְשֵׁי הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	22 Each board had two tenons, joined one to another. Thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
36.23 כג  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַקְּרָשִׁים, לַמִּשְׁכָּן:  עֶשְׂרִים קְרָשִׁים, לִפְאַת נֶגֶב תֵּימָנָה.	23 And he made the boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward.
36.24 כד  וְאַרְבָּעִים, אַדְנֵי-כֶסֶף--עָשָׂה, תַּחַת עֶשְׂרִים הַקְּרָשִׁים:  שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים תַּחַת-הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, לִשְׁתֵּי יְדֹתָיו, וּשְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים תַּחַת-הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, לִשְׁתֵּי יְדֹתָיו.	24 And he made forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards: two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.
36.25 כה  וּלְצֶלַע הַמִּשְׁכָּן הַשֵּׁנִית, לִפְאַת צָפוֹן, עָשָׂה, עֶשְׂרִים קְרָשִׁים.	25 And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards,
36.26 כו  וְאַרְבָּעִים אַדְנֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף--שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד, וּשְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד.	26 and their forty sockets of silver: two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
36.27 כז  וּלְיַרְכְּתֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יָמָּה, עָשָׂה, שִׁשָּׁה קְרָשִׁים.	27 And for the hinder part of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
36.28 כח  וּשְׁנֵי קְרָשִׁים עָשָׂה, לִמְקֻצְעֹת הַמִּשְׁכָּן--בַּיַּרְכָתָיִם.	28 And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part;
36.29 כט  וְהָיוּ תוֹאֲמִם, מִלְּמַטָּה, וְיַחְדָּו יִהְיוּ תַמִּים אֶל-רֹאשׁוֹ, אֶל-הַטַּבַּעַת הָאֶחָת; כֵּן עָשָׂה לִשְׁנֵיהֶם, לִשְׁנֵי הַמִּקְצֹעֹת.	29 that they might be double beneath, and in like manner they should be complete unto the top thereof unto the first ring. Thus he did to both of them in the two corners.
36.30 ל  וְהָיוּ, שְׁמֹנָה קְרָשִׁים, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם כֶּסֶף, שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר אֲדָנִים--שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים שְׁנֵי אֲדָנִים, תַּחַת הַקֶּרֶשׁ הָאֶחָד.	30 And there were eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets: under every board two sockets.
36.31 לא  וַיַּעַשׂ בְּרִיחֵי, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים--חֲמִשָּׁה, לְקַרְשֵׁי צֶלַע-הַמִּשְׁכָּן הָאֶחָת.	31 And he made bars of acacia-wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
36.32 לב  וַחֲמִשָּׁה בְרִיחִם, לְקַרְשֵׁי צֶלַע-הַמִּשְׁכָּן הַשֵּׁנִית; וַחֲמִשָּׁה בְרִיחִם לְקַרְשֵׁי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, לַיַּרְכָתַיִם יָמָּה.	32 and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the hinder part westward.
36.33 לג  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-הַבְּרִיחַ הַתִּיכֹן, לִבְרֹחַ בְּתוֹךְ הַקְּרָשִׁים, מִן-הַקָּצֶה אֶל-הַקָּצֶה.	33 And he made the middle bar to pass through in the midst of the boards from the one end to the other.
36.34 לד  וְאֶת-הַקְּרָשִׁים צִפָּה זָהָב, וְאֶת-טַבְּעֹתָם עָשָׂה זָהָב--בָּתִּים, לַבְּרִיחִם; וַיְצַף אֶת-הַבְּרִיחִם, זָהָב.	34 And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold for holders for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.
36.35 לה  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-הַפָּרֹכֶת, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר; מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב עָשָׂה אֹתָהּ, כְּרֻבִים.	35 And he made the veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; with the cherubim the work of the skilful workman made he it.
36.36 לו  וַיַּעַשׂ לָהּ, אַרְבָּעָה עַמּוּדֵי שִׁטִּים, וַיְצַפֵּם זָהָב, וָוֵיהֶם זָהָב; וַיִּצֹק לָהֶם, אַרְבָּעָה אַדְנֵי-כָסֶף.	36 And he made thereunto four pillars of acacia, and overlaid them with gold, their hooks being of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
36.37 לז  וַיַּעַשׂ מָסָךְ לְפֶתַח הָאֹהֶל, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, מַעֲשֵׂה, רֹקֵם.	37 And he made a screen for the door of the Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the weaver in colours;
36.38 לח  וְאֶת-עַמּוּדָיו חֲמִשָּׁה וְאֶת-וָוֵיהֶם, וְצִפָּה רָאשֵׁיהֶם וַחֲשֻׁקֵיהֶם זָהָב; וְאַדְנֵיהֶם חֲמִשָּׁה, נְחֹשֶׁת.  {פ}	38 and the five pillars of it with their hooks; and he overlaid their capitals and their fillets with gold; and their five sockets were of brass. {P}
37.1 א  וַיַּעַשׂ בְּצַלְאֵל אֶת-הָאָרֹן, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  אַמָּתַיִם וָחֵצִי אָרְכּוֹ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי רָחְבּוֹ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי, קֹמָתוֹ.	1 And Bezalel made the ark of acacia-wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it.
37.2 ב  וַיְצַפֵּהוּ זָהָב טָהוֹר, מִבַּיִת וּמִחוּץ; וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ זֵר זָהָב, סָבִיב.	2 And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.
37.3 ג  וַיִּצֹק לוֹ, אַרְבַּע טַבְּעֹת זָהָב, עַל, אַרְבַּע פַּעֲמֹתָיו; וּשְׁתֵּי טַבָּעֹת, עַל-צַלְעוֹ הָאֶחָת, וּשְׁתֵּי טַבָּעֹת, עַל-צַלְעוֹ הַשֵּׁנִית.	3 And he cast for it four rings of gold, in the four feet thereof: even two rings on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it.
37.4 ד  וַיַּעַשׂ בַּדֵּי, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים; וַיְצַף אֹתָם, זָהָב.	4 And he made staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with gold.
37.5 ה  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-הַבַּדִּים בַּטַּבָּעֹת, עַל צַלְעֹת הָאָרֹן, לָשֵׂאת, אֶת-הָאָרֹן.	5 And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
37.6 ו  וַיַּעַשׂ כַּפֹּרֶת, זָהָב טָהוֹר:  אַמָּתַיִם וָחֵצִי אָרְכָּהּ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי רָחְבָּהּ.	6 And he made an ark-cover of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
37.7 ז  וַיַּעַשׂ שְׁנֵי כְרֻבִים, זָהָב; מִקְשָׁה עָשָׂה אֹתָם, מִשְּׁנֵי קְצוֹת הַכַּפֹּרֶת.	7 And he made two cherubim of gold: of beaten work made he them, at the two ends of the ark-cover:
37.8 ח  כְּרוּב-אֶחָד מִקָּצָה מִזֶּה, וּכְרוּב-אֶחָד מִקָּצָה מִזֶּה; מִן-הַכַּפֹּרֶת עָשָׂה אֶת-הַכְּרֻבִים, מִשְּׁנֵי קצוותו (קְצוֹתָיו).	8 one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end; of one piece with the ark-cover made he the cherubim at the two ends thereof.
37.9 ט  וַיִּהְיוּ הַכְּרֻבִים פֹּרְשֵׂי כְנָפַיִם לְמַעְלָה, סֹכְכִים בְּכַנְפֵיהֶם עַל-הַכַּפֹּרֶת, וּפְנֵיהֶם, אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו; אֶל-הַכַּפֹּרֶת--הָיוּ, פְּנֵי הַכְּרֻבִים.  {פ}	9 And the cherubim spread out their wings on high, screening the ark-cover with their wings, with their faces one to another; toward the ark-cover were the faces of the cherubim. {P}
37.10 י  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  אַמָּתַיִם אָרְכּוֹ וְאַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ, וְאַמָּה וָחֵצִי קֹמָתוֹ.	10 And he made the table of acacia-wood: two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
37.11 יא  וַיְצַף אֹתוֹ, זָהָב טָהוֹר; וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ זֵר זָהָב, סָבִיב.	11 And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereto a crown of gold round about.
37.12 יב  וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ מִסְגֶּרֶת טֹפַח, סָבִיב; וַיַּעַשׂ זֵר-זָהָב לְמִסְגַּרְתּוֹ, סָבִיב.	12 And he made unto it a border of a hand-breadth round about, and made a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
37.13 יג  וַיִּצֹק לוֹ, אַרְבַּע טַבְּעֹת זָהָב; וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-הַטַּבָּעֹת, עַל אַרְבַּע הַפֵּאֹת, אֲשֶׁר לְאַרְבַּע רַגְלָיו.	13 And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that were on the four feet thereof.
37.14 יד  לְעֻמַּת, הַמִּסְגֶּרֶת, הָיוּ, הַטַּבָּעֹת; בָּתִּים, לַבַּדִּים, לָשֵׂאת, אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן.	14 Close by the border were the rings, the holders for the staves to bear the table.
37.15 טו  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַבַּדִּים עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים, וַיְצַף אֹתָם זָהָב, לָשֵׂאת, אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן.	15 And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.
37.16 טז  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַכֵּלִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, אֶת-קְעָרֹתָיו וְאֶת-כַּפֹּתָיו וְאֵת מְנַקִּיֹּתָיו, וְאֶת-הַקְּשָׂוֺת, אֲשֶׁר יֻסַּךְ בָּהֵן--זָהָב, טָהוֹר.  {פ}	16 And he made the vessels which were upon the table, the dishes thereof, and the pans thereof, and the bowls thereof, and the jars thereof, wherewith to pour out, of pure gold. {P}
37.17 יז  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה, זָהָב טָהוֹר; מִקְשָׁה עָשָׂה אֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה, יְרֵכָהּ וְקָנָהּ--גְּבִיעֶיהָ כַּפְתֹּרֶיהָ וּפְרָחֶיהָ, מִמֶּנָּה הָיוּ.	17 And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick, even its base, and its shaft; its cups, its knops, and its flowers, were of one piece with it.
37.18 יח  וְשִׁשָּׁה קָנִים, יֹצְאִים מִצִּדֶּיהָ:  שְׁלֹשָׁה קְנֵי מְנֹרָה, מִצִּדָּהּ הָאֶחָד, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה קְנֵי מְנֹרָה, מִצִּדָּהּ הַשֵּׁנִי.	18 And there were six branches going out of the sides thereof: three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof;
37.19 יט  שְׁלֹשָׁה גְבִעִים מְשֻׁקָּדִים בַּקָּנֶה הָאֶחָד, כַּפְתֹּר וָפֶרַח, וּשְׁלֹשָׁה גְבִעִים מְשֻׁקָּדִים בְּקָנֶה אֶחָד, כַּפְתֹּר וָפָרַח; כֵּן לְשֵׁשֶׁת הַקָּנִים, הַיֹּצְאִים מִן-הַמְּנֹרָה.	19 three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knop and a flower. So for the six branches going out of the candlestick.
37.20 כ  וּבַמְּנֹרָה, אַרְבָּעָה גְבִעִים:  מְשֻׁקָּדִים--כַּפְתֹּרֶיהָ, וּפְרָחֶיהָ.	20 And in the candlestick were four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knops thereof, and the flowers thereof;
37.21 כא  וְכַפְתֹּר תַּחַת שְׁנֵי הַקָּנִים מִמֶּנָּה, וְכַפְתֹּר תַּחַת שְׁנֵי הַקָּנִים מִמֶּנָּה, וְכַפְתֹּר, תַּחַת-שְׁנֵי הַקָּנִים מִמֶּנָּה--לְשֵׁשֶׁת, הַקָּנִים, הַיֹּצְאִים, מִמֶּנָּה.	21 and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, and a knop under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of it.
37.22 כב  כַּפְתֹּרֵיהֶם וּקְנֹתָם, מִמֶּנָּה הָיוּ; כֻּלָּהּ מִקְשָׁה אַחַת, זָהָב טָהוֹר.	22 Their knops and their branches were of one piece with it; the whole of it was one beaten work of pure gold.
37.23 כג  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ, שִׁבְעָה; וּמַלְקָחֶיהָ וּמַחְתֹּתֶיהָ, זָהָב טָהוֹר.	23 And he made the lamps thereof, seven, and the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, of pure gold.
37.24 כד  כִּכָּר זָהָב טָהוֹר, עָשָׂה אֹתָהּ, וְאֵת, כָּל-כֵּלֶיהָ.  {פ}	24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof. {P}
37.25 כה  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-מִזְבַּח הַקְּטֹרֶת, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  אַמָּה אָרְכּוֹ וְאַמָּה רָחְבּוֹ רָבוּעַ, וְאַמָּתַיִם קֹמָתוֹ--מִמֶּנּוּ, הָיוּ קַרְנֹתָיו.	25 And he made the altar of incense of acacia-wood: a cubit was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, four-square; and two cubits was the height thereof; the horns thereof were of one piece with it.
37.26 כו  וַיְצַף אֹתוֹ זָהָב טָהוֹר, אֶת-גַּגּוֹ וְאֶת-קִירֹתָיו סָבִיב--וְאֶת-קַרְנֹתָיו; וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ זֵר זָהָב, סָבִיב.	26 And he overlaid it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it; and he made unto it a crown of gold round about.
37.27 כז  וּשְׁתֵּי טַבְּעֹת זָהָב עָשָׂה-לוֹ מִתַּחַת לְזֵרוֹ, עַל שְׁתֵּי צַלְעֹתָיו, עַל, שְׁנֵי צִדָּיו--לְבָתִּים לְבַדִּים, לָשֵׂאת אֹתוֹ בָּהֶם.	27 And he made for it two golden rings under the crown thereof, upon the two ribs thereof, upon the two sides of it, for holders for staves wherewith to bear it.
37.28 כח  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַבַּדִּים, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים; וַיְצַף אֹתָם, זָהָב.	28 And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with gold.
37.29 כט  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, קֹדֶשׁ, וְאֶת-קְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים, טָהוֹר--מַעֲשֵׂה, רֹקֵחַ.  {ס}	29 And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, after the art of the perfumer. {S}
38.1 א  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים:  חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת אָרְכּוֹ וְחָמֵשׁ-אַמּוֹת רָחְבּוֹ, רָבוּעַ, וְשָׁלֹשׁ אַמּוֹת, קֹמָתוֹ.	1 And he made the altar of burnt-offering of acacia-wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof, four-square, and three cubits the height thereof.
38.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ קַרְנֹתָיו, עַל אַרְבַּע פִּנֹּתָיו--מִמֶּנּוּ, הָיוּ קַרְנֹתָיו; וַיְצַף אֹתוֹ, נְחֹשֶׁת.	2 And he made the horns thereof upon the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of one piece with it; and he overlaid it with brass.
38.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אֶת-הַסִּירֹת וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקֹת, אֶת-הַמִּזְלָגֹת, וְאֶת-הַמַּחְתֹּת; כָּל-כֵּלָיו, עָשָׂה נְחֹשֶׁת.	3 And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, the flesh-hooks, and the fire-pans; all the vessels thereof made he of brass.
38.4 ד  וַיַּעַשׂ לַמִּזְבֵּחַ מִכְבָּר, מַעֲשֵׂה רֶשֶׁת נְחֹשֶׁת, תַּחַת כַּרְכֻּבּוֹ מִלְּמַטָּה, עַד-חֶצְיוֹ.	4 And he made for the altar a grating of network of brass, under the ledge round it beneath, reaching halfway up.
38.5 ה  וַיִּצֹק אַרְבַּע טַבָּעֹת, בְּאַרְבַּע הַקְּצָוֺת--לְמִכְבַּר הַנְּחֹשֶׁת:  בָּתִּים, לַבַּדִּים.	5 And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grating of brass, to be holders for the staves.
38.6 ו  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַבַּדִּים, עֲצֵי שִׁטִּים; וַיְצַף אֹתָם, נְחֹשֶׁת.	6 And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with brass.
38.7 ז  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-הַבַּדִּים בַּטַּבָּעֹת, עַל צַלְעֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, לָשֵׂאת אֹתוֹ, בָּהֶם; נְבוּב לֻחֹת, עָשָׂה אֹתוֹ.  {ס}	7 And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, wherewith to bear it; he made it hollow with planks. {S}
38.8 ח  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֵת הַכִּיּוֹר נְחֹשֶׁת, וְאֵת, כַּנּוֹ נְחֹשֶׁת--בְּמַרְאֹת, הַצֹּבְאֹת, אֲשֶׁר צָבְאוּ, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.  {ס}	8 And he made the laver of brass, and the base thereof of brass, of the mirrors of the serving women that did service at the door of the tent of meeting. {S}
38.9 ט  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-הֶחָצֵר:  לִפְאַת נֶגֶב תֵּימָנָה, קַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, מֵאָה, בָּאַמָּה.	9 And he made the court; for the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, a hundred cubits.
38.10 י  עַמּוּדֵיהֶם עֶשְׂרִים, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם עֶשְׂרִים נְחֹשֶׁת; וָוֵי הָעַמּוּדִים וַחֲשֻׁקֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף.	10 Their pillars were twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver.
38.11 יא  וְלִפְאַת צָפוֹן, מֵאָה בָאַמָּה--עַמּוּדֵיהֶם עֶשְׂרִים, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם עֶשְׂרִים נְחֹשֶׁת; וָוֵי הָעַמּוּדִים וַחֲשֻׁקֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף.	11 And for the north side a hundred cubits, their pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
38.12 יב  וְלִפְאַת-יָם, קְלָעִים חֲמִשִּׁים בָּאַמָּה--עַמּוּדֵיהֶם עֲשָׂרָה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם עֲשָׂרָה; וָוֵי הָעַמֻּדִים וַחֲשׁוּקֵיהֶם, כָּסֶף.	12 And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
38.13 יג  וְלִפְאַת קֵדְמָה מִזְרָחָה, חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה.	13 And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
38.14 יד  קְלָעִים חֲמֵשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה, אֶל-הַכָּתֵף; עַמּוּדֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה.	14 The hangings for the one side [of the gate] were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
38.15 טו  וְלַכָּתֵף הַשֵּׁנִית, מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה לְשַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר, קְלָעִים, חֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה; עַמֻּדֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה.	15 And so for the other side; on this hand and that hand by the gate of the court were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
38.16 טז  כָּל-קַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר סָבִיב, שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר.	16 All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.
38.17 יז  וְהָאֲדָנִים לָעַמֻּדִים, נְחֹשֶׁת, וָוֵי הָעַמּוּדִים וַחֲשׁוּקֵיהֶם כֶּסֶף, וְצִפּוּי רָאשֵׁיהֶם כָּסֶף; וְהֵם מְחֻשָּׁקִים כֶּסֶף, כֹּל עַמֻּדֵי הֶחָצֵר.	17 And the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their capitals of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver.
38.18 יח  וּמָסַךְ שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר, מַעֲשֵׂה רֹקֵם--תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר; וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה, אֹרֶךְ, וְקוֹמָה בְרֹחַב חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת, לְעֻמַּת קַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר.	18 And the screen for the gate of the court was the work of the weaver in colours, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.
38.19 יט  וְעַמֻּדֵיהֶם, אַרְבָּעָה, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם אַרְבָּעָה, נְחֹשֶׁת; וָוֵיהֶם כֶּסֶף, וְצִפּוּי רָאשֵׁיהֶם וַחֲשֻׁקֵיהֶם כָּסֶף.	19 And their pillars were four, and their sockets four, of brass; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals and their fillets of silver.
38.20 כ  וְכָל-הַיְתֵדֹת לַמִּשְׁכָּן וְלֶחָצֵר, סָבִיב--נְחֹשֶׁת.  {ס}	20 And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass. {S}
38.21 כא  אֵלֶּה פְקוּדֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן מִשְׁכַּן הָעֵדֻת, אֲשֶׁר פֻּקַּד עַל-פִּי מֹשֶׁה:  עֲבֹדַת, הַלְוִיִּם, בְּיַד אִיתָמָר, בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן.	21 These are the accounts of the tabernacle, even the tabernacle of the testimony, as they were rendered according to the commandment of Moses, through the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.--
38.22 כב  וּבְצַלְאֵל בֶּן-אוּרִי בֶן-חוּר, לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה, עָשָׂה, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	22 And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the LORD commanded Moses.
38.23 כג  וְאִתּוֹ, אָהֳלִיאָב בֶּן-אֲחִיסָמָךְ לְמַטֵּה-דָן--חָרָשׁ וְחֹשֵׁב; וְרֹקֵם, בַּתְּכֵלֶת וּבָאַרְגָּמָן, וּבְתוֹלַעַת הַשָּׁנִי, וּבַשֵּׁשׁ.  {ס}	23 And with him was Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, a craftsman, and a skilful workman, and a weaver in colours, in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.-- {S}
38.24 כד  כָּל-הַזָּהָב, הֶעָשׂוּי לַמְּלָאכָה, בְּכֹל, מְלֶאכֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ--וַיְהִי זְהַב הַתְּנוּפָה, תֵּשַׁע וְעֶשְׂרִים כִּכָּר, וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וּשְׁלֹשִׁים שֶׁקֶל, בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	24 All the gold that was used for the work in all the work of the sanctuary, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
38.25 כה  וְכֶסֶף פְּקוּדֵי הָעֵדָה, מְאַת כִּכָּר; וְאֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשָּׁה וְשִׁבְעִים, שֶׁקֶל--בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	25 And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was a hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and three-score and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
38.26 כו  בֶּקַע, לַגֻּלְגֹּלֶת, מַחֲצִית הַשֶּׁקֶל, בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ--לְכֹל הָעֹבֵר עַל-הַפְּקֻדִים, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, לְשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים.	26 a beka a head, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that passed over to them that are numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
38.27 כז  וַיְהִי, מְאַת כִּכַּר הַכֶּסֶף, לָצֶקֶת אֵת אַדְנֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וְאֵת אַדְנֵי הַפָּרֹכֶת:  מְאַת אֲדָנִים לִמְאַת הַכִּכָּר, כִּכָּר לָאָדֶן.	27 And the hundred talents of silver were for casting the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the veil: a hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
38.28 כח  וְאֶת-הָאֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע הַמֵּאוֹת, וַחֲמִשָּׁה וְשִׁבְעִים, עָשָׂה וָוִים, לָעַמּוּדִים; וְצִפָּה רָאשֵׁיהֶם, וְחִשַּׁק אֹתָם.	28 And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their capitals, and made fillets for them.
38.29 כט  וּנְחֹשֶׁת הַתְּנוּפָה, שִׁבְעִים כִּכָּר, וְאַלְפַּיִם וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת, שָׁקֶל.	29 And the brass of the offering was seventy talents and two thousand and four hundred shekels.
38.30 ל  וַיַּעַשׂ בָּהּ, אֶת-אַדְנֵי פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֵת מִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, וְאֶת-מִכְבַּר הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ; וְאֵת, כָּל-כְּלֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	30 And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tent of meeting, and the brazen altar, and the brazen grating for it, and all the vessels of the altar,
38.31 לא  וְאֶת-אַדְנֵי הֶחָצֵר סָבִיב, וְאֶת-אַדְנֵי שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר; וְאֵת כָּל-יִתְדֹת הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְאֶת-כָּל-יִתְדֹת הֶחָצֵר, סָבִיב.	31 and the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the gate of the court, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.
39.1 א  וּמִן-הַתְּכֵלֶת וְהָאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת הַשָּׁנִי, עָשׂוּ בִגְדֵי-שְׂרָד לְשָׁרֵת בַּקֹּדֶשׁ; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר לְאַהֲרֹן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	1 And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made plaited garments, for ministering in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron, as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
39.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ, אֶת-הָאֵפֹד:  זָהָב, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר.	2 And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
39.3 ג  וַיְרַקְּעוּ אֶת-פַּחֵי הַזָּהָב, וְקִצֵּץ פְּתִילִם, לַעֲשׂוֹת בְּתוֹךְ הַתְּכֵלֶת וּבְתוֹךְ הָאַרְגָּמָן, וּבְתוֹךְ תּוֹלַעַת הַשָּׁנִי וּבְתוֹךְ הַשֵּׁשׁ--מַעֲשֵׂה, חֹשֵׁב.	3 And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into threads, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, the work of the skilful workman.
39.4 ד  כְּתֵפֹת עָשׂוּ-לוֹ, חֹבְרֹת--עַל-שְׁנֵי קצוותו (קְצוֹתָיו), חֻבָּר.	4 They made shoulder-pieces for it, joined together; at the two ends was it joined together.
39.5 ה  וְחֵשֶׁב אֲפֻדָּתוֹ אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו, מִמֶּנּוּ הוּא כְּמַעֲשֵׂהוּ, זָהָב תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	5 And the skilfully woven band, that was upon it, wherewith to gird it on, was of the same piece and like the work thereof: of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
39.6 ו  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-אַבְנֵי הַשֹּׁהַם, מֻסַבֹּת מִשְׁבְּצֹת זָהָב, מְפֻתָּחֹת פִּתּוּחֵי חוֹתָם, עַל-שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 And they wrought the onyx stones, inclosed in settings of gold, graven with the engravings of a signet, according to the names of the children of Israel.
39.7 ז  וַיָּשֶׂם אֹתָם, עַל כִּתְפֹת הָאֵפֹד--אַבְנֵי זִכָּרוֹן, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	7 And he put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children of Israel, as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
39.8 ח  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-הַחֹשֶׁן מַעֲשֵׂה חֹשֵׁב, כְּמַעֲשֵׂה אֵפֹד:  זָהָב, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--וְשֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר.	8 And he made the breastplate, the work of the skilful workman, like the work of the ephod: of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
39.9 ט  רָבוּעַ הָיָה כָּפוּל, עָשׂוּ אֶת-הַחֹשֶׁן--זֶרֶת אָרְכּוֹ וְזֶרֶת רָחְבּוֹ, כָּפוּל.	9 It was four-square; they made the breastplate double; a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being double.
39.10 י  וַיְמַלְאוּ-בוֹ--אַרְבָּעָה, טוּרֵי אָבֶן:  טוּר, אֹדֶם פִּטְדָה וּבָרֶקֶת--הַטּוּר, הָאֶחָד.	10 And they set in it four rows of stones: a row of carnelian, topaz, and smaragd was the first row.
39.11 יא  וְהַטּוּר, הַשֵּׁנִי--נֹפֶךְ סַפִּיר, וְיָהֲלֹם.	11 And the second row, a carbuncle, a sapphire, and an emerald.
39.12 יב  וְהַטּוּר, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי--לֶשֶׁם שְׁבוֹ, וְאַחְלָמָה.	12 And the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst.
39.13 יג  וְהַטּוּר, הָרְבִיעִי--תַּרְשִׁישׁ שֹׁהַם, וְיָשְׁפֵה:  מוּסַבֹּת מִשְׁבְּצֹת זָהָב, בְּמִלֻּאֹתָם.	13 And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper; they were inclosed in fittings of gold in their settings.
39.14 יד  וְהָאֲבָנִים עַל-שְׁמֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הֵנָּה, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה--עַל-שְׁמֹתָם:  פִּתּוּחֵי חֹתָם אִישׁ עַל-שְׁמוֹ, לִשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר שָׁבֶט.	14 And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name, for the twelve tribes.
39.15 טו  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ עַל-הַחֹשֶׁן שַׁרְשְׁרֹת גַּבְלֻת, מַעֲשֵׂה עֲבֹת, זָהָב, טָהוֹר.	15 And they made upon the breastplate plaited chains, of wreathen work of pure gold.
39.16 טז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, שְׁתֵּי מִשְׁבְּצֹת זָהָב, וּשְׁתֵּי, טַבְּעֹת זָהָב; וַיִּתְּנוּ, אֶת-שְׁתֵּי הַטַּבָּעֹת, עַל-שְׁנֵי, קְצוֹת הַחֹשֶׁן.	16 And they made two settings of gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
39.17 יז  וַיִּתְּנוּ, שְׁתֵּי הָעֲבֹתֹת הַזָּהָב, עַל-שְׁתֵּי, הַטַּבָּעֹת--עַל-קְצוֹת, הַחֹשֶׁן.	17 And they put the two wreathen chains of gold on the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.
39.18 יח  וְאֵת שְׁתֵּי קְצוֹת שְׁתֵּי הָעֲבֹתֹת, נָתְנוּ עַל-שְׁתֵּי הַמִּשְׁבְּצֹת; וַיִּתְּנֻם עַל-כִּתְפֹת הָאֵפֹד, אֶל-מוּל פָּנָיו.	18 And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains they put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the forepart thereof.
39.19 יט  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, שְׁתֵּי טַבְּעֹת זָהָב, וַיָּשִׂימוּ, עַל-שְׁנֵי קְצוֹת הַחֹשֶׁן:  עַל-שְׂפָתוֹ--אֲשֶׁר אֶל-עֵבֶר הָאֵפֹד, בָּיְתָה.	19 And they made two rings of gold, and put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge thereof, which was toward the side of the ephod inward.
39.20 כ  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, שְׁתֵּי טַבְּעֹת זָהָב, וַיִּתְּנֻם עַל-שְׁתֵּי כִתְפֹת הָאֵפֹד מִלְּמַטָּה מִמּוּל פָּנָיו, לְעֻמַּת מַחְבַּרְתּוֹ--מִמַּעַל, לְחֵשֶׁב הָאֵפֹד.	20 And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart thereof, close by the coupling thereof, above the skilfully woven band of the ephod.
39.21 כא  וַיִּרְכְּסוּ אֶת-הַחֹשֶׁן מִטַּבְּעֹתָיו אֶל-טַבְּעֹת הָאֵפֹד בִּפְתִיל תְּכֵלֶת, לִהְיֹת עַל-חֵשֶׁב הָאֵפֹד, וְלֹא-יִזַּח הַחֹשֶׁן, מֵעַל הָאֵפֹד--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	21 And they did bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a thread of blue, that it might be upon the skilfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
39.22 כב  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-מְעִיל הָאֵפֹד, מַעֲשֵׂה אֹרֵג, כְּלִיל, תְּכֵלֶת.	22 And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue;
39.23 כג  וּפִי-הַמְּעִיל בְּתוֹכוֹ, כְּפִי תַחְרָא; שָׂפָה לְפִיו סָבִיב, לֹא יִקָּרֵעַ.	23 and the hole of the robe in the midst thereof, as the hole of a coat of mail, with a binding round about the hole of it, that it should not be rent.
39.24 כד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, עַל-שׁוּלֵי הַמְּעִיל, רִמּוֹנֵי, תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--מָשְׁזָר.	24 And they made upon the skirts of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.
39.25 כה  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ פַעֲמֹנֵי, זָהָב טָהוֹר; וַיִּתְּנוּ אֶת-הַפַּעֲמֹנִים בְּתוֹךְ הָרִמֹּנִים, עַל-שׁוּלֵי הַמְּעִיל סָבִיב--בְּתוֹךְ, הָרִמֹּנִים.	25 And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the skirts of the robe round about, between the pomegranates:
39.26 כו  פַּעֲמֹן וְרִמֹּן פַּעֲמֹן וְרִמֹּן, עַל-שׁוּלֵי הַמְּעִיל סָבִיב, לְשָׁרֵת, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	26 a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about, to minister in; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
39.27 כז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-הַכָּתְנֹת שֵׁשׁ, מַעֲשֵׂה אֹרֵג, לְאַהֲרֹן, וּלְבָנָיו.	27 And they made the tunics of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,
39.28 כח  וְאֵת הַמִּצְנֶפֶת שֵׁשׁ, וְאֶת-פַּאֲרֵי הַמִּגְבָּעֹת שֵׁשׁ, וְאֶת-מִכְנְסֵי הַבָּד, שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר.	28 and the mitre of fine linen, and the goodly head-tires of fine linen, and the linen breeches of fine twined linen,
39.29 כט  וְאֶת-הָאַבְנֵט שֵׁשׁ מָשְׁזָר, וּתְכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן וְתוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי--מַעֲשֵׂה רֹקֵם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	29 and the girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, the work of the weaver in colours; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
39.30 ל  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-צִיץ נֵזֶר-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, זָהָב טָהוֹר; וַיִּכְתְּבוּ עָלָיו, מִכְתַּב פִּתּוּחֵי חוֹתָם--קֹדֶשׁ, לַיהוָה.	30 And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like the engravings of a signet: HOLY TO THE LORD.
39.31 לא  וַיִּתְּנוּ עָלָיו פְּתִיל תְּכֵלֶת, לָתֵת עַל-הַמִּצְנֶפֶת מִלְמָעְלָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	31 And they tied unto it a thread of blue, to fasten it upon the mitre above; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
39.32 לב  וַתֵּכֶל--כָּל-עֲבֹדַת, מִשְׁכַּן אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן עָשׂוּ.  {פ}	32 Thus was finished all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting; and the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they. {P}
39.33 לג  וַיָּבִיאוּ אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-הָאֹהֶל וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, קְרָסָיו קְרָשָׁיו, בְּרִיחָו וְעַמֻּדָיו וַאֲדָנָיו.	33 And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the Tent, and all its furniture, its clasps, its boards, its bars, and its pillars, and its sockets;
39.34 לד  וְאֶת-מִכְסֵה עוֹרֹת הָאֵילִם, הַמְאָדָּמִים, וְאֶת-מִכְסֵה, עֹרֹת הַתְּחָשִׁים; וְאֵת, פָּרֹכֶת הַמָּסָךְ.	34 and the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of sealskins, and the veil of the screen;
39.35 לה  אֶת-אֲרוֹן הָעֵדֻת, וְאֶת-בַּדָּיו; וְאֵת, הַכַּפֹּרֶת.	35 the ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the ark-cover;
39.36 לו  אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, אֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְאֵת, לֶחֶם הַפָּנִים.	36 the table, all the vessels thereof, and the showbread;
39.37 לז  אֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה הַטְּהֹרָה אֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ, נֵרֹת הַמַּעֲרָכָה--וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלֶיהָ; וְאֵת, שֶׁמֶן הַמָּאוֹר.	37 the pure candlestick, the lamps thereof, even the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for the light;
39.38 לח  וְאֵת, מִזְבַּח הַזָּהָב, וְאֵת שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וְאֵת קְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים; וְאֵת, מָסַךְ פֶּתַח הָאֹהֶל.	38 and the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for the door of the Tent;
39.39 לט  אֵת מִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, וְאֶת-מִכְבַּר הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, אֶת-בַּדָּיו, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; אֶת-הַכִּיֹּר, וְאֶת-כַּנּוֹ.	39 the brazen altar, and its grating of brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base;
39.40 מ  אֵת קַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר אֶת-עַמֻּדֶיהָ וְאֶת-אֲדָנֶיהָ, וְאֶת-הַמָּסָךְ לְשַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר, אֶת-מֵיתָרָיו, וִיתֵדֹתֶיהָ; וְאֵת, כָּל-כְּלֵי עֲבֹדַת הַמִּשְׁכָּן--לְאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	40 the hangings of the court, its pillars, and its sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court, the cords thereof, and the pins thereof, and all the instruments of the service of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting;
39.41 מא  אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַשְּׂרָד, לְשָׁרֵת בַּקֹּדֶשׁ; אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ לְאַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶת-בִּגְדֵי בָנָיו לְכַהֵן.	41 the plaited garments for ministering in the holy place; the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
39.42 מב  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה:  כֵּן עָשׂוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵת כָּל-הָעֲבֹדָה.	42 According to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did all the work.
39.43 מג  וַיַּרְא מֹשֶׁה אֶת-כָּל-הַמְּלָאכָה, וְהִנֵּה עָשׂוּ אֹתָהּ--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, כֵּן עָשׂוּ; וַיְבָרֶךְ אֹתָם, מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	43 And Moses saw all the work, and, behold, they had done it; as the LORD had commanded, even so had they done it. And Moses blessed them. {P}
40.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
40.2 ב  בְּיוֹם-הַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ, תָּקִים, אֶת-מִשְׁכַּן אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	2 'On the first day of the first month shalt thou rear up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
40.3 ג  וְשַׂמְתָּ שָׁם, אֵת אֲרוֹן הָעֵדוּת; וְסַכֹּתָ עַל-הָאָרֹן, אֶת-הַפָּרֹכֶת.	3 And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and thou shalt screen the ark with the veil.
40.4 ד  וְהֵבֵאתָ, אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן, וְעָרַכְתָּ, אֶת-עֶרְכּוֹ; וְהֵבֵאתָ, אֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה, וְהַעֲלֵיתָ, אֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ.	4 And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the bread that is upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.
40.5 ה  וְנָתַתָּה אֶת-מִזְבַּח הַזָּהָב, לִקְטֹרֶת, לִפְנֵי, אֲרוֹן הָעֵדֻת; וְשַׂמְתָּ אֶת-מָסַךְ הַפֶּתַח, לַמִּשְׁכָּן.	5 And thou shalt set the golden altar for incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the screen of the door to the tabernacle.
40.6 ו  וְנָתַתָּה, אֵת מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, לִפְנֵי, פֶּתַח מִשְׁכַּן אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד.	6 And thou shalt set the altar of burnt-offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
40.7 ז  וְנָתַתָּ, אֶת-הַכִּיֹּר, בֵּין-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וּבֵין הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְנָתַתָּ שָׁם, מָיִם.	7 And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and shalt put water therein.
40.8 ח  וְשַׂמְתָּ אֶת-הֶחָצֵר, סָבִיב; וְנָתַתָּ, אֶת-מָסַךְ שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר.	8 And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the screen of the gate of the court.
40.9 ט  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ; וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְהָיָה קֹדֶשׁ.	9 And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the furniture thereof; and it shall be holy.
40.10 י  וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֶת-מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ, אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְהָיָה הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים.	10 And thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt-offering, and all its vessels, and sanctify the altar; and the altar shall be most holy.
40.11 יא  וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֶת-הַכִּיֹּר, וְאֶת-כַּנּוֹ; וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ, אֹתוֹ.	11 And thou shalt anoint the laver and its base, and sanctify it.
40.12 יב  וְהִקְרַבְתָּ אֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְרָחַצְתָּ אֹתָם, בַּמָּיִם.	12 And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tent of meeting, and shalt wash them with water.
40.13 יג  וְהִלְבַּשְׁתָּ, אֶת-אַהֲרֹן, אֵת, בִּגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֹתוֹ וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֹתוֹ, וְכִהֵן לִי.	13 And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments; and thou shalt anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may minister unto Me in the priest's office.
40.14 יד  וְאֶת-בָּנָיו, תַּקְרִיב; וְהִלְבַּשְׁתָּ אֹתָם, כֻּתֳּנֹת.	14 And thou shalt bring his sons, and put tunics upon them.
40.15 טו  וּמָשַׁחְתָּ אֹתָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר מָשַׁחְתָּ אֶת-אֲבִיהֶם, וְכִהֲנוּ, לִי; וְהָיְתָה לִהְיֹת לָהֶם מָשְׁחָתָם, לִכְהֻנַּת עוֹלָם--לְדֹרֹתָם.	15 And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto Me in the priest's office; and their anointing shall be to them for an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.'
40.16 טז  וַיַּעַשׂ, מֹשֶׁה:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֹתוֹ--כֵּן עָשָׂה.  {ס}	16 Thus did Moses; according to all that the LORD commanded him, so did he. {S}
40.17 יז  וַיְהִי בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, בַּשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית--בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ:  הוּקַם, הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	17 And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.
40.18 יח  וַיָּקֶם מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-אֲדָנָיו, וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-קְרָשָׁיו, וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-בְּרִיחָיו; וַיָּקֶם, אֶת-עַמּוּדָיו.	18 And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and laid its sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up its pillars.
40.19 יט  וַיִּפְרֹשׂ אֶת-הָאֹהֶל, עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-מִכְסֵה הָאֹהֶל עָלָיו, מִלְמָעְלָה--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	19 And he spread the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.20 כ  וַיִּקַּח וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הָעֵדֻת, אֶל-הָאָרֹן, וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַבַּדִּים, עַל-הָאָרֹן; וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הַכַּפֹּרֶת עַל-הָאָרֹן, מִלְמָעְלָה.	20 And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the ark-cover above upon the ark.
40.21 כא  וַיָּבֵא אֶת-הָאָרֹן, אֶל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וַיָּשֶׂם אֵת פָּרֹכֶת הַמָּסָךְ, וַיָּסֶךְ עַל אֲרוֹן הָעֵדוּת--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	21 And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the veil of the screen, and screened the ark of the testimony; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.22 כב  וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הַשֻּׁלְחָן בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, עַל יֶרֶךְ הַמִּשְׁכָּן צָפֹנָה, מִחוּץ, לַפָּרֹכֶת.	22 And he put the table in the tent of meeting, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the veil.
40.23 כג  וַיַּעֲרֹךְ עָלָיו עֵרֶךְ לֶחֶם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	23 And he set a row of bread in order upon it before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.24 כד  וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, נֹכַח הַשֻּׁלְחָן, עַל יֶרֶךְ הַמִּשְׁכָּן, נֶגְבָּה.	24 And he put the candlestick in the tent of meeting, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.
40.25 כה  וַיַּעַל הַנֵּרֹת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	25 And he lighted the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.26 כו  וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-מִזְבַּח הַזָּהָב, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לִפְנֵי, הַפָּרֹכֶת.	26 And he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil;
40.27 כז  וַיַּקְטֵר עָלָיו, קְטֹרֶת סַמִּים--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	27 and he burnt thereon incense of sweet spices; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.28 כח  וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-מָסַךְ הַפֶּתַח, לַמִּשְׁכָּן.	28 And he put the screen of the door to the tabernacle.
40.29 כט  וְאֵת, מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, שָׂם, פֶּתַח מִשְׁכַּן אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד; וַיַּעַל עָלָיו, אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	29 And the altar of burnt-offering he set at the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered upon it the burnt-offering and the meal-offering; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.30 ל  וַיָּשֶׂם, אֶת-הַכִּיֹּר, בֵּין-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וּבֵין הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וַיִּתֵּן שָׁמָּה מַיִם, לְרָחְצָה.	30 And he set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and put water therein, wherewith to wash;
40.31 לא  וְרָחֲצוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, וְאֶת-רַגְלֵיהֶם.	31 that Moses and Aaron and his sons might wash their hands and their feet thereat;
40.32 לב  בְּבֹאָם אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וּבְקָרְבָתָם אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--יִרְחָצוּ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	32 when they went into the tent of meeting, and when they came near unto the altar, they should wash; as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
40.33 לג  וַיָּקֶם אֶת-הֶחָצֵר, סָבִיב לַמִּשְׁכָּן וְלַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-מָסַךְ שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר; וַיְכַל מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-הַמְּלָאכָה.  {פ}	33 And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the screen of the gate of the court. So Moses finished the work. {P}
40.34 לד  וַיְכַס הֶעָנָן, אֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, מָלֵא אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	34 Then the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
40.35 לה  וְלֹא-יָכֹל מֹשֶׁה, לָבוֹא אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--כִּי-שָׁכַן עָלָיו, הֶעָנָן; וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, מָלֵא אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	35 And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of meeting, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.--
40.36 לו  וּבְהֵעָלוֹת הֶעָנָן מֵעַל הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יִסְעוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּכֹל, מַסְעֵיהֶם.	36 And whenever the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward, throughout all their journeys.
40.37 לז  וְאִם-לֹא יֵעָלֶה, הֶעָנָן--וְלֹא יִסְעוּ, עַד-יוֹם הֵעָלֹתוֹ.	37 But if the cloud was not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.
40.38 לח  כִּי עֲנַן יְהוָה עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יוֹמָם, וְאֵשׁ, תִּהְיֶה לַיְלָה בּוֹ--לְעֵינֵי כָל-בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּכָל-מַסְעֵיהֶם.  {ש}	38 For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and there was fire therein by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.-- {P}
