1.1 א  וַיְהִי בִּשְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה, בָּרְבִיעִי בַּחֲמִשָּׁה לַחֹדֶשׁ, וַאֲנִי בְתוֹךְ-הַגּוֹלָה, עַל-נְהַר-כְּבָר; נִפְתְּחוּ, הַשָּׁמַיִם, וָאֶרְאֶה, מַרְאוֹת אֱלֹהִים.    1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river Chebar that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.
1.2 ב  בַּחֲמִשָּׁה, לַחֹדֶשׁ--הִיא הַשָּׁנָה הַחֲמִישִׁית, לְגָלוּת הַמֶּלֶךְ יוֹיָכִין.    2 In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,
1.3 ג  הָיֹה הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יְחֶזְקֵאל בֶּן-בּוּזִי הַכֹּהֵן, בְּאֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים--עַל-נְהַר-כְּבָר; וַתְּהִי עָלָיו שָׁם, יַד-יְהוָה.    3 the word of the LORD came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.
1.4 ד  וָאֵרֶא וְהִנֵּה רוּחַ סְעָרָה בָּאָה מִן-הַצָּפוֹן, עָנָן גָּדוֹל וְאֵשׁ מִתְלַקַּחַת, וְנֹגַהּ לוֹ, סָבִיב; וּמִתּוֹכָהּ--כְּעֵין הַחַשְׁמַל, מִתּוֹךְ הָאֵשׁ.    4 And I looked, and, behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a great cloud, with a fire flashing up, so that a brightness was round about it; and out of the midst thereof as the colour of electrum, out of the midst of the fire.
1.5 ה  וּמִתּוֹכָהּ--דְּמוּת, אַרְבַּע חַיּוֹת; וְזֶה, מַרְאֵיהֶן--דְּמוּת אָדָם, לָהֵנָּה.    5 And out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance: they had the likeness of a man.
1.6 ו  וְאַרְבָּעָה פָנִים, לְאֶחָת; וְאַרְבַּע כְּנָפַיִם, לְאַחַת לָהֶם.    6 And every one had four faces, and every one of them had four wings.
1.7 ז  וְרַגְלֵיהֶם, רֶגֶל יְשָׁרָה; וְכַף רַגְלֵיהֶם, כְּכַף רֶגֶל עֵגֶל, וְנֹצְצִים, כְּעֵין נְחֹשֶׁת קָלָל.    7 And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.
1.8 ח  וידו (וִידֵי) אָדָם, מִתַּחַת כַּנְפֵיהֶם, עַל, אַרְבַּעַת רִבְעֵיהֶם; וּפְנֵיהֶם וְכַנְפֵיהֶם, לְאַרְבַּעְתָּם.    8 And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides; and as for the faces and wings of them four,
1.9 ט  חֹבְרֹת אִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחוֹתָהּ, כַּנְפֵיהֶם:  לֹא-יִסַּבּוּ בְלֶכְתָּן, אִישׁ אֶל-עֵבֶר פָּנָיו יֵלֵכוּ.    9 their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward.
1.10 י  וּדְמוּת פְּנֵיהֶם, פְּנֵי אָדָם, וּפְנֵי אַרְיֵה אֶל-הַיָּמִין לְאַרְבַּעְתָּם, וּפְנֵי-שׁוֹר מֵהַשְּׂמֹאול לְאַרְבַּעְתָּן; וּפְנֵי-נֶשֶׁר, לְאַרְבַּעְתָּן.    10 As for the likeness of their faces, they had the face of a man; and they four had the face of a lion on the right side; and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four had also the face of an eagle.
1.11 יא  וּפְנֵיהֶם, וְכַנְפֵיהֶם פְּרֻדוֹת מִלְמָעְלָה:  לְאִישׁ, שְׁתַּיִם חֹבְרוֹת אִישׁ, וּשְׁתַּיִם מְכַסּוֹת, אֵת גְּוִיֹּתֵיהֶנָה.    11 Thus were their faces; and their wings were stretched upward; two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their bodies.
1.12 יב  וְאִישׁ אֶל-עֵבֶר פָּנָיו, יֵלֵכוּ:  אֶל אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה-שָּׁמָּה הָרוּחַ לָלֶכֶת יֵלֵכוּ, לֹא יִסַּבּוּ בְּלֶכְתָּן.    12 And they went every one straight forward; whither the spirit was to go, they went; they turned not when they went.
1.13 יג  וּדְמוּת הַחַיּוֹת מַרְאֵיהֶם כְּגַחֲלֵי-אֵשׁ, בֹּעֲרוֹת כְּמַרְאֵה הַלַּפִּדִים--הִיא, מִתְהַלֶּכֶת בֵּין הַחַיּוֹת; וְנֹגַהּ לָאֵשׁ, וּמִן-הָאֵשׁ יוֹצֵא בָרָק.    13 As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like coals of fire, burning like the appearance of torches; it flashed up and down among the living creatures; and there was brightness to the fire, and out of the fire went forth lightning.
1.14 יד  וְהַחַיּוֹת, רָצוֹא וָשׁוֹב, כְּמַרְאֵה, הַבָּזָק.    14 And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.
1.15 טו  וָאֵרֶא, הַחַיּוֹת; וְהִנֵּה אוֹפַן אֶחָד בָּאָרֶץ אֵצֶל הַחַיּוֹת, לְאַרְבַּעַת פָּנָיו.    15 Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel at the bottom hard by the living creatures, at the four faces thereof.
1.16 טז  מַרְאֵה הָאוֹפַנִּים וּמַעֲשֵׂיהֶם כְּעֵין תַּרְשִׁישׁ, וּדְמוּת אֶחָד לְאַרְבַּעְתָּן; וּמַרְאֵיהֶם, וּמַעֲשֵׂיהֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה הָאוֹפַן, בְּתוֹךְ הָאוֹפָן.    16 The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the colour of a beryl; and they four had one likeness; and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel within a wheel.
1.17 יז  עַל-אַרְבַּעַת רִבְעֵיהֶן, בְּלֶכְתָּם יֵלֵכוּ:  לֹא יִסַּבּוּ, בְּלֶכְתָּן.    17 When they went, they went toward their four sides; they turned not when they went.
1.18 יח  וְגַבֵּיהֶן--וְגֹבַהּ לָהֶם, וְיִרְאָה לָהֶם; וְגַבֹּתָם, מְלֵאֹת עֵינַיִם סָבִיב--לְאַרְבַּעְתָּן.    18 As for their rings, they were high and they were dreadful; and they four had their rings full of eyes round about.
1.19 יט  וּבְלֶכֶת, הַחַיּוֹת, יֵלְכוּ הָאוֹפַנִּים, אֶצְלָם; וּבְהִנָּשֵׂא הַחַיּוֹת מֵעַל הָאָרֶץ, יִנָּשְׂאוּ הָאוֹפַנִּים.    19 And when the living creatures went, the wheels went hard by them; and when the living creatures were lifted up from the bottom, the wheels were lifted up.
1.20 כ  עַל אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה-שָּׁם הָרוּחַ לָלֶכֶת יֵלֵכוּ, שָׁמָּה הָרוּחַ לָלֶכֶת; וְהָאוֹפַנִּים, יִנָּשְׂאוּ לְעֻמָּתָם, כִּי רוּחַ הַחַיָּה, בָּאוֹפַנִּים.    20 Whithersoever the spirit was to go, as the spirit was to go thither, so they went; and the wheels were lifted up beside them; for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
1.21 כא  בְּלֶכְתָּם יֵלֵכוּ, וּבְעָמְדָם יַעֲמֹדוּ; וּבְהִנָּשְׂאָם מֵעַל הָאָרֶץ, יִנָּשְׂאוּ הָאוֹפַנִּים לְעֻמָּתָם--כִּי רוּחַ הַחַיָּה, בָּאוֹפַנִּים.    21 When those went, these went, and when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up beside them; for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
1.22 כב  וּדְמוּת עַל-רָאשֵׁי הַחַיָּה, רָקִיעַ, כְּעֵין, הַקֶּרַח הַנּוֹרָא--נָטוּי עַל-רָאשֵׁיהֶם, מִלְמָעְלָה.    22 And over the heads of the living creatures there was the likeness of a firmament, like the colour of the terrible ice, stretched forth over their heads above.
1.23 כג  וְתַחַת, הָרָקִיעַ, כַּנְפֵיהֶם יְשָׁרוֹת, אִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחוֹתָהּ:  לְאִישׁ, שְׁתַּיִם מְכַסּוֹת לָהֵנָּה, וּלְאִישׁ שְׁתַּיִם מְכַסּוֹת לָהֵנָּה, אֵת גְּוִיֹּתֵיהֶם.    23 And under the firmament were their wings conformable the one to the other; this one of them had two which covered, and that one of them had two which covered, their bodies.
1.24 כד  וָאֶשְׁמַע אֶת-קוֹל כַּנְפֵיהֶם כְּקוֹל מַיִם רַבִּים כְּקוֹל-שַׁדַּי, בְּלֶכְתָּם--קוֹל הֲמֻלָּה, כְּקוֹל מַחֲנֶה; בְּעָמְדָם, תְּרַפֶּינָה כַנְפֵיהֶן.    24 And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings like the noise of great waters, like the voice of the Almighty, a noise of tumult like the noise of a host; when they stood, they let down their wings.
1.25 כה  וַיְהִי-קוֹל--מֵעַל, לָרָקִיעַ אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשָׁם; בְּעָמְדָם, תְּרַפֶּינָה כַנְפֵיהֶן.    25 For, when there was a voice above the firmament that was over their heads, as they stood, they let down their wings.
1.26 כו  וּמִמַּעַל, לָרָקִיעַ אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשָׁם, כְּמַרְאֵה אֶבֶן-סַפִּיר, דְּמוּת כִּסֵּא; וְעַל, דְּמוּת הַכִּסֵּא, דְּמוּת כְּמַרְאֵה אָדָם עָלָיו, מִלְמָעְלָה.    26 And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone; and upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness as the appearance of a man upon it above.
1.27 כז  וָאֵרֶא כְּעֵין חַשְׁמַל, כְּמַרְאֵה-אֵשׁ בֵּית-לָהּ סָבִיב, מִמַּרְאֵה מָתְנָיו, וּלְמָעְלָה; וּמִמַּרְאֵה מָתְנָיו, וּלְמַטָּה, רָאִיתִי כְּמַרְאֵה-אֵשׁ, וְנֹגַהּ לוֹ סָבִיב.    27 And I saw as the colour of electrum, as the appearance of fire round about enclosing it, from the appearance of his loins and upward; and from the appearance of his loins and downward I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and there was brightness round about him.
1.28 כח  כְּמַרְאֵה הַקֶּשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה בֶעָנָן בְּיוֹם הַגֶּשֶׁם, כֵּן מַרְאֵה הַנֹּגַהּ סָבִיב--הוּא, מַרְאֵה דְּמוּת כְּבוֹד-יְהוָה; וָאֶרְאֶה וָאֶפֹּל עַל-פָּנַי, וָאֶשְׁמַע קוֹל מְדַבֵּר.  {פ}    28 As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spoke. {P}
2.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  בֶּן-אָדָם עֲמֹד עַל-רַגְלֶיךָ, וַאֲדַבֵּר אֹתָךְ.    1 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak with thee.'
2.2 ב  וַתָּבֹא בִי רוּחַ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֵלַי, וַתַּעֲמִדֵנִי, עַל-רַגְלָי; וָאֶשְׁמַע, אֵת מִדַּבֵּר אֵלָי.  {פ}    2 And spirit entered into me when He spoke unto me, and set me upon my feet; and I heard Him that spoke unto me. {P}
2.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם שׁוֹלֵחַ אֲנִי אוֹתְךָ אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶל-גּוֹיִם הַמּוֹרְדִים, אֲשֶׁר מָרְדוּ-בִי:  הֵמָּה וַאֲבוֹתָם פָּשְׁעוּ בִי, עַד-עֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    3 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to rebellious nations, that have rebelled against Me; they and their fathers have transgressed against Me, even unto this very day;
2.4 ד  וְהַבָּנִים, קְשֵׁי פָנִים וְחִזְקֵי-לֵב--אֲנִי שׁוֹלֵחַ אוֹתְךָ, אֲלֵיהֶם; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    4 and the children are brazen-faced and stiff-hearted, I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD.
2.5 ה  וְהֵמָּה אִם-יִשְׁמְעוּ וְאִם-יֶחְדָּלוּ, כִּי בֵּית מְרִי הֵמָּה--וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי נָבִיא הָיָה בְתוֹכָם.  {פ}    5 And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear--for they are a rebellious house--yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them. {P}
2.6 ו  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם אַל-תִּירָא מֵהֶם וּמִדִּבְרֵיהֶם אַל-תִּירָא, כִּי סָרָבִים וְסַלּוֹנִים אוֹתָךְ, וְאֶל-עַקְרַבִּים, אַתָּה יוֹשֵׁב:  מִדִּבְרֵיהֶם אַל-תִּירָא וּמִפְּנֵיהֶם אַל-תֵּחָת, כִּי בֵּית מְרִי הֵמָּה.    6 And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though defiers and despisers be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions; be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, for they are a rebellious house.
2.7 ז  וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֶת-דְּבָרַי אֲלֵיהֶם, אִם-יִשְׁמְעוּ וְאִם-יֶחְדָּלוּ:  כִּי מְרִי, הֵמָּה.  {פ}    7 And thou shalt speak My words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for they are most rebellious. {P}
2.8 ח  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, שְׁמַע אֵת אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי מְדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ--אַל-תְּהִי-מֶרִי, כְּבֵית הַמֶּרִי:  פְּצֵה פִיךָ--וֶאֱכֹל, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי נֹתֵן אֵלֶיךָ.    8 And thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee: be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house; open thy mouth, and eat that which I give thee.'
2.9 ט  וָאֶרְאֶה, וְהִנֵּה-יָד שְׁלוּחָה אֵלָי; וְהִנֵּה-בוֹ, מְגִלַּת-סֵפֶר.    9 And when I looked, behold, a hand was put forth unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein;
2.10 י  וַיִּפְרֹשׂ אוֹתָהּ לְפָנַי, וְהִיא כְתוּבָה פָּנִים וְאָחוֹר; וְכָתוּב אֵלֶיהָ, קִנִים וָהֶגֶה וָהִי.  {ס}    10 and He spread it before me, and it was written within and without; and there was written therein lamentations, and moaning, and woe. {S}
3.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי--בֶּן-אָדָם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תִּמְצָא אֱכוֹל:  אֱכוֹל אֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה הַזֹּאת, וְלֵךְ דַּבֵּר אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, eat that which thou findest; eat this roll, and go, speak unto the house of Israel.'
3.2 ב  וָאֶפְתַּח, אֶת-פִּי; וַיַּאֲכִילֵנִי, אֵת הַמְּגִלָּה הַזֹּאת.    2 So I opened my mouth, and He caused me to eat that roll.
3.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם בִּטְנְךָ תַאֲכֵל וּמֵעֶיךָ תְמַלֵּא, אֵת הַמְּגִלָּה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי נֹתֵן אֵלֶיךָ; וָאֹכְלָה, וַתְּהִי בְּפִי כִּדְבַשׁ לְמָתוֹק.  {פ}    3 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee.' Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness. {P}
3.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  בֶּן-אָדָם, לֶךְ-בֹּא אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְדִבַּרְתָּ בִדְבָרַי, אֲלֵיהֶם.    4 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with My words unto them.
3.5 ה  כִּי לֹא אֶל-עַם עִמְקֵי שָׂפָה, וְכִבְדֵי לָשׁוֹן--אַתָּה שָׁלוּחַ:  אֶל-בֵּית, יִשְׂרָאֵל.    5 For thou art not sent to a people of an unintelligible speech and of a slow tongue, but to the house of Israel;
3.6 ו  לֹא אֶל-עַמִּים רַבִּים, עִמְקֵי שָׂפָה וְכִבְדֵי לָשׁוֹן, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תִשְׁמַע, דִּבְרֵיהֶם; אִם-לֹא אֲלֵיהֶם שְׁלַחְתִּיךָ, הֵמָּה יִשְׁמְעוּ אֵלֶיךָ.    6 not to many peoples of an unintelligible speech and of a slow tongue, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, if I sent thee to them, they would hearken unto thee.
3.7 ז  וּבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא יֹאבוּ לִשְׁמֹעַ אֵלֶיךָ--כִּי-אֵינָם אֹבִים, לִשְׁמֹעַ אֵלָי:  כִּי כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, חִזְקֵי-מֵצַח וּקְשֵׁי-לֵב הֵמָּה.    7 But the house of Israel will not consent to hearken unto thee; for they consent not to hearken unto Me; for all the house of Israel are of a hard forehead and of a stiff heart.
3.8 ח  הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ חֲזָקִים, לְעֻמַּת פְּנֵיהֶם; וְאֶת-מִצְחֲךָ חָזָק, לְעֻמַּת מִצְחָם.    8 Behold, I have made thy face hard against their faces, and thy forehead hard against their foreheads.
3.9 ט  כְּשָׁמִיר חָזָק מִצֹּר, נָתַתִּי מִצְחֶךָ:  לֹא-תִירָא אוֹתָם וְלֹא-תֵחַת מִפְּנֵיהֶם, כִּי בֵּית מְרִי הֵמָּה.  {פ}    9 As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead; fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, for they are a rebellious house.' {P}
3.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  בֶּן-אָדָם--אֶת-כָּל-דְּבָרַי אֲשֶׁר אֲדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ, קַח בִּלְבָבְךָ וּבְאָזְנֶיךָ שְּׁמָע.    10 Moreover He said unto me: 'Son of man, all My words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thy heart, and hear with thine ears.
3.11 יא  וְלֵךְ בֹּא אֶל-הַגּוֹלָה, אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמֶּךָ, וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  אִם-יִשְׁמְעוּ, וְאִם-יֶחְדָּלוּ.    11 And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them: Thus saith the Lord GOD; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.'
3.12 יב  וַתִּשָּׂאֵנִי רוּחַ--וָאֶשְׁמַע אַחֲרַי, קוֹל רַעַשׁ גָּדוֹל:  בָּרוּךְ כְּבוֹד-יְהוָה, מִמְּקוֹמוֹ.    12 Then a spirit lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing: 'Blessed be the glory of the LORD from His place';
3.13 יג  וְקוֹל כַּנְפֵי הַחַיּוֹת, מַשִּׁיקוֹת אִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחוֹתָהּ, וְקוֹל הָאוֹפַנִּים, לְעֻמָּתָם; וְקוֹל, רַעַשׁ גָּדוֹל.    13 also the noise of the wings of the living creatures as they touched one another, and the noise of the wheels beside them, even the noise of a great rushing.
3.14 יד  וְרוּחַ נְשָׂאַתְנִי, וַתִּקָּחֵנִי; וָאֵלֵךְ מַר בַּחֲמַת רוּחִי, וְיַד-יְהוָה עָלַי חָזָקָה.    14 So a spirit lifted me up, and took me away; and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of the LORD was strong upon me.
3.15 טו  וָאָבוֹא אֶל-הַגּוֹלָה תֵּל אָבִיב הַיֹּשְׁבִים אֶל-נְהַר-כְּבָר, ואשר (וָאֵשֵׁב)--הֵמָּה, יוֹשְׁבִים שָׁם; וָאֵשֵׁב שָׁם שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, מַשְׁמִים בְּתוֹכָם.    15 Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river Chebar, and I sat where they sat; and I remained there appalled among them seven days.
3.16 טז  וַיְהִי, מִקְצֵה שִׁבְעַת יָמִים;  {פ} וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    16 And it came to pass at the end of seven days, {P} that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
3.17 יז  בֶּן-אָדָם, צֹפֶה נְתַתִּיךָ לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְשָׁמַעְתָּ מִפִּי דָּבָר, וְהִזְהַרְתָּ אוֹתָם מִמֶּנִּי.    17 'Son of man, I have appointed thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; and when thou shalt hear a word at My mouth, thou shalt give them warning from Me.
3.18 יח  בְּאָמְרִי לָרָשָׁע, מוֹת תָּמוּת, וְלֹא הִזְהַרְתּוֹ וְלֹא דִבַּרְתָּ לְהַזְהִיר רָשָׁע מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרְשָׁעָה, לְחַיֹּתוֹ--הוּא רָשָׁע בַּעֲוֺנוֹ יָמוּת, וְדָמוֹ מִיָּדְךָ אֲבַקֵּשׁ.    18 When I say unto the wicked: Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand.
3.19 יט  וְאַתָּה, כִּי-הִזְהַרְתָּ רָשָׁע, וְלֹא-שָׁב מֵרִשְׁעוֹ, וּמִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרְשָׁעָה--הוּא בַּעֲוֺנוֹ יָמוּת, וְאַתָּה אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ הִצַּלְתָּ.    19 Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.
3.20 כ  וּבְשׁוּב צַדִּיק מִצִּדְקוֹ וְעָשָׂה עָוֶל, וְנָתַתִּי מִכְשׁוֹל לְפָנָיו הוּא יָמוּת:  כִּי לֹא הִזְהַרְתּוֹ, בְּחַטָּאתוֹ יָמוּת, וְלֹא תִזָּכַרְןָ צִדְקֹתָו אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וְדָמוֹ מִיָּדְךָ אֲבַקֵּשׁ.    20 Again, when a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, I will lay a stumblingblock before him, he shall die; because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteous deeds which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thy hand.
3.21 כא  וְאַתָּה כִּי הִזְהַרְתּוֹ צַדִּיק, לְבִלְתִּי חֲטֹא צַדִּיק--וְהוּא לֹא-חָטָא:  חָיוֹ יִחְיֶה כִּי נִזְהָר, וְאַתָּה אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ הִצַּלְתָּ.  {פ}    21 Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he took warning; and thou hast delivered thy soul.' {P}
3.22 כב  וַתְּהִי עָלַי שָׁם, יַד-יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, קוּם צֵא אֶל-הַבִּקְעָה, וְשָׁם, אֲדַבֵּר אוֹתָךְ.    22 And the hand of the LORD came there upon me; and He said unto me: 'Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there speak with thee.'
3.23 כג  וָאָקוּם, וָאֵצֵא אֶל-הַבִּקְעָה, וְהִנֵּה-שָׁם כְּבוֹד-יְהוָה עֹמֵד, כַּכָּבוֹד אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי עַל-נְהַר-כְּבָר; וָאֶפֹּל, עַל-פָּנָי.    23 Then I arose, and went forth into the plain; and, behold, the glory of the LORD stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell on my face.
3.24 כד  וַתָּבֹא-בִי רוּחַ, וַתַּעֲמִדֵנִי עַל-רַגְלָי; וַיְדַבֵּר אֹתִי וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֹּא הִסָּגֵר בְּתוֹךְ בֵּיתֶךָ.    24 Then spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet; and He spoke with me, and said unto me: 'Go, shut thyself within thy house.
3.25 כה  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הִנֵּה נָתְנוּ עָלֶיךָ עֲבוֹתִים, וַאֲסָרוּךָ, בָּהֶם; וְלֹא תֵצֵא, בְּתוֹכָם.    25 But thou, son of man, behold, bands shall be put upon thee, and thou shalt be bound with them, and thou shalt not go out among them;
3.26 כו  וּלְשׁוֹנְךָ, אַדְבִּיק אֶל-חִכֶּךָ, וְנֶאֱלַמְתָּ, וְלֹא-תִהְיֶה לָהֶם לְאִישׁ מוֹכִיחַ:  כִּי בֵּית מְרִי, הֵמָּה.    26 and I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover; for they are a rebellious house.
3.27 כז  וּבְדַבְּרִי אוֹתְךָ, אֶפְתַּח אֶת-פִּיךָ, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה; הַשֹּׁמֵעַ יִשְׁמָע וְהֶחָדֵל יֶחְדָּל, כִּי בֵּית מְרִי הֵמָּה.  {פ}    27 But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD; he that heareth, let him hear, and he that forbeareth, let him forbear; for they are a rebellious house. {P}
4.1 א  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם קַח-לְךָ לְבֵנָה, וְנָתַתָּה אוֹתָהּ לְפָנֶיךָ; וְחַקּוֹתָ עָלֶיהָ עִיר, אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    1 Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and trace upon it a city, even Jerusalem;
4.2 ב  וְנָתַתָּה עָלֶיהָ מָצוֹר, וּבָנִיתָ עָלֶיהָ דָּיֵק, וְשָׁפַכְתָּ עָלֶיהָ, סֹלְלָה; וְנָתַתָּה עָלֶיהָ מַחֲנוֹת וְשִׂים-עָלֶיהָ כָּרִים, סָבִיב.    2 and lay siege against it, and build forts against it, and cast up a mound against it; set camps also against it, and set battering rams against it round about.
4.3 ג  וְאַתָּה קַח-לְךָ, מַחֲבַת בַּרְזֶל, וְנָתַתָּה אוֹתָהּ קִיר בַּרְזֶל, בֵּינְךָ וּבֵין הָעִיר; וַהֲכִינֹתָה אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ אֵלֶיהָ וְהָיְתָה בַמָּצוֹר, וְצַרְתָּ עָלֶיהָ--אוֹת הִיא, לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    3 And take thou unto thee an iron griddle, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city; and set thy face toward it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel. {P}
4.4 ד  וְאַתָּה שְׁכַב עַל-צִדְּךָ הַשְּׂמָאלִי, וְשַׂמְתָּ אֶת-עֲוֺן בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל עָלָיו:  מִסְפַּר הַיָּמִים אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁכַּב עָלָיו, תִּשָּׂא אֶת-עֲוֺנָם.    4 Moreover lie thou upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it; according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it, thou shalt bear their iniquity.
4.5 ה  וַאֲנִי, נָתַתִּי לְךָ אֶת-שְׁנֵי עֲוֺנָם, לְמִסְפַּר יָמִים, שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת וְתִשְׁעִים יוֹם; וְנָשָׂאתָ, עֲוֺן בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    5 For I have appointed the years of their iniquity to be unto thee a number of days, even three hundred and ninety days; so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
4.6 ו  וְכִלִּיתָ אֶת-אֵלֶּה, וְשָׁכַבְתָּ עַל-צִדְּךָ הימיני (הַיְמָנִי) שֵׁנִית, וְנָשָׂאתָ, אֶת-עֲוֺן בֵּית-יְהוּדָה--אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם, יוֹם לַשָּׁנָה יוֹם לַשָּׁנָה נְתַתִּיו לָךְ.    6 And again, when thou hast accomplished these, thou shalt lie on thy right side, and shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah; forty days, each day for a year, have I appointed it unto thee.
4.7 ז  וְאֶל-מְצוֹר יְרוּשָׁלִַם תָּכִין פָּנֶיךָ, וּזְרֹעֲךָ חֲשׂוּפָה; וְנִבֵּאתָ, עָלֶיהָ.    7 And thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, with thine arm uncovered; and thou shalt prophesy against it.
4.8 ח  וְהִנֵּה נָתַתִּי עָלֶיךָ, עֲבוֹתִים; וְלֹא-תֵהָפֵךְ מִצִּדְּךָ אֶל-צִדֶּךָ, עַד-כַּלּוֹתְךָ יְמֵי מְצוּרֶךָ.    8 And, behold, I lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another, till thou hast accomplished the days of thy siege.
4.9 ט  וְאַתָּה קַח-לְךָ חִטִּין וּשְׂעֹרִים וּפוֹל וַעֲדָשִׁים וְדֹחַן וְכֻסְּמִים, וְנָתַתָּה אוֹתָם בִּכְלִי אֶחָד, וְעָשִׂיתָ אוֹתָם לְךָ, לְלָחֶם:  מִסְפַּר הַיָּמִים אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה שׁוֹכֵב עַל-צִדְּךָ, שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת וְתִשְׁעִים יוֹם--תֹּאכְלֶנּוּ.    9 Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentils, and millet, and spelt, and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread thereof; according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, even three hundred and ninety days, shalt thou eat thereof.
4.10 י  וּמַאֲכָלְךָ, אֲשֶׁר תֹּאכְלֶנּוּ--בְּמִשְׁקוֹל, עֶשְׂרִים שֶׁקֶל לַיּוֹם:  מֵעֵת עַד-עֵת, תֹּאכְלֶנּוּ.    10 And thy food which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day; from time to time shalt thou eat it.
4.11 יא  וּמַיִם בִּמְשׂוּרָה תִשְׁתֶּה, שִׁשִּׁית הַהִין:  מֵעֵת עַד-עֵת, תִּשְׁתֶּה.    11 Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of a hin; from time to time shalt thou drink.
4.12 יב  וְעֻגַת שְׂעֹרִים, תֹּאכְלֶנָּה; וְהִיא, בְּגֶלְלֵי צֵאַת הָאָדָם--תְּעֻגֶנָה, לְעֵינֵיהֶם.  {ס}    12 And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it in their sight with dung that cometh out of man.' {S}
4.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, כָּכָה יֹאכְלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-לַחְמָם טָמֵא, בַּגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר אַדִּיחֵם שָׁם.    13 And the LORD said: 'Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their bread unclean, among the nations whither I will drive them.'
4.14 יד  וָאֹמַר, אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה נַפְשִׁי, לֹא מְטֻמָּאָה; וּנְבֵלָה וּטְרֵפָה לֹא-אָכַלְתִּי מִנְּעוּרַי וְעַד-עַתָּה, וְלֹא-בָא בְּפִי בְּשַׂר פִּגּוּל.  {ס}    14 Then said I: 'Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not been polluted; for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn of beasts; neither came there abhorred flesh into my mouth.' {S}
4.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי--רְאֵה נָתַתִּי לְךָ אֶת-צפועי (צְפִיעֵי) הַבָּקָר, תַּחַת גֶּלְלֵי הָאָדָם; וְעָשִׂיתָ אֶת-לַחְמְךָ, עֲלֵיהֶם.  {ס}    15 Then He said unto me: 'See, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread thereon.' {S}
4.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם הִנְנִי שֹׁבֵר מַטֵּה-לֶחֶם בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְאָכְלוּ-לֶחֶם בְּמִשְׁקָל, וּבִדְאָגָה; וּמַיִם, בִּמְשׂוּרָה וּבְשִׁמָּמוֹן יִשְׁתּוּ.    16 Moreover He said unto me: 'Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight, and with anxiety; and they shall drink water by measure, and in appalment;
4.17 יז  לְמַעַן יַחְסְרוּ, לֶחֶם וָמָיִם; וְנָשַׁמּוּ אִישׁ וְאָחִיו, וְנָמַקּוּ בַּעֲוֺנָם.  {פ}    17 that they may want bread and water, and be appalled one with another, and pine away in their iniquity. {P}
5.1 א  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם קַח-לְךָ חֶרֶב חַדָּה, תַּעַר הַגַּלָּבִים תִּקָּחֶנָּה לָּךְ, וְהַעֲבַרְתָּ עַל-רֹאשְׁךָ, וְעַל-זְקָנֶךָ; וְלָקַחְתָּ לְךָ מֹאזְנֵי מִשְׁקָל, וְחִלַּקְתָּם.    1 And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp sword, as a barber's razor shalt thou take it unto thee, and cause it to pass upon thy head and upon thy beard; then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair.
5.2 ב  שְׁלִשִׁית, בָּאוּר תַּבְעִיר בְּתוֹךְ הָעִיר, כִּמְלֹאת, יְמֵי הַמָּצוֹר; וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-הַשְּׁלִשִׁית, תַּכֶּה בַחֶרֶב סְבִיבוֹתֶיהָ, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית תִּזְרֶה לָרוּחַ, וְחֶרֶב אָרִיק אַחֲרֵיהֶם.    2 A third part shalt thou burn in the fire in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled; and thou shalt take a third part, and smite it with the sword round about her; and a third part thou shalt scatter to the wind, and I will draw out a sword after them.
5.3 ג  וְלָקַחְתָּ מִשָּׁם, מְעַט בְּמִסְפָּר; וְצַרְתָּ אוֹתָם, בִּכְנָפֶיךָ.    3 Thou shalt also take thereof a few by number, and bind them in thy skirts.
5.4 ד  וּמֵהֶם, עוֹד תִּקָּח, וְהִשְׁלַכְתָּ אוֹתָם אֶל-תּוֹךְ הָאֵשׁ, וְשָׂרַפְתָּ אֹתָם בָּאֵשׁ:  מִמֶּנּוּ תֵצֵא-אֵשׁ, אֶל-כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    4 And of them again shalt thou take, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; therefrom shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel. {P}
5.5 ה  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, זֹאת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּתוֹךְ הַגּוֹיִם שַׂמְתִּיהָ; וּסְבִיבוֹתֶיהָ, אֲרָצוֹת.    5 Thus saith the Lord GOD: This is Jerusalem! I have set her in the midst of the nations, and countries are round about her.
5.6 ו  וַתֶּמֶר אֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי לְרִשְׁעָה, מִן-הַגּוֹיִם, וְאֶת-חֻקּוֹתַי, מִן-הָאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתֶיהָ:  כִּי בְמִשְׁפָּטַי מָאָסוּ, וְחֻקּוֹתַי לֹא-הָלְכוּ בָהֶם.  {ס}    6 And she hath rebelled against Mine ordinances in doing wickedness more than the nations, and against My statutes more than the countries that are round about her; for they have rejected Mine ordinances, and as for My statutes, they have not walked in them. {S}
5.7 ז  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן הֲמָנְכֶם מִן-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּחֻקּוֹתַי לֹא הֲלַכְתֶּם, וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי לֹא עֲשִׂיתֶם; וּכְמִשְׁפְּטֵי הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתֵיכֶם, לֹא עֲשִׂיתֶם.    7 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Because ye have outdone the nations that are round about you, in that ye have not walked in My statutes, neither have kept Mine ordinances, neither have done after the ordinances of the nations that are round about you;
5.8 ח  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי עָלַיִךְ, גַּם-אָנִי; וְעָשִׂיתִי בְתוֹכֵךְ מִשְׁפָּטִים, לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם.    8 therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and I will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations.
5.9 ט  וְעָשִׂיתִי בָךְ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָשִׂיתִי, וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר-לֹא-אֶעֱשֶׂה כָמֹהוּ, עוֹד--יַעַן, כָּל-תּוֹעֲבֹתָיִךְ.  {פ}    9 And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations. {P}
5.10 י  לָכֵן, אָבוֹת יֹאכְלוּ בָנִים בְּתוֹכֵךְ, וּבָנִים, יֹאכְלוּ אֲבוֹתָם; וְעָשִׂיתִי בָךְ שְׁפָטִים, וְזֵרִיתִי אֶת-כָּל-שְׁאֵרִיתֵךְ לְכָל-רוּחַ.  {ס}    10 Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter unto all the winds. {S}
5.11 יא  לָכֵן חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-לֹא יַעַן אֶת-מִקְדָּשִׁי טִמֵּאת, בְּכָל-שִׁקּוּצַיִךְ וּבְכָל-תּוֹעֲבֹתָיִךְ; וְגַם-אֲנִי אֶגְרַע וְלֹא-תָחוֹס עֵינִי, וְגַם-אֲנִי לֹא אֶחְמוֹל.    11 Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely, because thou hast defiled My sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall Mine eye spare, and I also will have no pity.
5.12 יב  שְׁלִשִׁתֵיךְ בַּדֶּבֶר יָמוּתוּ, וּבָרָעָב יִכְלוּ בְתוֹכֵךְ, וְהַשְּׁלִשִׁית, בַּחֶרֶב יִפְּלוּ סְבִיבוֹתָיִךְ; וְהַשְּׁלִישִׁית לְכָל-רוּחַ אֱזָרֶה, וְחֶרֶב אָרִיק אַחֲרֵיהֶם.    12 A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee; and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and a third part I will scatter unto all the winds, and will draw out a sword after them.
5.13 יג  וְכָלָה אַפִּי, וַהֲנִחוֹתִי חֲמָתִי בָּם--וְהִנֶּחָמְתִּי; וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי בְּקִנְאָתִי, בְּכַלּוֹתִי חֲמָתִי, בָּם.    13 Thus shall Mine anger spend itself, and I will satisfy My fury upon them, and I will be eased; and they shall know that I the LORD have spoken in My zeal, when I have spent My fury upon them.
5.14 יד  וְאֶתְּנֵךְ לְחָרְבָּה וּלְחֶרְפָּה, בַּגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתָיִךְ, לְעֵינֵי, כָּל-עוֹבֵר.    14 Moreover I will make thee an amazement and a reproach, among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.
5.15 טו  וְהָיְתָה חֶרְפָּה וּגְדוּפָה, מוּסָר וּמְשַׁמָּה, לַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתָיִךְ:  בַּעֲשׂוֹתִי בָךְ שְׁפָטִים בְּאַף וּבְחֵמָה, וּבְתֹכְחוֹת חֵמָה--אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי.    15 So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an astonishment, unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury, and in furious rebukes; I the LORD have spoken it;
5.16 טז  בְּשַׁלְּחִי אֶת-חִצֵּי הָרָעָב הָרָעִים בָּהֶם, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ לְמַשְׁחִית, אֲשֶׁר-אֲשַׁלַּח אוֹתָם, לְשַׁחֶתְכֶם--וְרָעָב אֹסֵף עֲלֵיכֶם, וְשָׁבַרְתִּי לָכֶם מַטֵּה-לָחֶם.    16 when I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, that are for destruction, which I will send to destroy you; and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread;
5.17 יז  וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם רָעָב וְחַיָּה רָעָה, וְשִׁכְּלֻךְ, וְדֶבֶר וָדָם, יַעֲבָר-בָּךְ; וְחֶרֶב אָבִיא עָלַיִךְ, אֲנִי יְהוָה דִּבַּרְתִּי.  {פ}    17 and I will send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the LORD have spoken it.' {P}
6.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
6.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ אֶל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהִנָּבֵא, אֲלֵיהֶם.    2 'Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,
6.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ--הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה לֶהָרִים וְלַגְּבָעוֹת לָאֲפִיקִים ולגיאות (וְלַגֵּיאָיוֹת), הִנְנִי אֲנִי מֵבִיא עֲלֵיכֶם חֶרֶב, וְאִבַּדְתִּי, בָּמוֹתֵיכֶם.    3 and say: Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD: Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the mountains and concerning the hills, concerning the ravines and concerning the valleys: Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.
6.4 ד  וְנָשַׁמּוּ, מִזְבְּחוֹתֵיכֶם, וְנִשְׁבְּרוּ, חַמָּנֵיכֶם; וְהִפַּלְתִּי, חַלְלֵיכֶם, לִפְנֵי, גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם.    4 And your altars shall become desolate, and your sun-images shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.
6.5 ה  וְנָתַתִּי, אֶת-פִּגְרֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי, גִּלּוּלֵיהֶם; וְזֵרִיתִי, אֶת-עַצְמוֹתֵיכֶם, סְבִיבוֹת, מִזְבְּחוֹתֵיכֶם.    5 And I will lay the carcasses of the children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.
6.6 ו  בְּכֹל, מוֹשְׁבוֹתֵיכֶם, הֶעָרִים תֶּחֱרַבְנָה, וְהַבָּמוֹת תִּישָׁמְנָה--לְמַעַן יֶחֶרְבוּ וְיֶאְשְׁמוּ מִזְבְּחוֹתֵיכֶם, וְנִשְׁבְּרוּ וְנִשְׁבְּתוּ גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם, וְנִגְדְּעוּ חַמָּנֵיכֶם, וְנִמְחוּ מַעֲשֵׂיכֶם.    6 In all your dwelling-places the cities shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your sun-images may be hewn down, and your works may be blotted out.
6.7 ז  וְנָפַל חָלָל, בְּתוֹכְכֶם; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    7 And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
6.8 ח  וְהוֹתַרְתִּי, בִּהְיוֹת לָכֶם פְּלִיטֵי חֶרֶב--בַּגּוֹיִם:  בְּהִזָּרוֹתֵיכֶם, בָּאֲרָצוֹת.    8 Yet will I leave a remnant, in that ye shall have some that escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.
6.9 ט  וְזָכְרוּ פְלִיטֵיכֶם אוֹתִי, בַּגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבּוּ-שָׁם, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּרְתִּי אֶת-לִבָּם הַזּוֹנֶה אֲשֶׁר-סָר מֵעָלַי, וְאֵת עֵינֵיהֶם הַזֹּנוֹת אַחֲרֵי גִּלּוּלֵיהֶם; וְנָקֹטּוּ, בִּפְנֵיהֶם, אֶל-הָרָעוֹת אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ, לְכֹל תּוֹעֲבֹתֵיהֶם.    9 And they that escape of you shall remember Me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, how that I have been anguished with their straying heart, which hath departed from Me, and with their eyes, which are gone astray after their idols; and they shall loathe themselves in their own sight for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.
6.10 י  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה; לֹא אֶל-חִנָּם דִּבַּרְתִּי, לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהֶם הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת.  {פ}    10 And they shall know that I am the LORD; I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them. {P}
6.11 יא  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הַכֵּה בְכַפְּךָ וּרְקַע בְּרַגְלְךָ וֶאֱמָר-אָח, אֶל כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹת רָעוֹת, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲשֶׁר, בַּחֶרֶב בָּרָעָב וּבַדֶּבֶר--יִפֹּלוּ.    11 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say: Alas! because of all the evil abominations of the house of Israel; for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.
6.12 יב  הָרָחוֹק בַּדֶּבֶר יָמוּת, וְהַקָּרוֹב בַּחֶרֶב יִפּוֹל, וְהַנִּשְׁאָר וְהַנָּצוּר, בָּרָעָב יָמוּת; וְכִלֵּיתִי חֲמָתִי, בָּם.    12 He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine; thus will I spend My fury upon them.
6.13 יג  וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בִּהְיוֹת חַלְלֵיהֶם בְּתוֹךְ גִּלּוּלֵיהֶם, סְבִיבוֹת מִזְבְּחוֹתֵיהֶם; אֶל כָּל-גִּבְעָה רָמָה בְּכֹל רָאשֵׁי הֶהָרִים, וְתַחַת כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן וְתַחַת כָּל-אֵלָה עֲבֻתָּה, מְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ-שָׁם רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לְכֹל גִּלּוּלֵיהֶם.    13 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains, and under every leafy tree, and under every thick terebinth, the place where they did offer sweet savour to all their idols.
6.14 יד  וְנָטִיתִי אֶת-יָדִי, עֲלֵיהֶם, וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ שְׁמָמָה וּמְשַׁמָּה מִמִּדְבַּר דִּבְלָתָה, בְּכֹל מוֹשְׁבוֹתֵיהֶם; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    14 And I will stretch out My hand upon them, and make the land desolate and waste, more than the wilderness of Diblah, throughout all their habitations; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
7.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
7.2 ב  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה לְאַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--קֵץ:  בָּא הַקֵּץ, עַל-ארבעת (אַרְבַּע) כַּנְפוֹת הָאָרֶץ.    2 'And thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the land of Israel: An end! the end is come upon the four corners of the land.
7.3 ג  עַתָּה, הַקֵּץ עָלַיִךְ, וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי אַפִּי בָּךְ, וּשְׁפַטְתִּיךְ כִּדְרָכָיִךְ; וְנָתַתִּי עָלַיִךְ, אֵת כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתָיִךְ.    3 Now is the end upon thee, and I will send Mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways; and I will bring upon thee all thine abominations.
7.4 ד  וְלֹא-תָחוֹס עֵינִי עָלַיִךְ, וְלֹא אֶחְמוֹל:  כִּי דְרָכַיִךְ עָלַיִךְ אֶתֵּן, וְתוֹעֲבוֹתַיִךְ בְּתוֹכֵךְ תִּהְיֶיןָ, וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    4 And Mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will bring thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the LORD. {P}
7.5 ה  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  רָעָה אַחַת רָעָה, הִנֵּה בָאָה.    5 Thus saith the Lord GOD: An evil, a singular evil, behold, it cometh.
7.6 ו  קֵץ בָּא, בָּא הַקֵּץ הֵקִיץ אֵלָיִךְ; הִנֵּה, בָּאָה.    6 An end is come, the end is come, it awaketh against thee; behold, it cometh.
7.7 ז  בָּאָה הַצְּפִירָה אֵלֶיךָ, יוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ; בָּא הָעֵת, קָרוֹב הַיּוֹם מְהוּמָה--וְלֹא-הֵד הָרִים.    7 The turn is come unto thee, O inhabitant of the land; the time is come, the day of tumult is near, and not of joyful shouting upon the mountains.
7.8 ח  עַתָּה מִקָּרוֹב, אֶשְׁפּוֹךְ חֲמָתִי עָלַיִךְ, וְכִלֵּיתִי אַפִּי בָּךְ, וּשְׁפַטְתִּיךְ כִּדְרָכָיִךְ; וְנָתַתִּי עָלַיִךְ, אֵת כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתָיִךְ.    8 Now will I shortly pour out My fury upon thee, and spend Mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways; and I will bring upon thee all thine abominations.
7.9 ט  וְלֹא-תָחוֹס עֵינִי, וְלֹא אֶחְמוֹל:  כִּדְרָכַיִךְ עָלַיִךְ אֶתֵּן, וְתוֹעֲבוֹתַיִךְ בְּתוֹכֵךְ תִּהְיֶיןָ, וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה מַכֶּה.    9 And Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; I will bring upon thee according to thy ways, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I the LORD do smite.
7.10 י  הִנֵּה הַיּוֹם, הִנֵּה בָאָה:  יָצְאָה, הַצְּפִרָה--צָץ הַמַּטֶּה, פָּרַח הַזָּדוֹן.    10 Behold the day; behold, it cometh; the turn is come forth; the rod hath blossomed, arrogancy hath budded.
7.11 יא  הֶחָמָס קָם, לְמַטֵּה-רֶשַׁע; לֹא-מֵהֶם וְלֹא מֵהֲמוֹנָם, וְלֹא מֶהֱמֵהֶם--וְלֹא-נֹהַּ בָּהֶם.    11 Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness; nought cometh from them, nor from their tumult, nor from their turmoil, neither is there eminency among them.
7.12 יב  בָּא הָעֵת, הִגִּיעַ הַיּוֹם--הַקּוֹנֶה אַל-יִשְׂמָח, וְהַמֹּכֵר אַל-יִתְאַבָּל:  כִּי חָרוֹן, אֶל-כָּל-הֲמוֹנָהּ.    12 The time is come, the day draweth near; let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.
7.13 יג  כִּי הַמֹּכֵר, אֶל-הַמִּמְכָּר לֹא יָשׁוּב, וְעוֹד בַּחַיִּים, חַיָּתָם:  כִּי-חָזוֹן אֶל-כָּל-הֲמוֹנָהּ לֹא יָשׁוּב, וְאִישׁ בַּעֲוֺנוֹ חַיָּתוֹ לֹא יִתְחַזָּקוּ.    13 For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they be yet alive; for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any stand possessed of the iniquity of his life.
7.14 יד  תָּקְעוּ בַתָּקוֹעַ וְהָכִין הַכֹּל, וְאֵין הֹלֵךְ לַמִּלְחָמָה:  כִּי חֲרוֹנִי, אֶל-כָּל-הֲמוֹנָהּ.    14 They have blown the horn, and have made all ready, but none goeth to the battle; for My wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.
7.15 טו  הַחֶרֶב בַּחוּץ, וְהַדֶּבֶר וְהָרָעָב מִבָּיִת:  אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה, בַּחֶרֶב יָמוּת, וַאֲשֶׁר בָּעִיר, רָעָב וָדֶבֶר יֹאכְלֶנּוּ.    15 The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within; he that is in the field shall die with the sword, and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.
7.16 טז  וּפָלְטוּ, פְּלִיטֵיהֶם, וְהָיוּ אֶל-הֶהָרִים כְּיוֹנֵי הַגֵּאָיוֹת כֻּלָּם, הֹמוֹת--אִישׁ, בַּעֲוֺנוֹ.    16 But they that shall at all escape of them, shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them moaning, every one in his iniquity.
7.17 יז  כָּל-הַיָּדַיִם, תִּרְפֶּינָה; וְכָל-בִּרְכַּיִם, תֵּלַכְנָה מָּיִם.    17 All hands shall be slack, and all knees shall drip with water.
7.18 יח  וְחָגְרוּ שַׂקִּים, וְכִסְּתָה אוֹתָם פַּלָּצוּת; וְאֶל כָּל-פָּנִים בּוּשָׁה, וּבְכָל-רָאשֵׁיהֶם קָרְחָה.    18 They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads.
7.19 יט  כַּסְפָּם בַּחוּצוֹת יַשְׁלִיכוּ, וּזְהָבָם לְנִדָּה יִהְיֶה--כַּסְפָּם וּזְהָבָם לֹא-יוּכַל לְהַצִּילָם בְּיוֹם עֶבְרַת יְהוָה, נַפְשָׁם לֹא יְשַׂבֵּעוּ וּמֵעֵיהֶם לֹא יְמַלֵּאוּ:  כִּי-מִכְשׁוֹל עֲוֺנָם, הָיָה.    19 They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be as an unclean thing; their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the LORD; they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels; because it hath been the stumblingblock of their iniquity.
7.20 כ  וּצְבִי עֶדְיוֹ לְגָאוֹן שָׂמָהוּ, וְצַלְמֵי תוֹעֲבֹתָם שִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם עָשׂוּ בוֹ; עַל-כֵּן נְתַתִּיו לָהֶם, לְנִדָּה.    20 And as for the beauty of their ornament, which was set for a pride, they made the images of their abominations and their detestable things thereof; therefore have I made it unto them as an unclean thing.
7.21 כא  וּנְתַתִּיו בְּיַד-הַזָּרִים לָבַז, וּלְרִשְׁעֵי הָאָרֶץ לְשָׁלָל; וחללוה (וְחִלְּלוּהוּ).    21 And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall profane it.
7.22 כב  וַהֲסִבּוֹתִי פָנַי מֵהֶם, וְחִלְּלוּ אֶת-צְפוּנִי; וּבָאוּ-בָהּ פָּרִיצִים, וְחִלְּלוּהָ.  {פ}    22 I will also turn My face from them, and they shall profane My secret place; and robbers shall enter into it, and profane it. {P}
7.23 כג  עֲשֵׂה, הָרַתּוֹק:  כִּי הָאָרֶץ, מָלְאָה מִשְׁפַּט דָּמִים, וְהָעִיר, מָלְאָה חָמָס.    23 Make the chain; for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.
7.24 כד  וְהֵבֵאתִי רָעֵי גוֹיִם, וְיָרְשׁוּ אֶת-בָּתֵּיהֶם; וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי גְּאוֹן עַזִּים, וְנִחֲלוּ מְקַדְשֵׁיהֶם.    24 Wherefore I will bring the worst of the nations, and they shall possess their houses; I will also make the pride of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be profaned.
7.25 כה  קְפָדָה-בָא; וּבִקְשׁוּ שָׁלוֹם, וָאָיִן.    25 Horror cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be none.
7.26 כו  הֹוָה עַל-הֹוָה תָּבוֹא, וּשְׁמֻעָה אֶל-שְׁמוּעָה תִּהְיֶה; וּבִקְשׁוּ חָזוֹן, מִנָּבִיא--וְתוֹרָה תֹּאבַד מִכֹּהֵן, וְעֵצָה מִזְּקֵנִים.    26 Calamity shall come upon calamity, and rumour shall be upon rumour; and they shall seek a vision of the prophet, and instruction shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elders.
7.27 כז  הַמֶּלֶךְ יִתְאַבָּל, וְנָשִׂיא יִלְבַּשׁ שְׁמָמָה, וִידֵי עַם-הָאָרֶץ, תִּבָּהַלְנָה; מִדַּרְכָּם אֶעֱשֶׂה אֹתָם, וּבְמִשְׁפְּטֵיהֶם אֶשְׁפְּטֵם, וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    27 The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with appalment, and the hands of the people of the land shall be enfeebled; I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
8.1 א  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַשִּׁשִּׁית, בַּשִּׁשִּׁי בַּחֲמִשָּׁה לַחֹדֶשׁ, אֲנִי יוֹשֵׁב בְּבֵיתִי, וְזִקְנֵי יְהוּדָה יוֹשְׁבִים לְפָנָי; וַתִּפֹּל עָלַי שָׁם, יַד אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    1 And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD fell there upon me.
8.2 ב  וָאֶרְאֶה, וְהִנֵּה דְמוּת כְּמַרְאֵה-אֵשׁ--מִמַּרְאֵה מָתְנָיו וּלְמַטָּה, אֵשׁ; וּמִמָּתְנָיו וּלְמַעְלָה, כְּמַרְאֵה-זֹהַר כְּעֵין הַחַשְׁמַלָה.    2 Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins and downward, fire; and from his loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of electrum.
8.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלַח תַּבְנִית יָד, וַיִּקָּחֵנִי בְּצִיצִת רֹאשִׁי; וַתִּשָּׂא אֹתִי רוּחַ בֵּין-הָאָרֶץ וּבֵין הַשָּׁמַיִם וַתָּבֵא אֹתִי יְרוּשָׁלְַמָה בְּמַרְאוֹת אֱלֹהִים, אֶל-פֶּתַח שַׁעַר הַפְּנִימִית הַפּוֹנֶה צָפוֹנָה, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם מוֹשַׁב, סֵמֶל הַקִּנְאָה הַמַּקְנֶה.    3 And the form of a hand was put forth, and I was taken by a lock of my head; and a spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the gate of the inner court that looketh toward the north; where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.
8.4 ד  וְהִנֵּה-שָׁם--כְּבוֹד, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כַּמַּרְאֶה, אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי בַּבִּקְעָה.    4 And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain.
8.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי--בֶּן-אָדָם, שָׂא-נָא עֵינֶיךָ דֶּרֶךְ צָפוֹנָה; וָאֶשָּׂא עֵינַי, דֶּרֶךְ צָפוֹנָה, וְהִנֵּה מִצָּפוֹן לְשַׁעַר הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סֵמֶל הַקִּנְאָה הַזֶּה בַּבִּאָה.    5 Then said He unto me: 'Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north.' So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold northward of the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in the entry.
8.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי--בֶּן-אָדָם, הֲרֹאֶה אַתָּה מהם (מָה הֵם) עֹשִׂים; תּוֹעֵבוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת אֲשֶׁר בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל עֹשִׂים פֹּה, לְרָחֳקָה מֵעַל מִקְדָּשִׁי, וְעוֹד תָּשׁוּב תִּרְאֶה, תּוֹעֵבוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת.  {פ}    6 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel do commit here, that I should go far off from My sanctuary? but thou shalt again see yet greater abominations.' {P}
8.7 ז  וַיָּבֵא אֹתִי, אֶל-פֶּתַח הֶחָצֵר; וָאֶרְאֶה, וְהִנֵּה חֹר-אֶחָד בַּקִּיר.    7 And He brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall.
8.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם חֲתָר-נָא בַקִּיר; וָאֶחְתֹּר בַּקִּיר, וְהִנֵּה פֶּתַח אֶחָד.  {ס}    8 Then said He unto me: 'Son of man, dig now in the wall'; and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door. {S}
8.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  בֹּא וּרְאֵה אֶת-הַתּוֹעֵבוֹת הָרָעוֹת, אֲשֶׁר הֵם עֹשִׂים פֹּה.    9 And He said unto me: 'Go in, and see the wicked abominations that they do here.'
8.10 י  וָאָבוֹא, וָאֶרְאֶה, וְהִנֵּה כָל-תַּבְנִית רֶמֶשׂ וּבְהֵמָה שֶׁקֶץ, וְכָל-גִּלּוּלֵי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--מְחֻקֶּה עַל-הַקִּיר, סָבִיב סָבִיב.    10 So I went in and saw; and behold every detestable form of creeping things and beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.
8.11 יא  וְשִׁבְעִים אִישׁ מִזִּקְנֵי בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל וְיַאֲזַנְיָהוּ בֶן-שָׁפָן עֹמֵד בְּתוֹכָם, עֹמְדִים לִפְנֵיהֶם, וְאִישׁ מִקְטַרְתּוֹ, בְּיָדוֹ; וַעֲתַר עֲנַן-הַקְּטֹרֶת, עֹלֶה.    11 And there stood before them seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, every man with his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up.
8.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הֲרָאִיתָ בֶן-אָדָם, אֲשֶׁר זִקְנֵי בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל עֹשִׂים בַּחֹשֶׁךְ, אִישׁ בְּחַדְרֵי מַשְׂכִּיתוֹ:  כִּי אֹמְרִים, אֵין יְהוָה רֹאֶה אֹתָנוּ--עָזַב יְהוָה, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.    12 Then said He unto me: 'Son of man, hast thou seen what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in his chambers of imagery? for they say: The LORD seeth us not, the LORD hath forsaken the land.'
8.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  עוֹד תָּשׁוּב תִּרְאֶה תּוֹעֵבוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה עֹשִׂים.    13 He said also unto me: 'Thou shalt again see yet greater abominations which they do.'
8.14 יד  וַיָּבֵא אֹתִי, אֶל-פֶּתַח שַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר, אֶל-הַצָּפוֹנָה; וְהִנֵּה-שָׁם הַנָּשִׁים יֹשְׁבוֹת, מְבַכּוֹת אֶת-הַתַּמּוּז.  {ס}    14 Then He brought me to the door of the gate of the LORD'S house which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat the women weeping for Tammuz. {S}
8.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הֲרָאִיתָ בֶן-אָדָם; עוֹד תָּשׁוּב תִּרְאֶה תּוֹעֵבוֹת, גְּדֹלוֹת מֵאֵלֶּה.    15 Then said He unto me: 'Hast thou seen this, O son of man? thou shalt again see yet greater abominations than these.'
8.16 טז  וַיָּבֵא אֹתִי, אֶל-חֲצַר בֵּית-יְהוָה הַפְּנִימִית, וְהִנֵּה-פֶתַח הֵיכַל יְהוָה בֵּין הָאוּלָם וּבֵין הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, כְּעֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה אִישׁ; אֲחֹרֵיהֶם אֶל-הֵיכַל יְהוָה, וּפְנֵיהֶם קֵדְמָה, וְהֵמָּה מִשְׁתַּחֲוִיתֶם קֵדְמָה, לַשָּׁמֶשׁ.    16 And He brought me into the inner court of the LORD'S house, and, behold, at the door of the temple of the LORD, between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the LORD, and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped the sun toward the east.
8.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הֲרָאִיתָ בֶן-אָדָם--הֲנָקֵל לְבֵית יְהוּדָה, מֵעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-הַתּוֹעֵבוֹת אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ-פֹה:  כִּי-מָלְאוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ חָמָס, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ לְהַכְעִיסֵנִי, וְהִנָּם שֹׁלְחִים אֶת-הַזְּמוֹרָה, אֶל-אַפָּם.    17 Then He said unto me: 'Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here in that they fill the land with violence, and provoke Me still more, and, lo, they put the branch to their nose?
8.18 יח  וְגַם-אֲנִי אֶעֱשֶׂה בְחֵמָה, לֹא-תָחוֹס עֵינִי וְלֹא אֶחְמֹל; וְקָרְאוּ בְאָזְנַי קוֹל גָּדוֹל, וְלֹא אֶשְׁמַע אוֹתָם.    18 Therefore will I also deal in fury; Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in Mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.'
9.1 א  וַיִּקְרָא בְאָזְנַי, קוֹל גָּדוֹל לֵאמֹר, קָרְבוּ, פְּקֻדּוֹת הָעִיר; וְאִישׁ כְּלִי מַשְׁחֵתוֹ, בְּיָדוֹ.    1 Then he called in mine ears with a loud voice, saying: 'Cause ye them that have charge over the city to draw near, every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.'
9.2 ב  וְהִנֵּה שִׁשָּׁה אֲנָשִׁים בָּאִים מִדֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר הָעֶלְיוֹן אֲשֶׁר מָפְנֶה צָפוֹנָה, וְאִישׁ כְּלִי מַפָּצוֹ בְּיָדוֹ, וְאִישׁ-אֶחָד בְּתוֹכָם לָבֻשׁ בַּדִּים, וְקֶסֶת הַסֹּפֵר בְּמָתְנָיו; וַיָּבֹאוּ, וַיַּעַמְדוּ, אֵצֶל, מִזְבַּח הַנְּחֹשֶׁת.    2 And, behold, six men came from the way of the upper gate, which lieth toward the north, every man with his weapon of destruction in his hand; and one man in the midst of them clothed in linen, with a writer's inkhorn on his side. And they went in, and stood beside the brazen altar.
9.3 ג  וּכְבוֹד אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, נַעֲלָה מֵעַל הַכְּרוּב אֲשֶׁר הָיָה עָלָיו, אֶל, מִפְתַּן הַבָּיִת; וַיִּקְרָא, אֶל-הָאִישׁ הַלָּבֻשׁ הַבַּדִּים, אֲשֶׁר קֶסֶת הַסֹּפֵר, בְּמָתְנָיו.  {פ}    3 And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub, whereupon it was, to the threshold of the house; and He called to the man clothed in linen, who had the writer's inkhorn on his side. {P}
9.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלָו, עֲבֹר בְּתוֹךְ הָעִיר, בְּתוֹךְ יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְהִתְוִיתָ תָּו עַל-מִצְחוֹת הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַנֶּאֱנָחִים וְהַנֶּאֱנָקִים, עַל כָּל-הַתּוֹעֵבוֹת, הַנַּעֲשׂוֹת בְּתוֹכָהּ.    4 And the LORD said unto him: 'Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst thereof.'
9.5 ה  וּלְאֵלֶּה אָמַר בְּאָזְנַי, עִבְרוּ בָעִיר אַחֲרָיו וְהַכּוּ:  על- (אַל-) תָּחֹס עיניכם (עֵינְכֶם), וְאַל-תַּחְמֹלוּ.    5 And to the others He said in my hearing: 'Go ye through the city after him, and smite; let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity;
9.6 ו  זָקֵן בָּחוּר וּבְתוּלָה וְטַף וְנָשִׁים תַּהַרְגוּ לְמַשְׁחִית, וְעַל-כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-עָלָיו הַתָּו אַל-תִּגַּשׁוּ, וּמִמִּקְדָּשִׁי, תָּחֵלּוּ; וַיָּחֵלּוּ בָּאֲנָשִׁים הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי הַבָּיִת.    6 slay utterly the old man, the young man and the maiden, and little children and women; but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at My sanctuary.' Then they began at the elders that were before the house.
9.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם טַמְּאוּ אֶת-הַבַּיִת, וּמַלְאוּ אֶת-הַחֲצֵרוֹת חֲלָלִים--צֵאוּ; וְיָצְאוּ, וְהִכּוּ בָעִיר.    7 And He said unto them: 'Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain; go ye forth.' And they went forth, and smote in the city.
9.8 ח  וַיְהִי, כְּהַכּוֹתָם, וְנֵאשְׁאַר, אָנִי; וָאֶפְּלָה עַל-פָּנַי וָאֶזְעַק, וָאֹמַר אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הֲמַשְׁחִית אַתָּה אֵת כָּל-שְׁאֵרִית יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשָׁפְכְּךָ אֶת-חֲמָתְךָ עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    8 And it came to pass, while they were smiting, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said: 'Ah Lord GOD! wilt Thou destroy all the residue of Israel in Thy pouring out of Thy fury upon Jerusalem?'
9.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, עֲוֺן בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה גָּדוֹל בִּמְאֹד מְאֹד, וַתִּמָּלֵא הָאָרֶץ דָּמִים, וְהָעִיר מָלְאָה מֻטֶּה:  כִּי אָמְרוּ, עָזַב יְהוָה אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְאֵין יְהוָה, רֹאֶה.    9 Then said He unto me: 'The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of wresting of judgment; for they say: The LORD hath forsaken the land, and the LORD seeth not.
9.10 י  וְגַם-אֲנִי--לֹא-תָחוֹס עֵינִי, וְלֹא אֶחְמֹל; דַּרְכָּם, בְּרֹאשָׁם נָתָתִּי.    10 And as for Me also, Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I will bring their way upon their head.'
9.11 יא  וְהִנֵּה הָאִישׁ לְבֻשׁ הַבַּדִּים, אֲשֶׁר הַקֶּסֶת בְּמָתְנָיו, מֵשִׁיב דָּבָר, לֵאמֹר:  עָשִׂיתִי, כאשר (כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר) צִוִּיתָנִי.  {פ}    11 And, behold, the man clothed in linen, who had the inkhorn on his side, reported, saying: 'I have done according to all that Thou hast commanded me.' {P}
10.1 א  וָאֶרְאֶה, וְהִנֵּה אֶל-הָרָקִיעַ אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ הַכְּרֻבִים, כְּאֶבֶן סַפִּיר, כְּמַרְאֵה דְּמוּת כִּסֵּא--נִרְאָה, עֲלֵיהֶם.    1 Then I looked, and, behold, upon the firmament that was over the head of the cherubim, there appeared above them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.
10.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הָאִישׁ לְבֻשׁ הַבַּדִּים, וַיֹּאמֶר בֹּא אֶל-בֵּינוֹת לַגַּלְגַּל אֶל-תַּחַת לַכְּרוּב וּמַלֵּא חָפְנֶיךָ גַחֲלֵי-אֵשׁ מִבֵּינוֹת לַכְּרֻבִים, וּזְרֹק, עַל-הָעִיר; וַיָּבֹא, לְעֵינָי.    2 And He spoke unto the man clothed in linen, and said: 'Go in between the wheelwork, even under the cherub, and fill both thy hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and dash them against the city.' And he went in in my sight.
10.3 ג  וְהַכְּרֻבִים, עֹמְדִים מִימִין לַבַּיִת--בְּבֹאוֹ הָאִישׁ; וְהֶעָנָן מָלֵא, אֶת-הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית.    3 Now the cherubim stood on the right side of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.
10.4 ד  וַיָּרָם כְּבוֹד-יְהוָה מֵעַל הַכְּרוּב, עַל מִפְתַּן הַבָּיִת; וַיִּמָּלֵא הַבַּיִת, אֶת-הֶעָנָן, וְהֶחָצֵר מָלְאָה, אֶת-נֹגַהּ כְּבוֹד יְהוָה.    4 And the glory of the LORD mounted up from the cherub to the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the LORD'S glory.
10.5 ה  וְקוֹל, כַּנְפֵי הַכְּרוּבִים--נִשְׁמַע, עַד-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצֹנָה:  כְּקוֹל אֵל-שַׁדַּי, בְּדַבְּרוֹ.    5 And the sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of God Almighty when He speaketh.
10.6 ו  וַיְהִי, בְּצַוֺּתוֹ אֶת-הָאִישׁ לְבֻשׁ-הַבַּדִּים לֵאמֹר, קַח אֵשׁ מִבֵּינוֹת לַגַּלְגַּל, מִבֵּינוֹת לַכְּרוּבִים; וַיָּבֹא, וַיַּעֲמֹד, אֵצֶל, הָאוֹפָן.    6 And it came to pass, when He commanded the man clothed in linen, saying: 'Take fire from between the wheelwork, from between the cherubim', that he went in, and stood beside a wheel.
10.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַכְּרוּב אֶת-יָדוֹ מִבֵּינוֹת לַכְּרוּבִים, אֶל-הָאֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר בֵּינוֹת הַכְּרֻבִים, וַיִּשָּׂא וַיִּתֵּן, אֶל-חָפְנֵי לְבֻשׁ הַבַּדִּים; וַיִּקַּח, וַיֵּצֵא.    7 And the cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubim unto the fire that was between the cherubim, and took thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed in linen, who took it and went out.
10.8 ח  וַיֵּרָא, לַכְּרֻבִים--תַּבְנִית, יַד-אָדָם, תַּחַת, כַּנְפֵיהֶם.    8 And there appeared in the cherubim the form of a man's hand under their wings.
10.9 ט  וָאֶרְאֶה, וְהִנֵּה אַרְבָּעָה אוֹפַנִּים אֵצֶל הַכְּרוּבִים--אוֹפַן אֶחָד אֵצֶל הַכְּרוּב אֶחָד, וְאוֹפַן אֶחָד אֵצֶל הַכְּרוּב אֶחָד; וּמַרְאֵה, הָאוֹפַנִּים, כְּעֵין, אֶבֶן תַּרְשִׁישׁ.    9 And I looked, and behold four wheels beside the cherubim, one wheel beside one cherub, and another wheel beside another cherub; and the appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl stone.
10.10 י  וּמַרְאֵיהֶם--דְּמוּת אֶחָד, לְאַרְבַּעְתָּם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה הָאוֹפַן, בְּתוֹךְ הָאוֹפָן.    10 And as for their appearance, they four had one likeness, as if a wheel had been within a wheel.
10.11 יא  בְּלֶכְתָּם, אֶל-אַרְבַּעַת רִבְעֵיהֶם יֵלֵכוּ--לֹא יִסַּבּוּ, בְּלֶכְתָּם:  כִּי הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-יִפְנֶה הָרֹאשׁ, אַחֲרָיו יֵלֵכוּ--לֹא יִסַּבּוּ, בְּלֶכְתָּם.    11 When they went, they went toward their four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the head looked they followed it; they turned not as they went.
10.12 יב  וְכָל-בְּשָׂרָם, וְגַבֵּהֶם, וִידֵיהֶם, וְכַנְפֵיהֶם--וְהָאוֹפַנִּים, מְלֵאִים עֵינַיִם סָבִיב, לְאַרְבַּעְתָּם, אוֹפַנֵּיהֶם.    12 And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels were full of eyes round about, even the wheels that they four had.
10.13 יג  לָאוֹפַנִּים--לָהֶם קוֹרָא הַגַּלְגַּל, בְּאָזְנָי.    13 As for the wheels, they were called in my hearing the wheelwork.
10.14 יד  וְאַרְבָּעָה פָנִים, לְאֶחָד:  פְּנֵי הָאֶחָד פְּנֵי הַכְּרוּב, וּפְנֵי הַשֵּׁנִי פְּנֵי אָדָם, וְהַשְּׁלִישִׁי פְּנֵי אַרְיֵה, וְהָרְבִיעִי פְּנֵי-נָשֶׁר.    14 And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of the cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.
10.15 טו  וַיֵּרֹמּוּ, הַכְּרוּבִים--הִיא הַחַיָּה, אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי בִּנְהַר-כְּבָר.    15 And the cherubim mounted up--this is the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.
10.16 טז  וּבְלֶכֶת, הַכְּרוּבִים, יֵלְכוּ הָאוֹפַנִּים, אֶצְלָם; וּבִשְׂאֵת הַכְּרוּבִים אֶת-כַּנְפֵיהֶם, לָרוּם מֵעַל הָאָרֶץ, לֹא-יִסַּבּוּ הָאוֹפַנִּים גַּם-הֵם, מֵאֶצְלָם.    16 And when the cherubim went, the wheels went beside them; and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside them.
10.17 יז  בְּעָמְדָם יַעֲמֹדוּ, וּבְרוֹמָם יֵרוֹמּוּ אוֹתָם:  כִּי רוּחַ הַחַיָּה, בָּהֶם.    17 When they stood, these stood, and when they mounted up, these mounted up with them; for the spirit of the living creature was in them.
10.18 יח  וַיֵּצֵא כְּבוֹד יְהוָה, מֵעַל מִפְתַּן הַבָּיִת; וַיַּעֲמֹד, עַל-הַכְּרוּבִים.    18 And the glory of the LORD went forth from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubim.
10.19 יט  וַיִּשְׂאוּ הַכְּרוּבִים אֶת-כַּנְפֵיהֶם וַיֵּרוֹמּוּ מִן-הָאָרֶץ לְעֵינַי, בְּצֵאתָם, וְהָאוֹפַנִּים, לְעֻמָּתָם; וַיַּעֲמֹד, פֶּתַח שַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה הַקַּדְמוֹנִי, וּכְבוֹד אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל עֲלֵיהֶם, מִלְמָעְלָה.    19 And the cherubim lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight when they went forth, and the wheels beside them; and they stood at the door of the east gate of the LORD'S house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
10.20 כ  הִיא הַחַיָּה, אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי תַּחַת אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בִּנְהַר-כְּבָר; וָאֵדַע, כִּי כְרוּבִים הֵמָּה.    20 This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew that they were cherubim.
10.21 כא  אַרְבָּעָה אַרְבָּעָה פָנִים לְאֶחָד, וְאַרְבַּע כְּנָפַיִם לְאֶחָד; וּדְמוּת יְדֵי אָדָם, תַּחַת כַּנְפֵיהֶם.    21 Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.
10.22 כב  וּדְמוּת פְּנֵיהֶם--הֵמָּה הַפָּנִים אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי עַל-נְהַר-כְּבָר, מַרְאֵיהֶם וְאוֹתָם; אִישׁ אֶל-עֵבֶר פָּנָיו, יֵלֵכוּ.    22 And as for the likeness of their faces, they were the faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances and themselves; they went every one straight forward.
11.1 א  וַתִּשָּׂא אֹתִי רוּחַ, וַתָּבֵא אֹתִי אֶל-שַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה הַקַּדְמוֹנִי הַפּוֹנֶה קָדִימָה, וְהִנֵּה בְּפֶתַח הַשַּׁעַר, עֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה אִישׁ; וָאֶרְאֶה בְתוֹכָם אֶת-יַאֲזַנְיָה בֶן-עַזֻּר, וְאֶת-פְּלַטְיָהוּ בֶן-בְּנָיָהוּ--שָׂרֵי הָעָם.  {פ}    1 Then a spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the LORD'S house, which looketh eastward; and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; and I saw in the midst of them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people. {P}
11.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  בֶּן-אָדָם--אֵלֶּה הָאֲנָשִׁים הַחֹשְׁבִים אָוֶן וְהַיֹּעֲצִים עֲצַת-רָע, בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת.    2 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, these are the men that devise iniquity, and that give wicked counsel in this city;
11.3 ג  הָאֹמְרִים, לֹא בְקָרוֹב בְּנוֹת בָּתִּים; הִיא הַסִּיר, וַאֲנַחְנוּ הַבָּשָׂר.  {ס}    3 that say: The time is not near to build houses! this city is the caldron, and we are the flesh. {S}
11.4 ד  לָכֵן, הִנָּבֵא עֲלֵיהֶם:  הִנָּבֵא, בֶּן-אָדָם.    4 Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man.'
11.5 ה  וַתִּפֹּל עָלַי, רוּחַ יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי אֱמֹר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, כֵּן אֲמַרְתֶּם בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּמַעֲלוֹת רוּחֲכֶם, אֲנִי יְדַעְתִּיהָ.    5 And the spirit of the LORD fell upon me, and He said unto me: 'Speak: Thus saith the LORD: Thus have ye said, O house of Israel; for I know the things that come into your mind.
11.6 ו  הִרְבֵּיתֶם חַלְלֵיכֶם, בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת; וּמִלֵּאתֶם חוּצֹתֶיהָ, חָלָל.  {פ}    6 Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain. {P}
11.7 ז  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, חַלְלֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר שַׂמְתֶּם בְּתוֹכָהּ, הֵמָּה הַבָּשָׂר וְהִיא הַסִּיר; וְאֶתְכֶם, הוֹצִיא מִתּוֹכָהּ.    7 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron; but ye shall be brought forth out of the midst of it.
11.8 ח  חֶרֶב, יְרֵאתֶם; וְחֶרֶב אָבִיא עֲלֵיכֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    8 Ye have feared the sword; and the sword will I bring upon you, saith the Lord GOD.
11.9 ט  וְהוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם מִתּוֹכָהּ, וְנָתַתִּי אֶתְכֶם בְּיַד-זָרִים; וְעָשִׂיתִי בָכֶם, שְׁפָטִים.    9 And I will bring you forth out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.
11.10 י  בַּחֶרֶב תִּפֹּלוּ, עַל-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶשְׁפּוֹט אֶתְכֶם; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    10 Ye shall fall by the sword: I will judge you upon the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
11.11 יא  הִיא, לֹא-תִהְיֶה לָכֶם לְסִיר, וְאַתֶּם תִּהְיוּ בְתוֹכָהּ, לְבָשָׂר; אֶל-גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶשְׁפֹּט אֶתְכֶם.    11 Though this city shall not be your caldron, ye shall be the flesh in the midst thereof; I will judge you upon the border of Israel;
11.12 יב  וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּחֻקַּי לֹא הֲלַכְתֶּם, וּמִשְׁפָּטַי לֹא עֲשִׂיתֶם; וּכְמִשְׁפְּטֵי הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתֵיכֶם, עֲשִׂיתֶם.    12 and ye shall know that I am the LORD; for ye have not walked in My statutes, neither have ye executed Mine ordinances, but have done after the ordinances of the nations that are round about you.'
11.13 יג  וַיְהִי, כְּהִנָּבְאִי, וּפְלַטְיָהוּ בֶן-בְּנָיָה, מֵת; וָאֶפֹּל עַל-פָּנַי וָאֶזְעַק קוֹל-גָּדוֹל, וָאֹמַר אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--כָּלָה אַתָּה עֹשֶׂה, אֵת שְׁאֵרִית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    13 And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said: 'Ah Lord GOD! wilt Thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?' {P}
11.14 יד  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    14 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
11.15 טו  בֶּן-אָדָם, אַחֶיךָ אַחֶיךָ אַנְשֵׁי גְאֻלָּתֶךָ, וְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֻּלֹּה:  אֲשֶׁר אָמְרוּ לָהֶם יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, רַחֲקוּ מֵעַל יְהוָה--לָנוּ הִיא נִתְּנָה הָאָרֶץ, לְמוֹרָשָׁה.  {ס}    15 'Son of man, as for thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel, all of them, concerning whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said: Get you far from the LORD! unto us is this land given for a possession; {S}
11.16 טז  לָכֵן אֱמֹר, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, כִּי הִרְחַקְתִּים בַּגּוֹיִם, וְכִי הֲפִיצוֹתִים בָּאֲרָצוֹת; וָאֱהִי לָהֶם לְמִקְדָּשׁ מְעַט, בָּאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ שָׁם.  {ס}    16 therefore say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Although I have removed them far off among the nations, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet have I been to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they are come; {S}
11.17 יז  לָכֵן אֱמֹר, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִן-הָעַמִּים, וְאָסַפְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִן-הָאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר נְפֹצוֹתֶם בָּהֶם; וְנָתַתִּי לָכֶם, אֶת-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    17 therefore say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will even gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.
11.18 יח  וּבָאוּ-שָׁמָּה; וְהֵסִירוּ אֶת-כָּל-שִׁקּוּצֶיהָ, וְאֶת-כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתֶיהָ--מִמֶּנָּה.    18 And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence.
11.19 יט  וְנָתַתִּי לָהֶם לֵב אֶחָד, וְרוּחַ חֲדָשָׁה אֶתֵּן בְּקִרְבְּכֶם; וַהֲסִרֹתִי לֵב הָאֶבֶן, מִבְּשָׂרָם, וְנָתַתִּי לָהֶם, לֵב בָּשָׂר.    19 And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will remove the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh;
11.20 כ  לְמַעַן בְּחֻקֹּתַי יֵלֵכוּ, וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי יִשְׁמְרוּ וְעָשׂוּ אֹתָם; וְהָיוּ-לִי לְעָם--וַאֲנִי, אֶהְיֶה לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים.    20 that they may walk in My statutes, and keep Mine ordinances, and do them; and they shall be My people, and I will be their God.
11.21 כא  וְאֶל-לֵב שִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם וְתוֹעֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, לִבָּם הֹלֵךְ--דַּרְכָּם בְּרֹאשָׁם נָתַתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    21 But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will bring their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord GOD.'
11.22 כב  וַיִּשְׂאוּ הַכְּרוּבִים אֶת-כַּנְפֵיהֶם, וְהָאוֹפַנִּים לְעֻמָּתָם; וּכְבוֹד אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל עֲלֵיהֶם, מִלְמָעְלָה.    22 Then did the cherubim lift up their wings, and the wheels were beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
11.23 כג  וַיַּעַל כְּבוֹד יְהוָה, מֵעַל תּוֹךְ הָעִיר; וַיַּעֲמֹד, עַל-הָהָר, אֲשֶׁר, מִקֶּדֶם לָעִיר.    23 And the glory of the LORD went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.
11.24 כד  וְרוּחַ נְשָׂאַתְנִי, וַתְּבִאֵנִי כַשְׂדִּימָה אֶל-הַגּוֹלָה, בַּמַּרְאֶה, בְּרוּחַ אֱלֹהִים; וַיַּעַל, מֵעָלַי, הַמַּרְאֶה, אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי.    24 And a spirit lifted me up, and brought me in the vision by the spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from Me.
11.25 כה  וָאֲדַבֵּר, אֶל-הַגּוֹלָה, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶרְאָנִי.  {פ}    25 Then I spoke unto them of the captivity all the things that the LORD had shown me. {P}
12.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 The word of the LORD also came unto me, saying:
12.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, בְּתוֹךְ בֵּית-הַמֶּרִי אַתָּה יֹשֵׁב:  אֲשֶׁר עֵינַיִם לָהֶם לִרְאוֹת וְלֹא רָאוּ, אָזְנַיִם לָהֶם לִשְׁמֹעַ וְלֹא שָׁמֵעוּ--כִּי בֵּית מְרִי, הֵם.    2 'Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of the rebellious house, that have eyes to see, and see not, that have ears to hear, and hear not; for they are a rebellious house.
12.3 ג  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, עֲשֵׂה לְךָ כְּלֵי גוֹלָה, וּגְלֵה יוֹמָם, לְעֵינֵיהֶם; וְגָלִיתָ מִמְּקוֹמְךָ אֶל-מָקוֹם אַחֵר, לְעֵינֵיהֶם--אוּלַי יִרְאוּ, כִּי בֵּית מְרִי הֵמָּה.    3 Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for exile, and remove as though for exile by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to another place in their sight; it may be they will perceive, for they are a rebellious house.
12.4 ד  וְהוֹצֵאתָ כֵלֶיךָ כִּכְלֵי גוֹלָה, יוֹמָם--לְעֵינֵיהֶם; וְאַתָּה, תֵּצֵא בָעֶרֶב לְעֵינֵיהֶם, כְּמוֹצָאֵי, גּוֹלָה.    4 And thou shalt bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for exile; and thou shalt go forth thyself at even in their sight, as when men go forth into exile.
12.5 ה  לְעֵינֵיהֶם, חֲתָר-לְךָ בַקִּיר; וְהוֹצֵאתָ, בּוֹ.    5 Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.
12.6 ו  לְעֵינֵיהֶם עַל-כָּתֵף תִּשָּׂא, בָּעֲלָטָה תוֹצִיא--פָּנֶיךָ תְכַסֶּה, וְלֹא תִרְאֶה אֶת-הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי-מוֹפֵת נְתַתִּיךָ, לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    6 In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulder, and carry it forth in the darkness; thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the ground; for I have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.'
12.7 ז  וָאַעַשׂ כֵּן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צֻוֵּיתִי, כֵּלַי הוֹצֵאתִי כִּכְלֵי גוֹלָה יוֹמָם, וּבָעֶרֶב חָתַרְתִּי-לִי בַקִּיר בְּיָד; בָּעֲלָטָה הוֹצֵאתִי עַל-כָּתֵף נָשָׂאתִי, לְעֵינֵיהֶם.  {פ}    7 And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for exile, and in the even I digged through the wall with my hand; I carried out in the darkness, and bore it upon my shoulder in their sight. {P}
12.8 ח  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלַי, בַּבֹּקֶר לֵאמֹר.    8 And in the morning came the word of the LORD unto me, saying:
12.9 ט  בֶּן-אָדָם, הֲלֹא אָמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל בֵּית הַמֶּרִי:  מָה, אַתָּה עֹשֶׂה.    9 'Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee: What doest thou?
12.10 י  אֱמֹר אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הַנָּשִׂיא הַמַּשָּׂא הַזֶּה, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה בְתוֹכָם.    10 Say thou unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Concerning the prince, even this burden, in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel among whom they are,
12.11 יא  אֱמֹר, אֲנִי מוֹפֶתְכֶם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי, כֵּן יֵעָשֶׂה לָהֶם--בַּגּוֹלָה בַשְּׁבִי, יֵלֵכוּ.    11 say: I am your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them--they shall go into exile, into captivity.
12.12 יב  וְהַנָּשִׂיא אֲשֶׁר-בְּתוֹכָם אֶל-כָּתֵף יִשָּׂא, בָּעֲלָטָה וְיֵצֵא--בַּקִּיר יַחְתְּרוּ, לְהוֹצִיא בוֹ; פָּנָיו יְכַסֶּה--יַעַן אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִרְאֶה לַעַיִן הוּא, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.    12 And the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder, and go forth in the darkness; they shall dig through the wall to carry out thereby; he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes.
12.13 יג  וּפָרַשְׂתִּי אֶת-רִשְׁתִּי עָלָיו, וְנִתְפַּשׂ בִּמְצוּדָתִי; וְהֵבֵאתִי אֹתוֹ בָבֶלָה אֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים, וְאוֹתָהּ לֹא-יִרְאֶה וְשָׁם יָמוּת.    13 My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in My snare; and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.
12.14 יד  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבֹתָיו עֶזְרֹה וְכָל-אֲגַפָּיו, אֱזָרֶה לְכָל-רוּחַ; וְחֶרֶב, אָרִיק אַחֲרֵיהֶם.    14 And I will disperse toward every wind all that are round about him to help him, and all his troops; and I will draw out the sword after them.
12.15 טו  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בַּהֲפִיצִי אוֹתָם בַּגּוֹיִם, וְזֵרִיתִי אוֹתָם בָּאֲרָצוֹת.    15 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries.
12.16 טז  וְהוֹתַרְתִּי מֵהֶם אַנְשֵׁי מִסְפָּר, מֵחֶרֶב מֵרָעָב וּמִדָּבֶר--לְמַעַן יְסַפְּרוּ אֶת-כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, בַּגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ שָׁם, וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    16 But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their abominations among the nations whither they come; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
12.17 יז  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    17 Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying:
12.18 יח  בֶּן-אָדָם, לַחְמְךָ בְּרַעַשׁ תֹּאכֵל; וּמֵימֶיךָ, בְּרָגְזָה וּבִדְאָגָה תִּשְׁתֶּה.    18 'Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with anxiety;
12.19 יט  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-עַם הָאָרֶץ כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה לְיוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַחְמָם בִּדְאָגָה יֹאכֵלוּ, וּמֵימֵיהֶם בְּשִׁמָּמוֹן יִשְׁתּוּ--לְמַעַן תֵּשַׁם אַרְצָהּ, מִמְּלֹאָהּ, מֵחֲמַס, כָּל-הַיֹּשְׁבִים בָּהּ.    19 and say unto the people of the land: Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel. They shall eat their bread with anxiety, and drink their water with appalment, that her land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.
12.20 כ  וְהֶעָרִים הַנּוֹשָׁבוֹת תֶּחֱרַבְנָה, וְהָאָרֶץ שְׁמָמָה תִהְיֶה; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    20 And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
12.21 כא  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    21 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
12.22 כב  בֶּן-אָדָם, מָה-הַמָּשָׁל הַזֶּה לָכֶם, עַל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  יַאַרְכוּ, הַיָּמִים, וְאָבַד, כָּל-חָזוֹן.    22 'Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying: The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?
12.23 כג  לָכֵן אֱמֹר אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִשְׁבַּתִּי אֶת-הַמָּשָׁל הַזֶּה, וְלֹא-יִמְשְׁלוּ אֹתוֹ עוֹד בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי, אִם-דַּבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם, קָרְבוּ הַיָּמִים, וּדְבַר כָּל-חָזוֹן.    23 Tell them therefore: Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them: The days are at hand, and the word of every vision.
12.24 כד  כִּי לֹא יִהְיֶה עוֹד, כָּל-חֲזוֹן שָׁוְא--וּמִקְסַם חָלָק:  בְּתוֹךְ, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    24 For there shall be no more any vain vision nor smooth divination within the house of Israel.
12.25 כה  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֲדַבֵּר אֵת אֲשֶׁר אֲדַבֵּר דָּבָר וְיֵעָשֶׂה--לֹא תִמָּשֵׁךְ, עוֹד:  כִּי בִימֵיכֶם בֵּית הַמֶּרִי, אֲדַבֵּר דָּבָר וַעֲשִׂיתִיו, נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    25 For I am the LORD; I will speak, what word soever it be that I shall speak, and it shall be performed; it shall be no more delayed; for in your days, O rebellious house, will I speak the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
12.26 כו  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    26 Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying:
12.27 כז  בֶּן-אָדָם, הִנֵּה בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֹמְרִים, הֶחָזוֹן אֲשֶׁר-הוּא חֹזֶה, לְיָמִים רַבִּים; וּלְעִתִּים רְחוֹקוֹת, הוּא נִבָּא.    27 'Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say: The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of times that are far off.
12.28 כח  לָכֵן אֱמֹר אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לֹא-תִמָּשֵׁךְ עוֹד, כָּל-דְּבָרָי--אֲשֶׁר אֲדַבֵּר דָּבָר וְיֵעָשֶׂה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    28 Therefore say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: There shall none of My words be delayed any more, but the word which I shall speak shall be performed, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
13.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
13.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, הִנָּבֵא אֶל-נְבִיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הַנִּבָּאִים; וְאָמַרְתָּ לִנְבִיאֵי מִלִּבָּם, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-יְהוָה.    2 'Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own heart: Hear ye the word of the LORD:
13.3 ג  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הוֹי עַל-הַנְּבִיאִים הַנְּבָלִים, אֲשֶׁר הֹלְכִים אַחַר רוּחָם, וּלְבִלְתִּי רָאוּ.    3 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe unto the vile prophets, that follow their own spirit, and things which they have not seen!
13.4 ד  כְּשֻׁעָלִים, בָּחֳרָבוֹת--נְבִיאֶיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָיוּ.    4 O Israel, thy prophets have been like foxes in ruins.
13.5 ה  לֹא עֲלִיתֶם בַּפְּרָצוֹת, וַתִּגְדְּרוּ גָדֵר עַל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲמֹד בַּמִּלְחָמָה, בְּיוֹם יְהוָה.    5 Ye have not gone up into the breaches, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the LORD.
13.6 ו  חָזוּ שָׁוְא, וְקֶסֶם כָּזָב--הָאֹמְרִים נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַיהוָה לֹא שְׁלָחָם; וְיִחֲלוּ, לְקַיֵּם דָּבָר.    6 They have seen vanity and lying divination, that say: The LORD saith; and the LORD hath not sent them, yet they hope that the word would be confirmed!
13.7 ז  הֲלוֹא מַחֲזֵה-שָׁוְא חֲזִיתֶם, וּמִקְסַם כָּזָב אֲמַרְתֶּם; וְאֹמְרִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַאֲנִי, לֹא דִבַּרְתִּי.  {ס}    7 Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say: The LORD saith; albeit I have not spoken? {S}
13.8 ח  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן דַּבֶּרְכֶם שָׁוְא, וַחֲזִיתֶם כָּזָב--לָכֵן הִנְנִי אֲלֵיכֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    8 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the Lord GOD.
13.9 ט  וְהָיְתָה יָדִי, אֶל-הַנְּבִיאִים הַחֹזִים שָׁוְא וְהַקֹּסְמִים כָּזָב, בְּסוֹד עַמִּי לֹא-יִהְיוּ וּבִכְתָב בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא יִכָּתֵבוּ, וְאֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא יָבֹאוּ; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    9 And My hand shall be against the prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies; they shall not be in the council of My people, neither shall they be written in the register of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
13.10 י  יַעַן וּבְיַעַן הִטְעוּ אֶת-עַמִּי, לֵאמֹר שָׁלוֹם--וְאֵין שָׁלוֹם; וְהוּא בֹּנֶה חַיִץ, וְהִנָּם טָחִים אֹתוֹ תָּפֵל.    10 Because, even because they have led My people astray, saying: Peace, and there is no peace; and when it buildeth up a slight wall, behold, they daub it with whited plaster;
13.11 יא  אֱמֹר אֶל-טָחֵי תָפֵל, וְיִפֹּל; הָיָה גֶּשֶׁם שׁוֹטֵף, וְאַתֵּנָה אַבְנֵי אֶלְגָּבִישׁ תִּפֹּלְנָה, וְרוּחַ סְעָרוֹת, תְּבַקֵּעַ.    11 say unto them that daub it with whited plaster, that it shall fall; there shall be an overflowing shower, and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind shall break forth,
13.12 יב  וְהִנֵּה, נָפַל הַקִּיר:  הֲלוֹא יֵאָמֵר אֲלֵיכֶם, אַיֵּה הַטִּיחַ אֲשֶׁר טַחְתֶּם.  {ס}    12 and, lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you: Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it? {S}
13.13 יג  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וּבִקַּעְתִּי רוּחַ-סְעָרוֹת, בַּחֲמָתִי; וְגֶשֶׁם שֹׁטֵף בְּאַפִּי יִהְיֶה, וְאַבְנֵי אֶלְגָּבִישׁ בְּחֵמָה לְכָלָה.    13 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: I will even cause a stormy wind to break forth in My fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in Mine anger, and great hailstones in fury to consume it.
13.14 יד  וְהָרַסְתִּי אֶת-הַקִּיר אֲשֶׁר-טַחְתֶּם תָּפֵל, וְהִגַּעְתִּיהוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ--וְנִגְלָה יְסֹדוֹ; וְנָפְלָה וּכְלִיתֶם בְּתוֹכָהּ, וִידַעְתֶּם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    14 So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with whited plaster, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be uncovered; and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
13.15 טו  וְכִלֵּיתִי אֶת-חֲמָתִי בַּקִּיר, וּבַטָּחִים אֹתוֹ תָּפֵל; וְאֹמַר לָכֶם אֵין הַקִּיר, וְאֵין הַטָּחִים אֹתוֹ.    15 Thus will I spend My fury upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with whited plaster; and I will say unto you: The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it;
13.16 טז  נְבִיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַנִּבְּאִים אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְהַחֹזִים לָהּ, חֲזוֹן שָׁלֹם; וְאֵין שָׁלֹם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    16 to wit, the prophets of Israel that prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and that see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD. {P}
13.17 יז  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ אֶל-בְּנוֹת עַמְּךָ, הַמִּתְנַבְּאוֹת, מִלִּבְּהֶן; וְהִנָּבֵא, עֲלֵיהֶן.    17 And thou, son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, that prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them,
13.18 יח  וְאָמַרְתָּ כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הוֹי לִמְתַפְּרוֹת כְּסָתוֹת עַל כָּל-אַצִּילֵי יָדַי וְעֹשׂוֹת הַמִּסְפָּחוֹת עַל-רֹאשׁ כָּל-קוֹמָה--לְצוֹדֵד נְפָשׁוֹת; הַנְּפָשׁוֹת תְּצוֹדֵדְנָה לְעַמִּי, וּנְפָשׁוֹת לָכֶנָה תְחַיֶּינָה.    18 and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe to the women that sew cushions upon all elbows, and make pads for the head of persons of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of My people, and save souls alive for yourselves?
13.19 יט  וַתְּחַלֶּלְנָה אֹתִי אֶל-עַמִּי, בְּשַׁעֲלֵי שְׂעֹרִים וּבִפְתוֹתֵי לֶחֶם, לְהָמִית נְפָשׁוֹת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תְמוּתֶנָה, וּלְחַיּוֹת נְפָשׁוֹת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תִחְיֶינָה:  בְּכַזֶּבְכֶם--לְעַמִּי, שֹׁמְעֵי כָזָב.  {ס}    19 And ye have profaned Me among My people for handfuls of barley and for crumbs of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to My people that hearken unto lies. {S}
13.20 כ  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי אֶל-כִּסְּתוֹתֵיכֶנָה אֲשֶׁר אַתֵּנָה מְצֹדְדוֹת שָׁם אֶת-הַנְּפָשׁוֹת לְפֹרְחוֹת, וְקָרַעְתִּי אֹתָם, מֵעַל זְרוֹעֹתֵיכֶם; וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי, אֶת-הַנְּפָשׁוֹת, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם מְצֹדְדוֹת אֶת-נְפָשִׁים, לְפֹרְחֹת.    20 Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against your cushions, wherewith ye hunt the souls as birds, and I will tear them from your arms; and I will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt as birds.
13.21 כא  וְקָרַעְתִּי אֶת-מִסְפְּחֹתֵיכֶם, וְהִצַּלְתִּי אֶת-עַמִּי מִיֶּדְכֶן, וְלֹא-יִהְיוּ עוֹד בְּיֶדְכֶן, לִמְצוּדָה; וִידַעְתֶּן, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    21 Your pads also will I tear, and deliver My people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
13.22 כב  יַעַן הַכְאוֹת לֵב-צַדִּיק שֶׁקֶר, וַאֲנִי לֹא הִכְאַבְתִּיו, וּלְחַזֵּק יְדֵי רָשָׁע, לְבִלְתִּי-שׁוּב מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָע לְהַחֲיֹתוֹ.    22 Because with lies ye have cowed the heart of the righteous, when I have not grieved him; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, that he be saved alive;
13.23 כג  לָכֵן, שָׁוְא לֹא תֶחֱזֶינָה, וְקֶסֶם, לֹא-תִקְסַמְנָה עוֹד; וְהִצַּלְתִּי אֶת-עַמִּי מִיֶּדְכֶן, וִידַעְתֶּן כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    23 therefore ye shall no more see vanity, nor divine divinations; and I will deliver My people out of your hand; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.'
14.1 א  וַיָּבוֹא אֵלַי אֲנָשִׁים, מִזִּקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, לְפָנָי.  {פ}    1 Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me. {P}
14.2 ב  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    2 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
14.3 ג  בֶּן-אָדָם, הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה הֶעֱלוּ גִלּוּלֵיהֶם עַל-לִבָּם, וּמִכְשׁוֹל עֲוֺנָם, נָתְנוּ נֹכַח פְּנֵיהֶם:  הַאִדָּרֹשׁ אִדָּרֵשׁ, לָהֶם.  {ס}    3 'Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their mind, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face; should I be inquired of at all by them? {S}
14.4 ד  לָכֵן דַּבֵּר-אוֹתָם וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִישׁ אִישׁ מִבֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר יַעֲלֶה אֶת-גִּלּוּלָיו אֶל-לִבּוֹ וּמִכְשׁוֹל עֲוֺנוֹ יָשִׂים נֹכַח פָּנָיו, וּבָא, אֶל-הַנָּבִיא:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, נַעֲנֵיתִי לוֹ בה (בָא)--בְּרֹב גִּלּוּלָיו.    4 Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his mind, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet--I the LORD will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;
14.5 ה  לְמַעַן תְּפֹשׂ אֶת-בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּלִבָּם, אֲשֶׁר נָזֹרוּ מֵעָלַי, בְּגִלּוּלֵיהֶם כֻּלָּם.  {ס}    5 that I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all turned away from Me through their idols. {S}
14.6 ו  לָכֵן אֱמֹר אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, שׁוּבוּ וְהָשִׁיבוּ, מֵעַל גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם; וּמֵעַל כָּל-תּוֹעֲבֹתֵיכֶם, הָשִׁיבוּ פְנֵיכֶם.    6 Therefore say unto the house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Return ye, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.
14.7 ז  כִּי אִישׁ אִישׁ מִבֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמֵהַגֵּר אֲשֶׁר-יָגוּר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִנָּזֵר מֵאַחֲרַי וְיַעַל גִּלּוּלָיו אֶל-לִבּוֹ, וּמִכְשׁוֹל עֲוֺנוֹ יָשִׂים נֹכַח פָּנָיו; וּבָא אֶל-הַנָּבִיא, לִדְרָשׁ-לוֹ בִי--אֲנִי יְהוָה, נַעֲנֶה-לּוֹ בִּי.    7 For every one of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that separateth himself from Me, and taketh his idols into his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet, that he inquire for him of Me--I the LORD will answer him by Myself,
14.8 ח  וְנָתַתִּי פָנַי בָּאִישׁ הַהוּא, וַהֲשִׂמֹתִיהוּ לְאוֹת וְלִמְשָׁלִים, וְהִכְרַתִּיו, מִתּוֹךְ עַמִּי; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {ס}    8 and I will set My face against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of My people; and ye shall know that I am the LORD. {S}
14.9 ט  וְהַנָּבִיא כִי-יְפֻתֶּה, וְדִבֶּר דָּבָר--אֲנִי יְהוָה פִּתֵּיתִי, אֵת הַנָּבִיא הַהוּא; וְנָטִיתִי אֶת-יָדִי, עָלָיו, וְהִשְׁמַדְתִּיו, מִתּוֹךְ עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    9 And when the prophet is enticed and speaketh a word, I the LORD have enticed that prophet, and I will stretch out My hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of My people Israel.
14.10 י  וְנָשְׂאוּ, עֲוֺנָם:  כַּעֲוֺן, הַדֹּרֵשׁ--כַּעֲוֺן הַנָּבִיא, יִהְיֶה.    10 And they shall bear their iniquity; the iniquity of the prophet shall be even as the iniquity of him that inquireth;
14.11 יא  לְמַעַן לֹא-יִתְעוּ עוֹד בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאַחֲרַי, וְלֹא-יִטַּמְּאוּ עוֹד, בְּכָל-פִּשְׁעֵיהֶם; וְהָיוּ-לִי לְעָם, וַאֲנִי אֶהְיֶה לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    11 that the house of Israel may go no more astray from Me, neither defile themselves any more with all their transgressions; but that they may be My people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
14.12 יב  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    12 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
14.13 יג  בֶּן-אָדָם, אֶרֶץ כִּי תֶחֱטָא-לִי לִמְעָל-מַעַל, וְנָטִיתִי יָדִי עָלֶיהָ, וְשָׁבַרְתִּי לָהּ מַטֵּה-לָחֶם; וְהִשְׁלַחְתִּי-בָהּ רָעָב, וְהִכְרַתִּי מִמֶּנָּה אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה.    13 'Son of man, when a land sinneth against Me by trespassing grievously, and I stretch out My hand upon it, and break the staff of the bread thereof, and send famine upon it, and cut off from it man and beast;
14.14 יד  וְהָיוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּתוֹכָהּ--נֹחַ, דנאל (דָּנִיֵּאל) וְאִיּוֹב:  הֵמָּה בְצִדְקָתָם יְנַצְּלוּ נַפְשָׁם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    14 though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord GOD.
14.15 טו  לוּ-חַיָּה רָעָה אַעֲבִיר בָּאָרֶץ, וְשִׁכְּלָתָּה; וְהָיְתָה שְׁמָמָה מִבְּלִי עוֹבֵר, מִפְּנֵי הַחַיָּה.    15 If I cause evil beasts to pass through the land, and they bereave it, and it be desolate, so that no man may pass through because of the beasts;
14.16 טז  שְׁלֹשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּתוֹכָהּ--חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-בָּנִים וְאִם-בָּנוֹת יַצִּילוּ:  הֵמָּה לְבַדָּם יִנָּצֵלוּ, וְהָאָרֶץ תִּהְיֶה שְׁמָמָה.    16 though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.
14.17 יז  אוֹ חֶרֶב אָבִיא, עַל-הָאָרֶץ הַהִיא; וְאָמַרְתִּי, חֶרֶב תַּעֲבֹר בָּאָרֶץ, וְהִכְרַתִּי מִמֶּנָּה, אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה.    17 Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say: Let the sword go through the land, so that I cut off from it man and beast;
14.18 יח  וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּתוֹכָהּ--חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לֹא יַצִּילוּ בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת:  כִּי הֵם לְבַדָּם, יִנָּצֵלוּ.    18 though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves.
14.19 יט  אוֹ דֶּבֶר אֲשַׁלַּח, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ הַהִיא; וְשָׁפַכְתִּי חֲמָתִי עָלֶיהָ בְּדָם, לְהַכְרִית מִמֶּנָּה אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה.    19 Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out My fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast;
14.20 כ  וְנֹחַ דנאל (דָּנִיֵּאל) וְאִיּוֹב, בְּתוֹכָהּ--חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-בֵּן אִם-בַּת יַצִּילוּ:  הֵמָּה בְצִדְקָתָם, יַצִּילוּ נַפְשָׁם.  {פ}    20 though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness. {P}
14.21 כא  כִּי כֹה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אַף כִּי-אַרְבַּעַת שְׁפָטַי הָרָעִים חֶרֶב וְרָעָב וְחַיָּה רָעָה וָדֶבֶר, שִׁלַּחְתִּי, אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם--לְהַכְרִית מִמֶּנָּה, אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה.    21 For thus saith the Lord GOD: How much more when I send My four sore judgments against Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the evil beasts, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast.
14.22 כב  וְהִנֵּה נוֹתְרָה-בָּהּ פְּלֵטָה, הַמּוּצָאִים בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת--הִנָּם יוֹצְאִים אֲלֵיכֶם, וּרְאִיתֶם אֶת-דַּרְכָּם וְאֶת-עֲלִילוֹתָם; וְנִחַמְתֶּם, עַל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר הֵבֵאתִי עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם--אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר הֵבֵאתִי, עָלֶיהָ.    22 And, behold, though there be left a remnant therein that shall be brought forth, both sons and daughters; behold, when they come forth unto you, and ye see their way and their doings, then ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it;
14.23 כג  וְנִחֲמוּ אֶתְכֶם, כִּי-תִרְאוּ אֶת-דַּרְכָּם וְאֶת-עֲלִילוֹתָם; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי לֹא חִנָּם עָשִׂיתִי אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי בָהּ--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    23 and they shall comfort you, when ye see their way and their doings, and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
15.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
15.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, מַה-יִּהְיֶה עֵץ-הַגֶּפֶן מִכָּל-עֵץ--הַזְּמוֹרָה, אֲשֶׁר הָיָה בַּעֲצֵי הַיָּעַר.    2 'Son of man, what is the vine-tree more than any tree, the vine branch which grew up among the trees of the forest?
15.3 ג  הֲיֻקַּח מִמֶּנּוּ עֵץ, לַעֲשׂוֹת לִמְלָאכָה; אִם-יִקְחוּ מִמֶּנּוּ יָתֵד, לִתְלוֹת עָלָיו כָּל-כֶּלִי.    3 Shall wood be taken thereof to make any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
15.4 ד  הִנֵּה לָאֵשׁ, נִתַּן לְאָכְלָה:  אֵת שְׁנֵי קְצוֹתָיו אָכְלָה הָאֵשׁ, וְתוֹכוֹ נָחָר--הֲיִצְלַח, לִמְלָאכָה.    4 Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire hath devoured both the ends of it, and the midst of it is singed; is it profitable for any work?
15.5 ה  הִנֵּה בִּהְיוֹתוֹ תָמִים, לֹא יֵעָשֶׂה לִמְלָאכָה:  אַף כִּי-אֵשׁ אֲכָלַתְהוּ וַיֵּחָר, וְנַעֲשָׂה עוֹד לִמְלָאכָה.  {ס}    5 Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work; how much less, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is singed, shall it yet be meet for any work? {S}
15.6 ו  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, כַּאֲשֶׁר עֵץ-הַגֶּפֶן בְּעֵץ הַיַּעַר, אֲשֶׁר-נְתַתִּיו לָאֵשׁ לְאָכְלָה--כֵּן נָתַתִּי, אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    6 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: As the vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so do I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
15.7 ז  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-פָּנַי, בָּהֶם--מֵהָאֵשׁ יָצָאוּ, וְהָאֵשׁ תֹּאכְלֵם; וִידַעְתֶּם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּשׂוּמִי אֶת-פָּנַי בָּהֶם.    7 And I will set My face against them; out of the fire are they come forth, and the fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I set My face against them.
15.8 ח  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, שְׁמָמָה--יַעַן מָעֲלוּ מַעַל, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    8 And I will make the land desolate, because they have acted treacherously, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
16.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
16.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, הוֹדַע אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם אֶת-תּוֹעֲבֹתֶיהָ.    2 'Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,
16.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לִירוּשָׁלִַם, מְכֹרֹתַיִךְ וּמֹלְדֹתַיִךְ, מֵאֶרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִי; אָבִיךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, וְאִמֵּךְ חִתִּית.    3 and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD unto Jerusalem: Thine origin and thy nativity is of the land of the Canaanite; the Amorite was thy father, and thy mother was a Hittite.
16.4 ד  וּמוֹלְדוֹתַיִךְ, בְּיוֹם הוּלֶּדֶת אוֹתָךְ לֹא-כָרַּת שָׁרֵּךְ, וּבְמַיִם לֹא-רֻחַצְתְּ, לְמִשְׁעִי; וְהָמְלֵחַ לֹא הֻמְלַחַתְּ, וְהָחְתֵּל לֹא חֻתָּלְתְּ.    4 And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water for cleansing; thou was not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.
16.5 ה  לֹא-חָסָה עָלַיִךְ עַיִן, לַעֲשׂוֹת לָךְ אַחַת מֵאֵלֶּה--לְחֻמְלָה עָלָיִךְ; וַתֻּשְׁלְכִי אֶל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה, בְּגֹעַל נַפְשֵׁךְ, בְּיוֹם, הֻלֶּדֶת אֹתָךְ.    5 No eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field in the loathsomeness of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.
16.6 ו  וָאֶעֱבֹר עָלַיִךְ וָאֶרְאֵךְ, מִתְבּוֹסֶסֶת בְּדָמָיִךְ; וָאֹמַר לָךְ בְּדָמַיִךְ חֲיִי, וָאֹמַר לָךְ בְּדָמַיִךְ חֲיִי.    6 And when I passed by thee, and saw thee wallowing in thy blood, I said unto thee: In thy blood, live; yea, I said unto thee: In thy blood, live;
16.7 ז  רְבָבָה, כְּצֶמַח הַשָּׂדֶה נְתַתִּיךְ, וַתִּרְבִּי וַתִּגְדְּלִי, וַתָּבֹאִי בַּעֲדִי עֲדָיִים:  שָׁדַיִם נָכֹנוּ וּשְׂעָרֵךְ צִמֵּחַ, וְאַתְּ עֵרֹם וְעֶרְיָה.    7 I cause thee to increase, even as the growth of the field. And thou didst increase and grow up, and thou camest to excellent beauty: thy breasts were fashioned, and thy hair was grown; yet thou wast naked and bare.
16.8 ח  וָאֶעֱבֹר עָלַיִךְ וָאֶרְאֵךְ, וְהִנֵּה עִתֵּךְ עֵת דֹּדִים, וָאֶפְרֹשׂ כְּנָפִי עָלַיִךְ, וָאֲכַסֶּה עֶרְוָתֵךְ; וָאֶשָּׁבַע לָךְ וָאָבוֹא בִבְרִית אֹתָךְ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--וַתִּהְיִי-לִי.    8 Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, and, behold, thy time was the time of love, I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I swore unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest Mine.
16.9 ט  וָאֶרְחָצֵךְ בַּמַּיִם, וָאֶשְׁטֹף דָּמַיִךְ מֵעָלָיִךְ; וָאֲסֻכֵךְ, בַּשָּׁמֶן.    9 Then washed I thee with water; yea, I cleansed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.
16.10 י  וָאַלְבִּישֵׁךְ רִקְמָה, וָאֶנְעֲלֵךְ תָּחַשׁ; וָאֶחְבְּשֵׁךְ בַּשֵּׁשׁ, וַאֲכַסֵּךְ מֶשִׁי.    10 I clothed thee also with richly woven work, and shod thee with sealskin, and I wound fine linen about thy head, and covered thee with silk.
16.11 יא  וָאֶעְדֵּךְ, עֶדִי; וָאֶתְּנָה צְמִידִים עַל-יָדַיִךְ, וְרָבִיד עַל-גְּרוֹנֵךְ.    11 I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.
16.12 יב  וָאֶתֵּן נֶזֶם, עַל-אַפֵּךְ, וַעֲגִילִים, עַל-אָזְנָיִךְ; וַעֲטֶרֶת תִּפְאֶרֶת, בְּרֹאשֵׁךְ.    12 And I put a ring upon thy nose, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thy head.
16.13 יג  וַתַּעְדִּי זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, וּמַלְבּוּשֵׁךְ ששי (שֵׁשׁ) וָמֶשִׁי וְרִקְמָה, סֹלֶת וּדְבַשׁ וָשֶׁמֶן, אכלתי (אָכָלְתְּ); וַתִּיפִי בִּמְאֹד מְאֹד, וַתִּצְלְחִי לִמְלוּכָה.    13 Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and richly woven work; thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil; and thou didst wax exceeding beautiful, and thou wast meet for royal estate.
16.14 יד  וַיֵּצֵא לָךְ שֵׁם בַּגּוֹיִם, בְּיָפְיֵךְ:  כִּי כָּלִיל הוּא, בַּהֲדָרִי אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי עָלַיִךְ--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    14 And thy renown went forth among the nations for thy beauty; for it was perfect, through My splendour which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord GOD.
16.15 טו  וַתִּבְטְחִי בְיָפְיֵךְ, וַתִּזְנִי עַל-שְׁמֵךְ; וַתִּשְׁפְּכִי אֶת-תַּזְנוּתַיִךְ עַל-כָּל-עוֹבֵר, לוֹ-יֶהִי.    15 But thou didst trust in thy beauty and play the harlot because of thy renown, and didst pour out thy harlotries on every one that passed by; his it was.
16.16 טז  וַתִּקְחִי מִבְּגָדַיִךְ, וַתַּעֲשִׂי-לָךְ בָּמוֹת טְלֻאוֹת, וַתִּזְנִי, עֲלֵיהֶם:  לֹא בָאוֹת, וְלֹא יִהְיֶה.    16 And thou didst take of thy garments, and didst make for thee high places decked with divers colours, and didst play the harlot upon them; the like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.
16.17 יז  וַתִּקְחִי כְּלֵי תִפְאַרְתֵּךְ, מִזְּהָבִי וּמִכַּסְפִּי אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָךְ, וַתַּעֲשִׂי-לָךְ, צַלְמֵי זָכָר; וַתִּזְנִי-בָם.    17 Thou didst also take thy fair jewels of My gold and of My silver, which I had given thee, and madest for thee images of men, and didst play the harlot with them;
16.18 יח  וַתִּקְחִי אֶת-בִּגְדֵי רִקְמָתֵךְ, וַתְּכַסִּים; וְשַׁמְנִי, וּקְטָרְתִּי, נתתי (נָתַתְּ), לִפְנֵיהֶם.    18 and thou didst take thy richly woven garments and cover them, and didst set Mine oil and Mine incense before them.
16.19 יט  וְלַחְמִי אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לָךְ סֹלֶת וָשֶׁמֶן וּדְבַשׁ, הֶאֱכַלְתִּיךְ, וּנְתַתִּיהוּ לִפְנֵיהֶם לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, וַיֶּהִי:  נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    19 My bread also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou didst even set it before them for a sweet savour, and thus it was; saith the Lord GOD.
16.20 כ  וַתִּקְחִי אֶת-בָּנַיִךְ וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתַיִךְ, אֲשֶׁר יָלַדְתְּ לִי, וַתִּזְבָּחִים לָהֶם, לֶאֱכוֹל--הַמְעַט, מתזנותך (מִתַּזְנוּתָיִךְ).    20 Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto Me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Were thy harlotries a small matter,
16.21 כא  וַתִּשְׁחֲטִי, אֶת-בָּנָי; וַתִּתְּנִים, בְּהַעֲבִיר אוֹתָם לָהֶם.    21 that thou hast slain My children, and delivered them up, in setting them apart unto them?
16.22 כב  וְאֵת כָּל-תּוֹעֲבֹתַיִךְ וְתַזְנֻתַיִךְ, לֹא זכרתי (זָכַרְתְּ) אֶת-יְמֵי נְעוּרָיִךְ--בִּהְיוֹתֵךְ עֵירֹם וְעֶרְיָה, מִתְבּוֹסֶסֶת בְּדָמֵךְ הָיִית.    22 And in all thine abominations and thy harlotries thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast wallowing in thy blood.
16.23 כג  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי כָּל-רָעָתֵךְ:  אוֹי אוֹי לָךְ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    23 And it came to pass after all thy wickedness--woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord GOD--
16.24 כד  וַתִּבְנִי-לָךְ, גָּב; וַתַּעֲשִׂי-לָךְ רָמָה, בְּכָל-רְחוֹב.    24 that thou hast built unto thee an eminent place, and hast made thee a lofty place in every street.
16.25 כה  אֶל-כָּל-רֹאשׁ דֶּרֶךְ, בָּנִית רָמָתֵךְ, וַתְּתַעֲבִי אֶת-יָפְיֵךְ, וַתְּפַשְּׂקִי אֶת-רַגְלַיִךְ לְכָל-עוֹבֵר; וַתַּרְבִּי, אֶת-תזנותך (תַּזְנוּתָיִךְ).    25 Thou hast built thy lofty place at every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty an abomination, and hast opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy harlotries.
16.26 כו  וַתִּזְנִי אֶל-בְּנֵי-מִצְרַיִם שְׁכֵנַיִךְ, גִּדְלֵי בָשָׂר; וַתַּרְבִּי אֶת-תַּזְנֻתֵךְ, לְהַכְעִיסֵנִי.    26 Thou hast also played the harlot with the Egyptians, thy neighbours, great of flesh; and hast multiplied thy harlotry, to provoke Me.
16.27 כז  וְהִנֵּה נָטִיתִי יָדִי עָלַיִךְ, וָאֶגְרַע חֻקֵּךְ; וָאֶתְּנֵךְ בְּנֶפֶשׁ שֹׂנְאוֹתַיִךְ, בְּנוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים--הַנִּכְלָמוֹת, מִדַּרְכֵּךְ זִמָּה.    27 Behold, therefore I have stretched out My hand over thee, and have diminished thine allowance, and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, that are ashamed of thy lewd way.
16.28 כח  וַתִּזְנִי אֶל-בְּנֵי אַשּׁוּר, מִבִּלְתִּי שָׂבְעָתֵךְ; וַתִּזְנִים, וְגַם לֹא שָׂבָעַתְּ.    28 Thou hast played the harlot also with the Assyrians, without having enough; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet thou wast not satisfied.
16.29 כט  וַתַּרְבִּי אֶת-תַּזְנוּתֵךְ אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, כַּשְׂדִּימָה; וְגַם-בְּזֹאת, לֹא שָׂבָעַתְּ.    29 Thou hast moreover multiplied thy harlotry with the land of traffic, even with Chaldea; and yet thou didst not have enough herewith.
16.30 ל  מָה אֲמֻלָה לִבָּתֵךְ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--בַּעֲשׂוֹתֵךְ, אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה, מַעֲשֵׂה אִשָּׁה-זוֹנָה, שַׁלָּטֶת.    30 How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord GOD, seeing thou doest all these things, the work of a wanton harlot;
16.31 לא  בִּבְנוֹתַיִךְ גַּבֵּךְ בְּרֹאשׁ כָּל-דֶּרֶךְ, וְרָמָתֵךְ עשיתי (עָשִׂית) בְּכָל-רְחוֹב; וְלֹא-הייתי (הָיִית) כַּזּוֹנָה, לְקַלֵּס אֶתְנָן.    31 in that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and makest thy lofty place in every street; and hast not been as a harlot that enhanceth her hire.
16.32 לב  הָאִשָּׁה, הַמְּנָאָפֶת--תַּחַת אִישָׁהּ, תִּקַּח אֶת-זָרִים.    32 Thou wife that committest adultery, that takest strangers instead of thy husband--
16.33 לג  לְכָל-זֹנוֹת, יִתְּנוּ-נֵדֶה; וְאַתְּ נָתַתְּ אֶת-נְדָנַיִךְ, לְכָל-מְאַהֲבַיִךְ, וַתִּשְׁחֳדִי אוֹתָם לָבוֹא אֵלַיִךְ מִסָּבִיב, בְּתַזְנוּתָיִךְ.    33 to all harlots gifts are given; but thou hast given thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hast bribed them to come unto thee from every side in thy harlotries.
16.34 לד  וַיְהִי-בָךְ הֵפֶךְ מִן-הַנָּשִׁים בְּתַזְנוּתַיִךְ, וְאַחֲרַיִךְ לֹא זוּנָּה; וּבְתִתֵּךְ אֶתְנָן, וְאֶתְנַן לֹא נִתַּן-לָךְ--וַתְּהִי לְהֶפֶךְ.    34 And the contrary is in thee from other women, in that thou didst solicit to harlotry, and wast not solicited; and in that thou givest hire, and no hire is given unto thee, thus thou art contrary.
16.35 לה  לָכֵן זוֹנָה, שִׁמְעִי דְּבַר-יְהוָה.  {פ}    35 Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the LORD! {P}
16.36 לו  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן הִשָּׁפֵךְ נְחֻשְׁתֵּךְ וַתִּגָּלֶה עֶרְוָתֵךְ, בְּתַזְנוּתַיִךְ, עַל-מְאַהֲבָיִךְ; וְעַל, כָּל-גִּלּוּלֵי תוֹעֲבוֹתַיִךְ, וְכִדְמֵי בָנַיִךְ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתְּ לָהֶם.    36 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness uncovered through thy harlotries with thy lovers; and because of all the idols of thy abominations, and for the blood of thy children, that thou didst give unto them;
16.37 לז  לָכֵן הִנְנִי מְקַבֵּץ אֶת-כָּל-מְאַהֲבַיִךְ, אֲשֶׁר עָרַבְתְּ עֲלֵיהֶם, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אָהַבְתְּ, עַל כָּל-אֲשֶׁר שָׂנֵאת; וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֹתָם עָלַיִךְ מִסָּבִיב, וְגִלֵּיתִי עֶרְוָתֵךְ אֲלֵהֶם, וְרָאוּ, אֶת-כָּל-עֶרְוָתֵךְ.    37 therefore behold, I will gather all thy lovers, unto whom thou hast been pleasant, and all them that thou hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather them against thee from every side, and will uncover thy nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness.
16.38 לח  וּשְׁפַטְתִּיךְ מִשְׁפְּטֵי נֹאֲפוֹת, וְשֹׁפְכֹת דָּם; וּנְתַתִּיךְ, דַּם חֵמָה וְקִנְאָה.    38 And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will bring upon thee the blood of fury and jealousy.
16.39 לט  וְנָתַתִּי אֹתָךְ בְּיָדָם, וְהָרְסוּ גַבֵּךְ וְנִתְּצוּ רָמֹתַיִךְ, וְהִפְשִׁיטוּ אוֹתָךְ בְּגָדַיִךְ, וְלָקְחוּ כְּלֵי תִפְאַרְתֵּךְ; וְהִנִּיחוּךְ, עֵירֹם וְעֶרְיָה.    39 I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and break down thy lofty places; and they shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take thy fair jewels; and they shall leave thee naked and bare.
16.40 מ  וְהֶעֱלוּ עָלַיִךְ קָהָל, וְרָגְמוּ אוֹתָךְ בָּאָבֶן; וּבִתְּקוּךְ, בְּחַרְבוֹתָם.    40 They shall also bring up an assembly against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.
16.41 מא  וְשָׂרְפוּ בָתַּיִךְ, בָּאֵשׁ, וְעָשׂוּ-בָךְ שְׁפָטִים, לְעֵינֵי נָשִׁים רַבּוֹת; וְהִשְׁבַּתִּיךְ, מִזּוֹנָה, וְגַם-אֶתְנַן, לֹא תִתְּנִי-עוֹד.    41 And they shall burn thy houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women; and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou shalt also give no hire any more.
16.42 מב  וַהֲנִחֹתִי חֲמָתִי בָּךְ, וְסָרָה קִנְאָתִי מִמֵּךְ; וְשָׁקַטְתִּי, וְלֹא אֶכְעַס עוֹד.    42 So will I satisfy My fury upon thee, and My jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.
16.43 מג  יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-זכרתי (זָכַרְתְּ) אֶת-יְמֵי נְעוּרַיִךְ, וַתִּרְגְּזִי-לִי, בְּכָל-אֵלֶּה; וְגַם-אֲנִי הֵא דַּרְכֵּךְ בְּרֹאשׁ נָתַתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְלֹא עשיתי (עָשִׂית) אֶת-הַזִּמָּה, עַל כָּל-תּוֹעֲבֹתָיִךְ.    43 Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted Me in all these things; lo, therefore I also will bring thy way upon thy head, saith the Lord GOD; or hast thou not committed this lewdness above all thine abominations?
16.44 מד  הִנֵּה, כָּל-הַמֹּשֵׁל, עָלַיִךְ יִמְשֹׁל, לֵאמֹר:  כְּאִמָּה, בִּתָּהּ.    44 Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying: As the mother, so her daughter.
16.45 מה  בַּת-אִמֵּךְ אַתְּ, גֹּעֶלֶת אִישָׁהּ וּבָנֶיהָ; וַאֲחוֹת אֲחוֹתֵךְ אַתְּ, אֲשֶׁר גָּעֲלוּ אַנְשֵׁיהֶן וּבְנֵיהֶן--אִמְּכֶן חִתִּית, וַאֲבִיכֶן אֱמֹרִי.    45 Thou art thy mother's daughter, that loatheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children; your mother was a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.
16.46 מו  וַאֲחוֹתֵךְ הַגְּדוֹלָה שֹׁמְרוֹן הִיא וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, הַיּוֹשֶׁבֶת עַל-שְׂמֹאולֵךְ; וַאֲחוֹתֵךְ הַקְּטַנָּה מִמֵּךְ, הַיּוֹשֶׁבֶת מִימִינֵךְ--סְדֹם, וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ.    46 And thine elder sister is Samaria, that dwelleth at thy left hand, she and her daughters; and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.
16.47 מז  וְלֹא בְדַרְכֵיהֶן הָלַכְתְּ, וּכְתוֹעֲבוֹתֵיהֶן עשיתי (עָשִׂית):  כִּמְעַט קָט, וַתַּשְׁחִתִי מֵהֵן בְּכָל-דְּרָכָיִךְ.    47 Yet hast thou not walked in their ways, nor done after their abominations; but in a very little while thou didst deal more corruptly than they in all thy ways.
16.48 מח  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-עָשְׂתָה סְדֹם אֲחוֹתֵךְ, הִיא וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂית, אַתְּ וּבְנוֹתָיִךְ.    48 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.
16.49 מט  הִנֵּה-זֶה הָיָה, עֲוֺן סְדֹם אֲחוֹתֵךְ:  גָּאוֹן שִׂבְעַת-לֶחֶם וְשַׁלְוַת הַשְׁקֵט, הָיָה לָהּ וְלִבְנוֹתֶיהָ, וְיַד-עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן, לֹא הֶחֱזִיקָה.    49 Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom: pride, fulness of bread, and careless ease was in her and in her daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.
16.50 נ  וַתִּגְבְּהֶינָה, וַתַּעֲשֶׂינָה תוֹעֵבָה לְפָנָי; וָאָסִיר אֶתְהֶן, כַּאֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי.  {ס}    50 And they were haughty, and committed abomination before Me; therefore I removed them when I saw it. {S}
16.51 נא  וְשֹׁמְרוֹן, כַּחֲצִי חַטֹּאתַיִךְ לֹא חָטָאָה; וַתַּרְבִּי אֶת-תּוֹעֲבוֹתַיִךְ, מֵהֵנָּה, וַתְּצַדְּקִי אֶת-אחותך (אֲחוֹתַיִךְ), בְּכָל-תּוֹעֲבֹתַיִךְ אֲשֶׁר עשיתי (עָשִׂית).    51 Neither hath Samaria committed even half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters by all thine abominations which thou hast done.
16.52 נב  גַּם-אַתְּ שְׂאִי כְלִמָּתֵךְ, אֲשֶׁר פִּלַּלְתְּ לַאֲחוֹתֵךְ, בְּחַטֹּאתַיִךְ אֲשֶׁר-הִתְעַבְתְּ מֵהֵן, תִּצְדַּקְנָה מִמֵּךְ; וְגַם-אַתְּ בּוֹשִׁי וּשְׂאִי כְלִמָּתֵךְ, בְּצַדֶּקְתֵּךְ אַחְיוֹתֵךְ.    52 Thou also, bear thine own shame, in that thou hast given judgment for thy sisters; through thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they, they are more righteous than thou; yea, be thou also confounded, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.
16.53 נג  וְשַׁבְתִּי, אֶת-שְׁבִיתְהֶן--אֶת-שבית (שְׁבוּת) סְדֹם וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, וְאֶת-שבית (שְׁבוּת) שֹׁמְרוֹן וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ; ושבית (וּשְׁבוּת) שְׁבִיתַיִךְ, בְּתוֹכָהְנָה.    53 And I will turn their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, and the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them;
16.54 נד  לְמַעַן, תִּשְׂאִי כְלִמָּתֵךְ, וְנִכְלַמְתְּ, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂית--בְּנַחֲמֵךְ, אֹתָן.    54 that thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be ashamed because of all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them.
16.55 נה  וַאֲחוֹתַיִךְ, סְדֹם וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ תָּשֹׁבְןָ לְקַדְמָתָן, וְשֹׁמְרוֹן וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, תָּשֹׁבְןָ לְקַדְמָתָן; וְאַתְּ, וּבְנוֹתַיִךְ, תְּשֻׁבֶינָה, לְקַדְמַתְכֶן.    55 And thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, and thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.
16.56 נו  וְלוֹא הָיְתָה סְדֹם אֲחוֹתֵךְ, לִשְׁמוּעָה בְּפִיךְ, בְּיוֹם, גְּאוֹנָיִךְ.    56 For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride;
16.57 נז  בְּטֶרֶם, תִּגָּלֶה רָעָתֵךְ, כְּמוֹ עֵת חֶרְפַּת בְּנוֹת-אֲרָם, וְכָל-סְבִיבוֹתֶיהָ בְּנוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים; הַשָּׁאטוֹת אוֹתָךְ, מִסָּבִיב.    57 before thy wickedness was uncovered, as at the time of the taunt of the daughters of Aram, and of all that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, that have thee in disdain round about.
16.58 נח  אֶת-זִמָּתֵךְ וְאֶת-תּוֹעֲבוֹתַיִךְ, אַתְּ נְשָׂאתִים--נְאֻם, יְהוָה.  {ס}    58 Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the LORD. {S}
16.59 נט  כִּי כֹה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, ועשית (וְעָשִׂיתִי) אוֹתָךְ כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂית--אֲשֶׁר-בָּזִית אָלָה, לְהָפֵר בְּרִית.    59 For thus saith the Lord GOD: I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.
16.60 ס  וְזָכַרְתִּי אֲנִי אֶת-בְּרִיתִי אוֹתָךְ, בִּימֵי נְעוּרָיִךְ; וַהֲקִימוֹתִי לָךְ, בְּרִית עוֹלָם.    60 Nevertheless I will remember My covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.
16.61 סא  וְזָכַרְתְּ אֶת-דְּרָכַיִךְ, וְנִכְלַמְתְּ, בְּקַחְתֵּךְ אֶת-אֲחוֹתַיִךְ הַגְּדֹלוֹת מִמֵּךְ, אֶל-הַקְּטַנּוֹת מִמֵּךְ; וְנָתַתִּי אֶתְהֶן לָךְ לְבָנוֹת, וְלֹא מִבְּרִיתֵךְ.    61 Then shalt thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder sisters and thy younger; and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not because of thy covenant.
16.62 סב  וַהֲקִימֹתִי אֲנִי אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, אִתָּךְ; וְיָדַעַתְּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    62 And I will establish My covenant with thee, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD;
16.63 סג  לְמַעַן תִּזְכְּרִי, וָבֹשְׁתְּ, וְלֹא יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ עוֹד פִּתְחוֹן פֶּה, מִפְּנֵי כְּלִמָּתֵךְ--בְּכַפְּרִי-לָךְ לְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂית, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    63 that thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame; when I have forgiven thee all that thou hast done, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
17.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
17.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, חוּד חִידָה וּמְשֹׁל מָשָׁל, אֶל-בֵּית, יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 'Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of Israel,
17.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הַנֶּשֶׁר הַגָּדוֹל גְּדוֹל הַכְּנָפַיִם אֶרֶךְ הָאֵבֶר, מָלֵא הַנּוֹצָה, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ הָרִקְמָה--בָּא אֶל-הַלְּבָנוֹן, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-צַמֶּרֶת הָאָרֶז.    3 and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: A great eagle with great wings and long pinions, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the top of the cedar;
17.4 ד  אֵת רֹאשׁ יְנִיקוֹתָיו, קָטָף; וַיְבִיאֵהוּ אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, בְּעִיר רֹכְלִים שָׂמוֹ.    4 He cropped off the topmost of the young twigs thereof, and carried it into a land of traffic; he set it in a city of merchants.
17.5 ה  וַיִּקַּח מִזֶּרַע הָאָרֶץ, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ בִּשְׂדֵה-זָרַע; קָח עַל-מַיִם רַבִּים, צַפְצָפָה שָׂמוֹ.    5 He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful soil; he placed it beside many waters, he set it as a slip.
17.6 ו  וַיִּצְמַח וַיְהִי לְגֶפֶן סֹרַחַת שִׁפְלַת קוֹמָה, לִפְנוֹת דָּלִיּוֹתָיו אֵלָיו, וְשָׁרָשָׁיו, תַּחְתָּיו יִהְיוּ; וַתְּהִי לְגֶפֶן--וַתַּעַשׂ בַּדִּים, וַתְּשַׁלַּח פֹּרֹאות.    6 And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose tendrils might turn toward him, and the roots thereof be under him; so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.
17.7 ז  וַיְהִי נֶשֶׁר-אֶחָד גָּדוֹל, גְּדוֹל כְּנָפַיִם וְרַב-נוֹצָה; וְהִנֵּה הַגֶּפֶן הַזֹּאת כָּפְנָה שָׁרָשֶׁיהָ עָלָיו, וְדָלִיּוֹתָיו שִׁלְחָה-לּוֹ, לְהַשְׁקוֹת אוֹתָהּ, מֵעֲרֻגוֹת מַטָּעָהּ.    7 There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers; and, behold, this vine did bend its roots toward him, and shot forth its branches toward him, from the beds of its plantation, that he might water it.
17.8 ח  אֶל-שָׂדֶה טּוֹב אֶל-מַיִם רַבִּים, הִיא שְׁתוּלָה--לַעֲשׂוֹת עָנָף וְלָשֵׂאת פֶּרִי, לִהְיוֹת לְגֶפֶן אַדָּרֶת.    8 It was planted in a good soil by many waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a stately vine.
17.9 ט  אֱמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--תִּצְלָח; הֲלוֹא אֶת-שָׁרָשֶׁיהָ יְנַתֵּק וְאֶת-פִּרְיָהּ יְקוֹסֵס וְיָבֵשׁ, כָּל-טַרְפֵּי צִמְחָהּ תִּיבָשׁ, וְלֹא-בִזְרֹעַ גְּדוֹלָה וּבְעַם-רָב, לְמַשְׂאוֹת אוֹתָהּ מִשָּׁרָשֶׁיהָ.    9 Say thou: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Shall it prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither, yea, wither in all its sprouting leaves? neither shall great power or much people be at hand when it is plucked up by the roots thereof.
17.10 י  וְהִנֵּה שְׁתוּלָה, הֲתִצְלָח; הֲלֹא כְגַעַת בָּהּ רוּחַ הַקָּדִים, תִּיבַשׁ יָבֹשׁ, עַל-עֲרֻגֹת צִמְחָהּ, תִּיבָשׁ.  {פ}    10 Yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper? Shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? In the beds where it grew it shall wither.' {P}
17.11 יא  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
17.12 יב  אֱמָר-נָא לְבֵית הַמֶּרִי, הֲלֹא יְדַעְתֶּם מָה-אֵלֶּה; אֱמֹר, הִנֵּה-בָא מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל יְרוּשָׁלִַם וַיִּקַּח אֶת-מַלְכָּהּ וְאֶת-שָׂרֶיהָ, וַיָּבֵא אוֹתָם אֵלָיו, בָּבֶלָה.    12 'Say now to the rebellious house: Know ye not what these things mean? tell them: Behold, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and took the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and brought them to him to Babylon;
17.13 יג  וַיִּקַּח מִזֶּרַע הַמְּלוּכָה, וַיִּכְרֹת אִתּוֹ בְּרִית; וַיָּבֵא אֹתוֹ בְּאָלָה, וְאֶת-אֵילֵי הָאָרֶץ לָקָח.    13 and he took of the seed royal, and made a covenant with him, and brought him under an oath, and the mighty of the land he took away;
17.14 יד  לִהְיוֹת מַמְלָכָה שְׁפָלָה, לְבִלְתִּי הִתְנַשֵּׂא, לִשְׁמֹר אֶת-בְּרִיתוֹ, לְעָמְדָהּ.    14 that his might be a lowly kingdom, that it might not lift itself up, but that by keeping his covenant it might stand.
17.15 טו  וַיִּמְרָד-בּוֹ, לִשְׁלֹחַ מַלְאָכָיו מִצְרַיִם, לָתֶת-לוֹ סוּסִים, וְעַם-רָב; הֲיִצְלָח הֲיִמָּלֵט הָעֹשֵׂה אֵלֶּה, וְהֵפֵר בְּרִית וְנִמְלָט.    15 But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? shall he break the covenant, and yet escape?
17.16 טז  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-לֹא בִּמְקוֹם הַמֶּלֶךְ הַמַּמְלִיךְ אֹתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר בָּזָה אֶת-אָלָתוֹ וַאֲשֶׁר הֵפֵר אֶת-בְּרִיתוֹ--אִתּוֹ בְתוֹךְ-בָּבֶל, יָמוּת.    16 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die.
17.17 יז  וְלֹא בְחַיִל גָּדוֹל וּבְקָהָל רָב, יַעֲשֶׂה אוֹתוֹ פַרְעֹה בַּמִּלְחָמָה, בִּשְׁפֹּךְ סֹלְלָה, וּבִבְנוֹת דָּיֵק--לְהַכְרִית, נְפָשׁוֹת רַבּוֹת.    17 Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company succour him in the war, when they cast up mounds and build forts, to cut off many souls;
17.18 יח  וּבָזָה אָלָה, לְהָפֵר בְּרִית; וְהִנֵּה נָתַן יָדוֹ וְכָל-אֵלֶּה עָשָׂה, לֹא יִמָּלֵט.  {ס}    18 seeing he hath despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these things, he shall not escape. {S}
17.19 יט  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, חַי-אָנִי, אִם-לֹא אָלָתִי אֲשֶׁר בָּזָה, וּבְרִיתִי אֲשֶׁר הֵפִיר--וּנְתַתִּיו, בְּרֹאשׁוֹ.    19 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: As I live, surely Mine oath that he hath despised, and My covenant that he hath broken, I will even bring it upon his own head.
17.20 כ  וּפָרַשְׂתִּי עָלָיו רִשְׁתִּי, וְנִתְפַּשׂ בִּמְצוּדָתִי; וַהֲבִיאוֹתִיהוּ בָבֶלָה, וְנִשְׁפַּטְתִּי אִתּוֹ שָׁם, מַעֲלוֹ, אֲשֶׁר מָעַל-בִּי.    20 And I will spread My net upon him, and he shall be taken in My snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his treachery that he hath committed against Me.
17.21 כא  וְאֵת כָּל-מִבְרָחָו בְּכָל-אֲגַפָּיו בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ, וְהַנִּשְׁאָרִים לְכָל-רוּחַ יִפָּרֵשׂוּ; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה דִּבַּרְתִּי.  {פ}    21 And all his mighty men in all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward every wind; and ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken it. {P}
17.22 כב  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְלָקַחְתִּי אָנִי מִצַּמֶּרֶת הָאֶרֶז הָרָמָה, וְנָתָתִּי; מֵרֹאשׁ יֹנְקוֹתָיו, רַךְ אֶקְטֹף, וְשָׁתַלְתִּי אָנִי, עַל הַר-גָּבֹהַּ וְתָלוּל.    22 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Moreover I will take, even I, of the lofty top of the cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the topmost of its young twigs a tender one, and I will plant it upon a high mountain and eminent;
17.23 כג  בְּהַר מְרוֹם יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶשְׁתֳּלֶנּוּ, וְנָשָׂא עָנָף וְעָשָׂה פֶרִי, וְהָיָה לְאֶרֶז אַדִּיר; וְשָׁכְנוּ תַחְתָּיו, כֹּל צִפּוֹר כָּל-כָּנָף--בְּצֵל דָּלִיּוֹתָיו, תִּשְׁכֹּנָּה.    23 in the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a stately cedar; and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing, in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.
17.24 כד  וְיָדְעוּ כָּל-עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה הִשְׁפַּלְתִּי עֵץ גָּבֹהַּ הִגְבַּהְתִּי עֵץ שָׁפָל, הוֹבַשְׁתִּי עֵץ לָח, וְהִפְרַחְתִּי עֵץ יָבֵשׁ:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי וְעָשִׂיתִי.  {פ}    24 And all the trees of the field shall know that I the LORD have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish; I the LORD have spoken and have done it.' {P}
18.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
18.2 ב  מַה-לָּכֶם, אַתֶּם מֹשְׁלִים אֶת-הַמָּשָׁל הַזֶּה, עַל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  אָבוֹת יֹאכְלוּ בֹסֶר, וְשִׁנֵּי הַבָּנִים תִּקְהֶינָה.    2 'What mean ye, that ye use this proverb in the land of Israel, saying: The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?
18.3 ג  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  אִם-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם עוֹד, מְשֹׁל הַמָּשָׁל הַזֶּה--בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    3 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.
18.4 ד  הֵן כָּל-הַנְּפָשׁוֹת לִי הֵנָּה, כְּנֶפֶשׁ הָאָב וּכְנֶפֶשׁ הַבֵּן לִי-הֵנָּה:  הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַחֹטֵאת, הִיא תָמוּת.    4 Behold, all souls are Mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is Mine; the soul that sinneth, it shall die.
18.5 ה  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-יִהְיֶה צַדִּיק; וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט, וּצְדָקָה.    5 But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right,
18.6 ו  אֶל-הֶהָרִים, לֹא אָכָל, וְעֵינָיו לֹא נָשָׂא, אֶל-גִּלּוּלֵי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאֶת-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ לֹא טִמֵּא, וְאֶל-אִשָּׁה נִדָּה לֹא יִקְרָב.    6 and hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbour's wife, neither hath come near to a woman in her impurity;
18.7 ז  וְאִישׁ, לֹא יוֹנֶה--חֲבֹלָתוֹ חוֹב יָשִׁיב, גְּזֵלָה לֹא יִגְזֹל; לַחְמוֹ לְרָעֵב יִתֵּן, וְעֵירֹם יְכַסֶּה-בָּגֶד.    7 and hath not wronged any, but hath restored his pledge for a debt, hath taken nought by robbery, hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment;
18.8 ח  בַּנֶּשֶׁךְ לֹא-יִתֵּן, וְתַרְבִּית לֹא יִקָּח--מֵעָוֶל, יָשִׁיב יָדוֹ; מִשְׁפַּט אֱמֶת יַעֲשֶׂה, בֵּין אִישׁ לְאִישׁ.    8 he that hath not given forth upon interest, neither hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true justice between man and man,
18.9 ט  בְּחֻקּוֹתַי יְהַלֵּךְ וּמִשְׁפָּטַי שָׁמַר, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֱמֶת:  צַדִּיק הוּא חָיֹה יִחְיֶה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    9 hath walked in My statutes, and hath kept Mine ordinances, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord GOD.
18.10 י  וְהוֹלִיד בֵּן-פָּרִיץ, שֹׁפֵךְ דָּם; וְעָשָׂה אָח, מֵאַחַד מֵאֵלֶּה.    10 If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth to a brother any of these things,
18.11 יא  וְהוּא, אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה לֹא עָשָׂה--כִּי גַם אֶל-הֶהָרִים אָכַל, וְאֶת-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ טִמֵּא.    11 whereas he himself had not done any of these things, for he hath even eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour's wife,
18.12 יב  עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן, הוֹנָה--גְּזֵלוֹת גָּזָל, חֲבֹל לֹא יָשִׁיב; וְאֶל-הַגִּלּוּלִים נָשָׂא עֵינָיו, תּוֹעֵבָה עָשָׂה.    12 hath wronged the poor and needy, hath taken by robbery, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination,
18.13 יג  בַּנֶּשֶׁךְ נָתַן וְתַרְבִּית לָקַח, וָחָי:  לֹא יִחְיֶה, אֵת כָּל-הַתּוֹעֵבוֹת הָאֵלֶּה עָשָׂה--מוֹת יוּמָת, דָּמָיו בּוֹ יִהְיֶה.    13 hath given forth upon interest, and hath taken increase; shall he then live? he shall not live--he hath done all these abominations; he shall surely be put to death, his blood shall be upon him.
18.14 יד  וְהִנֵּה, הוֹלִיד בֵּן, וַיַּרְא, אֶת-כָּל-חַטֹּאת אָבִיו אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה; וַיִּרְאֶה, וְלֹא יַעֲשֶׂה כָּהֵן.    14 Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all his father's sins, which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like,
18.15 טו  עַל-הֶהָרִים, לֹא אָכָל, וְעֵינָיו לֹא נָשָׂא, אֶל-גִּלּוּלֵי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; אֶת-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ, לֹא טִמֵּא.    15 that hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour's wife,
18.16 טז  וְאִישׁ, לֹא הוֹנָה--חֲבֹל לֹא חָבָל, וּגְזֵלָה לֹא גָזָל; לַחְמוֹ לְרָעֵב נָתָן, וְעֵרוֹם כִּסָּה-בָגֶד.    16 neither hath wronged any, hath not taken aught to pledge, neither hath taken by robbery, but hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment,
18.17 יז  מֵעָנִי הֵשִׁיב יָדוֹ, נֶשֶׁךְ וְתַרְבִּית לֹא לָקָח--מִשְׁפָּטַי עָשָׂה, בְּחֻקּוֹתַי הָלָךְ:  הוּא, לֹא יָמוּת בַּעֲוֺן אָבִיו--חָיֹה יִחְיֶה.    17 that hath withdrawn his hand from the poor, that hath not received interest nor increase, hath executed Mine ordinances, hath walked in My statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live.
18.18 יח  אָבִיו כִּי-עָשַׁק עֹשֶׁק, גָּזַל גֵּזֶל אָח, וַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-טוֹב עָשָׂה, בְּתוֹךְ עַמָּיו; וְהִנֵּה-מֵת, בַּעֲוֺנוֹ.    18 As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, committed robbery on his brother, and did that which is not good among his people, behold, he dieth for his iniquity.
18.19 יט  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, מַדֻּעַ לֹא-נָשָׂא הַבֵּן בַּעֲוֺן הָאָב; וְהַבֵּן מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה עָשָׂה, אֵת כָּל-חֻקּוֹתַי שָׁמַר וַיַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם--חָיֹה יִחְיֶה.    19 Yet say ye: Why doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father with him? When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept all My statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live.
18.20 כ  הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַחֹטֵאת, הִיא תָמוּת:  בֵּן לֹא-יִשָּׂא בַּעֲוֺן הָאָב, וְאָב לֹא יִשָּׂא בַּעֲוֺן הַבֵּן--צִדְקַת הַצַּדִּיק עָלָיו תִּהְיֶה, וְרִשְׁעַת רשע (הָרָשָׁע) עָלָיו תִּהְיֶה.  {ס}    20 The soul that sinneth, it shall die; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father with him, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son with him; the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. {S}
18.21 כא  וְהָרָשָׁע, כִּי יָשׁוּב מִכָּל-חַטֹּאתָו אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וְשָׁמַר אֶת-כָּל-חֻקוֹתַי, וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה--חָיֹה יִחְיֶה, לֹא יָמוּת.    21 But if the wicked turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all My statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
18.22 כב  כָּל-פְּשָׁעָיו אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, לֹא יִזָּכְרוּ לוֹ:  בְּצִדְקָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, יִחְיֶה.    22 None of his transgressions that he hath committed shall be remembered against him; for his righteousness that he hath done he shall live.
18.23 כג  הֶחָפֹץ אֶחְפֹּץ מוֹת רָשָׁע, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הֲלוֹא בְּשׁוּבוֹ מִדְּרָכָיו, וְחָיָה.  {ס}    23 Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord GOD; and not rather that he should return from his ways, and live? {S}
18.24 כד  וּבְשׁוּב צַדִּיק מִצִּדְקָתוֹ, וְעָשָׂה עָוֶל, כְּכֹל הַתּוֹעֵבוֹת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה הָרָשָׁע יַעֲשֶׂה, וָחָי--כָּל-צִדְקֹתָו אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה לֹא תִזָּכַרְנָה, בְּמַעֲלוֹ אֲשֶׁר-מָעַל וּבְחַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-חָטָא בָּם יָמוּת.    24 But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? None of his righteous deeds that he hath done shall be remembered; for his trespass that he trespassed, and for his sin that he hath sinned, for them shall he die.
18.25 כה  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, לֹא יִתָּכֵן דֶּרֶךְ אֲדֹנָי:  שִׁמְעוּ-נָא, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֲדַרְכִּי לֹא יִתָּכֵן, הֲלֹא דַרְכֵיכֶם לֹא יִתָּכֵנוּ.    25 Yet ye say: The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel: Is it My way that is not equal? is it not your ways that are unequal?
18.26 כו  בְּשׁוּב-צַדִּיק מִצִּדְקָתוֹ וְעָשָׂה עָוֶל, וּמֵת עֲלֵיהֶם:  בְּעַוְלוֹ אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, יָמוּת.  {ס}    26 When the righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall die therefor; for his iniquity that he hath done shall he die. {S}
18.27 כז  וּבְשׁוּב רָשָׁע, מֵרִשְׁעָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וַיַּעַשׂ מִשְׁפָּט, וּצְדָקָה--הוּא, אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ יְחַיֶּה.    27 Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.
18.28 כח  וַיִּרְאֶה וישוב (וַיָּשָׁב), מִכָּל-פְּשָׁעָיו אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה--חָיוֹ יִחְיֶה, לֹא יָמוּת.    28 Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
18.29 כט  וְאָמְרוּ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא יִתָּכֵן דֶּרֶךְ אֲדֹנָי:  הַדְּרָכַי לֹא יִתָּכְנוּ, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--הֲלֹא דַרְכֵיכֶם, לֹא יִתָּכֵן.    29 Yet saith the house of Israel: The way of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, is it My ways that are not equal? is it not your ways that are unequal?
18.30 ל  לָכֵן אִישׁ כִּדְרָכָיו אֶשְׁפֹּט אֶתְכֶם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  שׁוּבוּ וְהָשִׁיבוּ מִכָּל-פִּשְׁעֵיכֶם, וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם לְמִכְשׁוֹל עָוֺן.    30 Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Return ye, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so shall they not be a stumblingblock of iniquity unto you.
18.31 לא  הַשְׁלִיכוּ מֵעֲלֵיכֶם, אֶת-כָּל-פִּשְׁעֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר פְּשַׁעְתֶּם בָּם, וַעֲשׂוּ לָכֶם לֵב חָדָשׁ, וְרוּחַ חֲדָשָׁה; וְלָמָּה תָמֻתוּ, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    31 Cast away from you all your transgressions, wherein ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
18.32 לב  כִּי לֹא אֶחְפֹּץ בְּמוֹת הַמֵּת, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  וְהָשִׁיבוּ, וִחְיוּ.  {פ}    32 For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord GOD; wherefore turn yourselves, and live. {P}
19.1 א  וְאַתָּה שָׂא קִינָה, אֶל-נְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 Moreover, take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,
19.2 ב  וְאָמַרְתָּ, מָה אִמְּךָ לְבִיָּא, בֵּין אֲרָיוֹת, רָבָצָה; בְּתוֹךְ כְּפִרִים, רִבְּתָה גוּרֶיהָ.    2 and say: How was thy mother a lioness; among lions she couched, in the midst of the young lions she reared her whelps!
19.3 ג  וַתַּעַל אֶחָד מִגֻּרֶיהָ, כְּפִיר הָיָה; וַיִּלְמַד לִטְרָף-טֶרֶף, אָדָם אָכָל.    3 And she brought up one of her whelps, he became a young lion; and he learned to catch the prey, he devoured men.
19.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ אֵלָיו גּוֹיִם, בְּשַׁחְתָּם נִתְפָּשׂ; וַיְבִאֻהוּ בַחַחִים, אֶל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    4 Then the nations assembled against him, he was taken in their pit; and they brought him with hooks unto the land of Egypt.
19.5 ה  וַתֵּרֶא כִּי נוֹחֲלָה, אָבְדָה תִּקְוָתָהּ; וַתִּקַּח אֶחָד מִגֻּרֶיהָ, כְּפִיר שָׂמָתְהוּ.    5 Now when she saw that she was disappointed, and her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.
19.6 ו  וַיִּתְהַלֵּךְ בְּתוֹךְ-אֲרָיוֹת, כְּפִיר הָיָה; וַיִּלְמַד לִטְרָף-טֶרֶף, אָדָם אָכָל.    6 And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion; and he learned to catch the prey, he devoured men.
19.7 ז  וַיֵּדַע, אַלְמְנוֹתָיו, וְעָרֵיהֶם, הֶחֱרִיב; וַתֵּשַׁם אֶרֶץ וּמְלֹאָהּ, מִקּוֹל שַׁאֲגָתוֹ.    7 And he knew their castles, and laid waste their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, because of the noise of his roaring.
19.8 ח  וַיִּתְּנוּ עָלָיו גּוֹיִם סָבִיב, מִמְּדִינוֹת; וַיִּפְרְשׂוּ עָלָיו רִשְׁתָּם, בְּשַׁחְתָּם נִתְפָּשׂ.    8 Then the nations cried out against him on every side from the provinces; and they spread their net over him, he was taken in their pit.
19.9 ט  וַיִּתְּנֻהוּ בַסּוּגַר בַּחַחִים, וַיְבִאֻהוּ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל; יְבִאֻהוּ, בַּמְּצֹדוֹת, לְמַעַן לֹא-יִשָּׁמַע קוֹלוֹ עוֹד, אֶל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    9 And they put him in a cage with hooks, and brought him to the king of Babylon; that they might bring him into strongholds, so that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel. {P}
19.10 י  אִמְּךָ כַגֶּפֶן בְּדָמְךָ, עַל-מַיִם שְׁתוּלָה; פֹּרִיָּה, וַעֲנֵפָה, הָיְתָה, מִמַּיִם רַבִּים.    10 Thy mother was like a vine, in thy likeness, planted by the waters; she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.
19.11 יא  וַיִּהְיוּ-לָהּ מַטּוֹת עֹז, אֶל-שִׁבְטֵי מֹשְׁלִים, וַתִּגְבַּהּ קוֹמָתוֹ, עַל-בֵּין עֲבֹתִים; וַיֵּרָא בְגָבְהוֹ, בְּרֹב דָּלִיֹּתָיו.    11 And she had strong rods to be sceptres for them that bore rule; and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she was seen in her height with the multitude of her tendrils.
19.12 יב  וַתֻּתַּשׁ בְּחֵמָה לָאָרֶץ הֻשְׁלָכָה, וְרוּחַ הַקָּדִים הוֹבִישׁ פִּרְיָהּ; הִתְפָּרְקוּ וְיָבֵשׁוּ מַטֵּה עֻזָּהּ, אֵשׁ אֲכָלָתְהוּ.    12 But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit; her strong rods were broken off and withered, the fire consumed her.
19.13 יג  וְעַתָּה, שְׁתוּלָה בַמִּדְבָּר, בְּאֶרֶץ, צִיָּה וְצָמָא.    13 And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground.
19.14 יד  וַתֵּצֵא אֵשׁ מִמַּטֵּה בַדֶּיהָ, פִּרְיָהּ אָכָלָה, וְלֹא-הָיָה בָהּ מַטֵּה-עֹז, שֵׁבֶט לִמְשׁוֹל:  קִינָה הִיא, וַתְּהִי לְקִינָה.  {פ}    14 And fire is gone out of the rod of her branches, it hath devoured her fruit, so that there is in her no strong rod to be a sceptre to rule.' This is a lamentation, and it was for a lamentation. {P}
20.1 א  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִיעִית, בַּחֲמִשִׁי בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ, בָּאוּ אֲנָשִׁים מִזִּקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִדְרֹשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, לְפָנָי.  {ס}    1 And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to inquire of the LORD, and sat before me. {S}
20.2 ב  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    2 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
20.3 ג  בֶּן-אָדָם, דַּבֵּר אֶת-זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הֲלִדְרֹשׁ אֹתִי, אַתֶּם בָּאִים:  חַי-אָנִי אִם-אִדָּרֵשׁ לָכֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    3 'Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Are ye come to inquire of Me? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by you.
20.4 ד  הֲתִשְׁפֹּט אֹתָם, הֲתִשְׁפּוֹט בֶּן-אָדָם:  אֶת-תּוֹעֲבֹת אֲבוֹתָם, הוֹדִיעֵם.    4 Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers;
20.5 ה  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּיוֹם בָּחֳרִי בְיִשְׂרָאֵל, וָאֶשָּׂא יָדִי לְזֶרַע בֵּית יַעֲקֹב וָאִוָּדַע לָהֶם בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וָאֶשָּׂא יָדִי לָהֶם לֵאמֹר, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    5 and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up My hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made Myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up My hand unto them, saying: I am the LORD your God;
20.6 ו  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, נָשָׂאתִי יָדִי לָהֶם, לְהוֹצִיאָם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  אֶל-אֶרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-תַּרְתִּי לָהֶם, זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבַשׁ--צְבִי הִיא, לְכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת.    6 in that day I lifted up My hand unto them, to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had sought out for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the beauty of all lands;
20.7 ז  וָאֹמַר אֲלֵהֶם, אִישׁ שִׁקּוּצֵי עֵינָיו הַשְׁלִיכוּ, וּבְגִלּוּלֵי מִצְרַיִם, אַל-תִּטַּמָּאוּ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    7 and I said unto them: Cast ye away every man the detestable things of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt; I am the LORD your God.
20.8 ח  וַיַּמְרוּ-בִי, וְלֹא אָבוּ לִשְׁמֹעַ אֵלַי--אִישׁ אֶת-שִׁקּוּצֵי עֵינֵיהֶם לֹא הִשְׁלִיכוּ, וְאֶת-גִּלּוּלֵי מִצְרַיִם לֹא עָזָבוּ; וָאֹמַר לִשְׁפֹּךְ חֲמָתִי עֲלֵיהֶם, לְכַלּוֹת אַפִּי בָּהֶם, בְּתוֹךְ, אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    8 But they rebelled against Me, and would not hearken unto Me; they did not every man cast away the detestable things of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt; then I said I would pour out My fury upon them, to spend My anger upon them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
20.9 ט  וָאַעַשׂ לְמַעַן שְׁמִי, לְבִלְתִּי הֵחֵל לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה בְתוֹכָם--אֲשֶׁר נוֹדַעְתִּי אֲלֵיהֶם לְעֵינֵיהֶם, לְהוֹצִיאָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    9 But I wrought for My name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, among whom they were, in whose sight I made Myself known unto them, so as to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt.
20.10 י  וָאוֹצִיאֵם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וָאֲבִאֵם, אֶל-הַמִּדְבָּר.    10 So I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.
20.11 יא  וָאֶתֵּן לָהֶם אֶת-חֻקּוֹתַי, וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי הוֹדַעְתִּי אוֹתָם:  אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה אוֹתָם הָאָדָם, וָחַי בָּהֶם.    11 And I gave them My statutes, and taught them Mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them.
20.12 יב  וְגַם אֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, נָתַתִּי לָהֶם, לִהְיוֹת לְאוֹת, בֵּינִי וּבֵינֵיהֶם--לָדַעַת, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה מְקַדְּשָׁם.    12 Moreover also I gave them My sabbaths, to be a sign between Me and them, that they might know that I am the LORD that sanctify them.
20.13 יג  וַיַּמְרוּ-בִי בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּמִּדְבָּר, בְּחֻקּוֹתַי לֹא-הָלָכוּ וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי מָאָסוּ אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם הָאָדָם וָחַי בָּהֶם, וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתַי, חִלְּלוּ מְאֹד; וָאֹמַר לִשְׁפֹּךְ חֲמָתִי עֲלֵיהֶם, בַּמִּדְבָּר--לְכַלּוֹתָם.    13 But the house of Israel rebelled against Me in the wilderness; they walked not in My statutes, and they rejected Mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them, and My sabbaths they greatly profaned; then I said I would pour out My fury upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.
20.14 יד  וָאֶעֱשֶׂה, לְמַעַן שְׁמִי, לְבִלְתִּי הֵחֵל לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִים לְעֵינֵיהֶם.    14 But I wrought for My name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
20.15 טו  וְגַם-אֲנִי, נָשָׂאתִי יָדִי לָהֶם--בַּמִּדְבָּר:  לְבִלְתִּי הָבִיא אוֹתָם אֶל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי, זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבַשׁ--צְבִי הִיא, לְכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת.    15 Yet also I lifted up My hand unto them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the beauty of all lands;
20.16 טז  יַעַן בְּמִשְׁפָּטַי מָאָסוּ, וְאֶת-חֻקּוֹתַי לֹא-הָלְכוּ בָהֶם, וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, חִלֵּלוּ:  כִּי אַחֲרֵי גִלּוּלֵיהֶם, לִבָּם הֹלֵךְ.    16 because they rejected Mine ordinances, and walked not in My statutes, and profaned My sabbaths--for their heart went after their idols.
20.17 יז  וַתָּחָס עֵינִי עֲלֵיהֶם, מִשַּׁחֲתָם; וְלֹא-עָשִׂיתִי אוֹתָם כָּלָה, בַּמִּדְבָּר.    17 Nevertheless Mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither did I make a full end of them in the wilderness.
20.18 יח  וָאֹמַר אֶל-בְּנֵיהֶם, בַּמִּדְבָּר, בְּחוּקֵּי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם אַל-תֵּלֵכוּ, וְאֶת-מִשְׁפְּטֵיהֶם אַל-תִּשְׁמֹרוּ; וּבְגִלּוּלֵיהֶם, אַל-תִּטַּמָּאוּ.    18 And I said unto their children in the wilderness: Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols;
20.19 יט  אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, בְּחֻקּוֹתַי לֵכוּ; וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי שִׁמְרוּ, וַעֲשׂוּ אוֹתָם.    19 I am the LORD your God; walk in My statutes, and keep Mine ordinances, and do them;
20.20 כ  וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, קַדֵּשׁוּ; וְהָיוּ לְאוֹת, בֵּינִי וּבֵינֵיכֶם--לָדַעַת, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    20 and hallow My sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between Me and you, that ye may know that I am the LORD your God.
20.21 כא  וַיַּמְרוּ-בִי הַבָּנִים, בְּחֻקּוֹתַי לֹא-הָלָכוּ וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי לֹא-שָׁמְרוּ לַעֲשׂוֹת אוֹתָם אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה אוֹתָם הָאָדָם וָחַי בָּהֶם--אֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, חִלֵּלוּ; וָאֹמַר לִשְׁפֹּךְ חֲמָתִי עֲלֵיהֶם, לְכַלּוֹת אַפִּי בָּם--בַּמִּדְבָּר.    21 But the children rebelled against Me; they walked not in My statutes, neither kept Mine ordinances to do them, which if a man do, he shall live by them; they profaned My sabbaths; then I said I would pour out My fury upon them, to spend My anger upon them in the wilderness.
20.22 כב  וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי, אֶת-יָדִי, וָאַעַשׂ, לְמַעַן שְׁמִי--לְבִלְתִּי הֵחֵל לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-הוֹצֵאתִי אוֹתָם לְעֵינֵיהֶם.    22 Nevertheless I withdrew My hand, and wrought for My name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.
20.23 כג  גַּם-אֲנִי, נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי לָהֶם--בַּמִּדְבָּר:  לְהָפִיץ אֹתָם בַּגּוֹיִם, וּלְזָרוֹת אוֹתָם בָּאֲרָצוֹת.    23 I lifted up My hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations, and disperse them through the countries;
20.24 כד  יַעַן מִשְׁפָּטַי לֹא-עָשׂוּ, וְחֻקּוֹתַי מָאָסוּ, וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, חִלֵּלוּ; וְאַחֲרֵי גִּלּוּלֵי אֲבוֹתָם, הָיוּ עֵינֵיהֶם.    24 because they had not executed Mine ordinances, but had rejected My statutes, and had profaned My sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers' idols.
20.25 כה  וְגַם-אֲנִי נָתַתִּי לָהֶם, חֻקִּים לֹא טוֹבִים; וּמִשְׁפָּטִים--לֹא יִחְיוּ, בָּהֶם.    25 Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and ordinances whereby they should not live;
20.26 כו  וָאֲטַמֵּא אוֹתָם בְּמַתְּנוֹתָם, בְּהַעֲבִיר כָּל-פֶּטֶר רָחַם:  לְמַעַן אֲשִׁמֵּם--לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר יֵדְעוּ, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {ס}    26 and I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they set apart all that openeth the womb, that I might destroy them, to the end that they might know that I am the LORD. {S}
20.27 כז  לָכֵן דַּבֵּר אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, בֶּן-אָדָם, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  עוֹד, זֹאת גִּדְּפוּ אוֹתִי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּמַעֲלָם בִּי, מָעַל.    27 Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: In this moreover have your fathers blasphemed Me, in that they dealt treacherously with Me.
20.28 כח  וָאֲבִיאֵם, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי, לָתֵת אוֹתָהּ לָהֶם; וַיִּרְאוּ כָל-גִּבְעָה רָמָה וְכָל-עֵץ עָבֹת, וַיִּזְבְּחוּ-שָׁם אֶת-זִבְחֵיהֶם וַיִּתְּנוּ-שָׁם כַּעַס קָרְבָּנָם, וַיָּשִׂימוּ שָׁם רֵיחַ נִיחוֹחֵיהֶם, וַיַּסִּיכוּ שָׁם אֶת-נִסְכֵּיהֶם.    28 For when I had brought them into the land, which I lifted up My hand to give unto them, then they saw every high hill, and every thick tree, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering, there also they made their sweet savour, and there they poured out their drink-offerings.
20.29 כט  וָאֹמַר אֲלֵהֶם--מָה הַבָּמָה, אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם הַבָּאִים שָׁם; וַיִּקָּרֵא שְׁמָהּ בָּמָה, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}    29 Then I said unto them: What meaneth the high place whereunto ye go? So the name thereof is called Bamah unto this day. {S}
20.30 ל  לָכֵן אֱמֹר אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הַבְּדֶרֶךְ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, אַתֶּם נִטְמְאִים; וְאַחֲרֵי שִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם, אַתֶּם זֹנִים.    30 Wherefore say unto the house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: When ye pollute yourselves after the manner of your fathers, and go after their abominations,
20.31 לא  וּבִשְׂאֵת מַתְּנֹתֵיכֶם בְּהַעֲבִיר בְּנֵיכֶם בָּאֵשׁ אַתֶּם נִטְמְאִים לְכָל-גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם, עַד-הַיּוֹם,  {ס}  וַאֲנִי אִדָּרֵשׁ לָכֶם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל:  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-אִדָּרֵשׁ, לָכֶם.    31 and when, in offering your gifts, in making your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, unto this day; {S} shall I then be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by you;
20.32 לב  וְהָעֹלָה, עַל-רוּחֲכֶם--הָיוֹ, לֹא תִהְיֶה:  אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, נִהְיֶה כַגּוֹיִם כְּמִשְׁפְּחוֹת הָאֲרָצוֹת--לְשָׁרֵת, עֵץ וָאָבֶן.    32 and that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all; in that ye say: We will be as the nations, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.
20.33 לג  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  אִם-לֹא בְּיָד חֲזָקָה וּבִזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה, וּבְחֵמָה שְׁפוּכָה--אֶמְלוֹךְ עֲלֵיכֶם.    33 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with fury poured out, will I be king over you;
20.34 לד  וְהוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, מִן-הָעַמִּים, וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, מִן-הָאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר נְפוֹצֹתֶם בָּם--בְּיָד חֲזָקָה וּבִזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה, וּבְחֵמָה שְׁפוּכָה.    34 and I will bring you out from the peoples, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with fury poured out;
20.35 לה  וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-מִדְבַּר הָעַמִּים; וְנִשְׁפַּטְתִּי אִתְּכֶם שָׁם, פָּנִים אֶל-פָּנִים.    35 and I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples, and there will I plead with you face to face.
20.36 לו  כַּאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁפַּטְתִּי אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּמִדְבַּר אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--כֵּן אִשָּׁפֵט אִתְּכֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    36 Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord GOD.
20.37 לז  וְהַעֲבַרְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, תַּחַת הַשָּׁבֶט; וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, בְּמָסֹרֶת הַבְּרִית.    37 And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant;
20.38 לח  וּבָרוֹתִי מִכֶּם, הַמֹּרְדִים וְהַפּוֹשְׁעִים בִּי--מֵאֶרֶץ מְגוּרֵיהֶם אוֹצִיא אוֹתָם, וְאֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא יָבוֹא; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    38 and I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against Me; I will bring them forth out of the land where they sojourn, but they shall not enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
20.39 לט  וְאַתֶּם בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִישׁ גִּלּוּלָיו לְכוּ עֲבֹדוּ, וְאַחַר, אִם-אֵינְכֶם שֹׁמְעִים אֵלָי; וְאֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי לֹא תְחַלְּלוּ-עוֹד, בְּמַתְּנוֹתֵיכֶם וּבְגִלּוּלֵיכֶם.    39 As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD: Go ye, serve every one his idols, even because ye will not hearken unto Me; but My holy name shall ye no more profane with your gifts, and with your idols.
20.40 מ  כִּי בְהַר-קָדְשִׁי בְּהַר מְרוֹם יִשְׂרָאֵל, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--שָׁם יַעַבְדֻנִי כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל כֻּלֹּה, בָּאָרֶץ:  שָׁם אֶרְצֵם--וְשָׁם אֶדְרוֹשׁ אֶת-תְּרוּמֹתֵיכֶם וְאֶת-רֵאשִׁית מַשְׂאוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּכָל-קָדְשֵׁיכֶם.    40 For in My holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them, serve Me in the land; there will I accept them, and there will I require your heave-offerings, and the first of your gifts, with all your holy things.
20.41 מא  בְּרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, אֶרְצֶה אֶתְכֶם, בְּהוֹצִיאִי אֶתְכֶם מִן-הָעַמִּים, וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִן-הָאֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר נְפֹצֹתֶם בָּם; וְנִקְדַּשְׁתִּי בָכֶם, לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם.    41 With your sweet savour will I accept you, when I bring you out from the peoples, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in you in the sight of the nations.
20.42 מב  וִידַעְתֶּם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בַּהֲבִיאִי אֶתְכֶם אֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי, לָתֵת אוֹתָהּ, לַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.    42 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country which I lifted up My hand to give unto your fathers.
20.43 מג  וּזְכַרְתֶּם-שָׁם, אֶת-דַּרְכֵיכֶם וְאֵת כָּל-עֲלִילוֹתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר נִטְמֵאתֶם, בָּם; וּנְקֹטֹתֶם, בִּפְנֵיכֶם, בְּכָל-רָעוֹתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם.    43 And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have polluted yourselves; and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.
20.44 מד  וִידַעְתֶּם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בַּעֲשׂוֹתִי אִתְּכֶם לְמַעַן שְׁמִי:  לֹא כְדַרְכֵיכֶם הָרָעִים וְכַעֲלִילוֹתֵיכֶם הַנִּשְׁחָתוֹת, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    44 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I have wrought with you for My name's sake, not according to your evil ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
20.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
20.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ דֶּרֶךְ תֵּימָנָה, וְהַטֵּף, אֶל-דָּרוֹם; וְהִנָּבֵא אֶל-יַעַר הַשָּׂדֶה, נֶגֶב.    2 'Son of man, set thy face toward the South, and preach toward the South, and prophesy against the forest of the field in the South;
20.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ לְיַעַר הַנֶּגֶב, שְׁמַע דְּבַר-יְהוָה:  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה הִנְנִי מַצִּית-בְּךָ אֵשׁ וְאָכְלָה בְךָ כָל-עֵץ-לַח וְכָל-עֵץ יָבֵשׁ לֹא-תִכְבֶּה, לַהֶבֶת שַׁלְהֶבֶת, וְנִצְרְבוּ-בָהּ כָּל-פָּנִים, מִנֶּגֶב צָפוֹנָה.    3 and say to the forest of the South: Hear the word of the LORD: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree, it shall not be quenched, even a flaming flame; and all faces from the south to the north shall be seared thereby.
20.4 ד  וְרָאוּ, כָּל-בָּשָׂר, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, בִּעַרְתִּיהָ:  לֹא, תִּכְבֶּה.    4 And all flesh shall see that I the LORD have kindled it; it shall not be quenched.'
20.5 ה  וָאֹמַר, אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה; הֵמָּה אֹמְרִים לִי, הֲלֹא מְמַשֵּׁל מְשָׁלִים הוּא.  {פ}    5 Then said I: 'Ah Lord GOD! they say of me: Is he not a maker of parables?' {P}
21.6 ו  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    6 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
21.7 ז  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְהַטֵּף, אֶל-מִקְדָּשִׁים; וְהִנָּבֵא, אֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    7 'Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and preach toward the sanctuaries, and prophesy against the land of Israel;
21.8 ח  וְאָמַרְתָּ לְאַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי אֵלַיִךְ, וְהוֹצֵאתִי חַרְבִּי מִתַּעְרָהּ; וְהִכְרַתִּי מִמֵּךְ, צַדִּיק וְרָשָׁע.    8 and say to the land of Israel: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth My sword out of its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.
21.9 ט  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר-הִכְרַתִּי מִמֵּךְ, צַדִּיק וְרָשָׁע; לָכֵן תֵּצֵא חַרְבִּי מִתַּעְרָהּ, אֶל-כָּל-בָּשָׂר--מִנֶּגֶב צָפוֹן.    9 Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall My sword go forth out of its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north;
21.10 י  וְיָדְעוּ, כָּל-בָּשָׂר, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, הוֹצֵאתִי חַרְבִּי מִתַּעְרָהּ:  לֹא תָשׁוּב, עוֹד.  {ס}    10 and all flesh shall know that I the LORD have drawn forth My sword out of its sheath; it shall not return any more. {S}
21.11 יא  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הֵאָנַח; בְּשִׁבְרוֹן מָתְנַיִם וּבִמְרִירוּת, תֵּאָנַח לְעֵינֵיהֶם.    11 Sigh therefore, thou son of man; with the breaking of thy loins and with bitterness shalt thou sigh before their eyes.
21.12 יב  וְהָיָה כִּי-יֹאמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ, עַל-מָה אַתָּה נֶאֱנָח; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-שְׁמוּעָה כִי-בָאָה וְנָמֵס כָּל-לֵב וְרָפוּ כָל-יָדַיִם וְכִהֲתָה כָל-רוּחַ, וְכָל-בִּרְכַּיִם תֵּלַכְנָה מַּיִם--הִנֵּה בָאָה וְנִהְיָתָה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    12 And it shall be, when they say unto thee: Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt say: Because of the tidings, for it cometh; and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be slack, and every spirit shall be faint, and all knees shall drip with water; behold, it cometh, and it shall be done, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
21.13 יג  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    13 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
21.14 יד  בֶּן-אָדָם--הִנָּבֵא וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי:  אֱמֹר, חֶרֶב חֶרֶב הוּחַדָּה וְגַם-מְרוּטָה.    14 'Son of man, prophesy, and say: Thus saith the LORD: Say: A sword, a sword, it is sharpened, and also furbished:
21.15 טו  לְמַעַן טְבֹחַ טֶבַח הוּחַדָּה, לְמַעַן-הֱיֵה-לָהּ בָּרָק מֹרָטָּה; אוֹ נָשִׂישׂ, שֵׁבֶט בְּנִי מֹאֶסֶת כָּל-עֵץ.    15 It is sharpened that it may make a sore slaughter, it is furbished that it may glitter--or shall we make mirth?--against the rod of My son, contemning every tree.
21.16 טז  וַיִּתֵּן אֹתָהּ לְמָרְטָה, לִתְפֹּשׂ בַּכָּף; הִיא-הוּחַדָּה חֶרֶב וְהִיא מֹרָטָּה, לָתֵת אוֹתָהּ בְּיַד-הוֹרֵג.    16 And it is given to be furbished, that it may be handled; the sword, it is sharpened, yea, it is furbished, to give it into the hand of the slayer.
21.17 יז  זְעַק וְהֵילֵל, בֶּן-אָדָם--כִּי-הִיא הָיְתָה בְעַמִּי, הִיא בְּכָל-נְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; מְגוּרֵי אֶל-חֶרֶב הָיוּ אֶת-עַמִּי, לָכֵן סְפֹק אֶל-יָרֵךְ.    17 Cry and wail, son of man; for it is upon My people, it is upon all the princes of Israel; they are thrust down to the sword with My people; smite therefore upon thy thigh.
21.18 יח  כִּי בֹחַן--וּמָה, אִם-גַּם-שֵׁבֶט מֹאֶסֶת לֹא יִהְיֶה:  נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    18 For there is a trial; and what if it contemn even the rod? It shall be no more, saith the Lord GOD. {P}
21.19 יט  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם--הִנָּבֵא, וְהַךְ כַּף אֶל-כָּף; וְתִכָּפֵל חֶרֶב שְׁלִישִׁתָה, חֶרֶב חֲלָלִים--הִיא חֶרֶב חָלָל הַגָּדוֹל, הַחֹדֶרֶת לָהֶם.    19 Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thy hands together; and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of those to be slain; it is the sword of the great one that is to be slain, which compasseth them about.
21.20 כ  לְמַעַן לָמוּג לֵב, וְהַרְבֵּה הַמִּכְשֹׁלִים--עַל כָּל-שַׁעֲרֵיהֶם, נָתַתִּי אִבְחַת-חָרֶב; אָח עֲשׂוּיָה לְבָרָק, מְעֻטָּה לְטָבַח.    20 I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that their heart may melt, and their stumblings be multiplied; ah! it is made glittering, it is sharpened for slaughter.
21.21 כא  הִתְאַחֲדִי הֵימִנִי, הָשִׂימִי הַשְׂמִילִי; אָנָה, פָּנַיִךְ מֻעָדוֹת.    21 Go thee one way to the right, or direct thyself to the left; whither is thy face set?
21.22 כב  וְגַם-אֲנִי, אַכֶּה כַפִּי אֶל-כַּפִּי, וַהֲנִיחֹתִי, חֲמָתִי:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי.  {פ}    22 I will also smite My hands together, and I will satisfy My fury; I the LORD have spoken it.' {P}
21.23 כג  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    23 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
21.24 כד  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם שִׂים-לְךָ שְׁנַיִם דְּרָכִים, לָבוֹא חֶרֶב מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--מֵאֶרֶץ אֶחָד, יֵצְאוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם; וְיָד בָּרֵא, בְּרֹאשׁ דֶּרֶךְ-עִיר בָּרֵא.    24 'Now, thou son of man, make thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come; they twain shall come forth out of one land; and mark a signpost, mark it clear at the head of the way to the city.
21.25 כה  דֶּרֶךְ תָּשִׂים--לָבוֹא חֶרֶב, אֵת רַבַּת בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן; וְאֶת-יְהוּדָה בִירוּשָׁלִַם, בְּצוּרָה.    25 Thou shalt make a way, that the sword may come to Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and to Judah in Jerusalem the fortified.
21.26 כו  כִּי-עָמַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶל-אֵם הַדֶּרֶךְ, בְּרֹאשׁ שְׁנֵי הַדְּרָכִים--לִקְסָם-קָסֶם:  קִלְקַל בַּחִצִּים שָׁאַל בַּתְּרָפִים, רָאָה בַּכָּבֵד.    26 For the king of Babylon standeth at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination; he shaketh the arrows to and fro, he inquireth of the teraphim, he looketh in the liver.
21.27 כז  בִּימִינוֹ הָיָה הַקֶּסֶם יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לָשׂוּם כָּרִים לִפְתֹּחַ פֶּה בְּרֶצַח, לְהָרִים קוֹל, בִּתְרוּעָה--לָשׂוּם כָּרִים עַל-שְׁעָרִים, לִשְׁפֹּךְ סֹלְלָה לִבְנוֹת דָּיֵק.    27 In his right hand is the lot Jerusalem, to set battering rams, to open the mouth for the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to set battering rams against the gates, to cast up mounds, to build forts.
21.28 כח  וְהָיָה לָהֶם כקסום- (כִּקְסָם-) שָׁוְא בְּעֵינֵיהֶם, שְׁבֻעֵי שְׁבֻעוֹת לָהֶם; וְהוּא-מַזְכִּיר עָוֺן, לְהִתָּפֵשׂ.  {ס}    28 And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight, who have weeks upon weeks! but it bringeth iniquity to remembrance, that they may be taken. {S}
21.29 כט  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן הַזְכַּרְכֶם עֲוֺנְכֶם, בְּהִגָּלוֹת פִּשְׁעֵיכֶם לְהֵרָאוֹת חַטֹּאותֵיכֶם בְּכֹל עֲלִילוֹתֵיכֶם--יַעַן, הִזָּכֶרְכֶם, בַּכַּף, תִּתָּפֵשׂוּ.  {פ}    29 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are uncovered, so that your sins do appear in all your doings; because that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand. {P}
21.30 ל  וְאַתָּה חָלָל רָשָׁע, נְשִׂיא יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא יוֹמוֹ, בְּעֵת עֲוֺן קֵץ.  {ס}    30 And thou, O wicked one, that art to be slain, the prince of Israel, whose day is come, in the time of the iniquity of the end; {S}
21.31 לא  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הָסִיר הַמִּצְנֶפֶת, וְהָרִים הָעֲטָרָה; זֹאת לֹא-זֹאת--הַשָּׁפָלָה הַגְבֵּהַּ, וְהַגָּבֹהַּ הַשְׁפִּיל.    31 thus saith the Lord GOD: The mitre shall be removed, and the crown taken off; this shall be no more the same: that which is low shall be exalted, and that which is high abased.
21.32 לב  עַוָּה עַוָּה, עַוָּה אֲשִׂימֶנָּה; גַּם-זֹאת לֹא הָיָה, עַד-בֹּא אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ הַמִּשְׁפָּט וּנְתַתִּיו.  {פ}    32 A ruin, a ruin, a ruin, will I make it; this also shall be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. {P}
21.33 לג  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הִנָּבֵא וְאָמַרְתָּ כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וְאֶל-חֶרְפָּתָם; וְאָמַרְתָּ, חֶרֶב חֶרֶב פְּתוּחָה לְטֶבַח מְרוּטָה, לְהָכִיל, לְמַעַן בָּרָק.    33 And thou, son of man, prophesy, and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the children of Ammon, and concerning their taunt; and say thou: O sword, O sword keen-edged, furbished for the slaughter, to the uttermost, because of the glitterings;
21.34 לד  בַּחֲזוֹת לָךְ שָׁוְא, בִּקְסָם-לָךְ כָּזָב--לָתֵת אוֹתָךְ, אֶל-צַוְּארֵי חַלְלֵי רְשָׁעִים, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא יוֹמָם, בְּעֵת עֲוֺן קֵץ.    34 While they see falsehood unto thee, while they divine lies unto thee, to lay thee upon the necks of the wicked that are to be slain, whose day is come, in the time of the iniquity of the end!
21.35 לה  הָשַׁב, אֶל-תַּעְרָהּ, בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-נִבְרֵאת בְּאֶרֶץ מְכֻרוֹתַיִךְ, אֶשְׁפֹּט אֹתָךְ.    35 Cause it to return into its sheath!--In the place where thou wast created, in the land of thine origin, will I judge thee.
21.36 לו  וְשָׁפַכְתִּי עָלַיִךְ זַעְמִי, בְּאֵשׁ עֶבְרָתִי אָפִיחַ עָלָיִךְ; וּנְתַתִּיךְ, בְּיַד אֲנָשִׁים בֹּעֲרִים, חָרָשֵׁי, מַשְׁחִית.    36 And I will pour out My indignation upon thee, I will blow upon thee with the fire of My wrath; and I will deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, skilful to destroy.
21.37 לז  לָאֵשׁ תִּהְיֶה לְאָכְלָה, דָּמֵךְ יִהְיֶה בְּתוֹךְ הָאָרֶץ; לֹא תִזָּכֵרִי, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה דִּבַּרְתִּי.  {פ}    37 Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land, thou shalt be no more remembered; for I the LORD have spoken it.' {P}
22.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
22.2 ב  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הֲתִשְׁפֹּט הֲתִשְׁפֹּט אֶת-עִיר הַדָּמִים; וְהוֹדַעְתָּהּ, אֵת כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתֶיהָ.    2 'Now, thou, son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city? then cause her to know all her abominations.
22.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, עִיר שֹׁפֶכֶת דָּם בְּתוֹכָהּ, לָבוֹא עִתָּהּ; וְעָשְׂתָה גִלּוּלִים עָלֶיהָ, לְטָמְאָה.    3 And thou shalt say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: O city that sheddest blood in the midst of thee, that thy time may come, and that makest idols unto thyself to defile thee;
22.4 ד  בְּדָמֵךְ אֲשֶׁר-שָׁפַכְתְּ אָשַׁמְתְּ, וּבְגִלּוּלַיִךְ אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂית טָמֵאת, וַתַּקְרִיבִי יָמַיִךְ, וַתָּבוֹא עַד-שְׁנוֹתָיִךְ; עַל-כֵּן, נְתַתִּיךְ חֶרְפָּה לַגּוֹיִם, וְקַלָּסָה, לְכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת.    4 thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed, and art defiled in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years; therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the nations, and a mocking to all the countries!
22.5 ה  הַקְּרֹבוֹת וְהָרְחֹקוֹת מִמֵּךְ, יִתְקַלְּסוּ-בָךְ--טְמֵאַת הַשֵּׁם, רַבַּת הַמְּהוּמָה.    5 Those that are near, and those that are far from thee, shall mock thee, thou defiled of name and full of tumult.
22.6 ו  הִנֵּה נְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִישׁ לִזְרֹעוֹ הָיוּ בָךְ, לְמַעַן, שְׁפָךְ-דָּם.    6 Behold, the princes of Israel, every one according to his might, have been in thee to shed blood.
22.7 ז  אָב וָאֵם הֵקַלּוּ בָךְ, לַגֵּר עָשׂוּ בַעֹשֶׁק בְּתוֹכֵךְ; יָתוֹם וְאַלְמָנָה, הוֹנוּ בָךְ.    7 In thee have they made light of father and mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger; in thee have they wronged the fatherless and the widow.
22.8 ח  קָדָשַׁי, בָּזִית; וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתַי, חִלָּלְתְּ.    8 Thou hast despised My holy things, and hast profaned My sabbaths.
22.9 ט  אַנְשֵׁי רָכִיל הָיוּ בָךְ, לְמַעַן שְׁפָךְ-דָּם; וְאֶל-הֶהָרִים אָכְלוּ בָךְ, זִמָּה עָשׂוּ בְתוֹכֵךְ.    9 In thee have been talebearers to shed blood; and in thee they have eaten upon the mountains; in the midst of thee they have committed lewdness.
22.10 י  עֶרְוַת-אָב, גִּלָּה-בָךְ; טְמֵאַת הַנִּדָּה, עִנּוּ-בָךְ.    10 In thee have they uncovered their fathers' nakedness; in thee have they humbled her that was unclean in her impurity.
22.11 יא  וְאִישׁ אֶת-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ, עָשָׂה תּוֹעֵבָה, וְאִישׁ אֶת-כַּלָּתוֹ, טִמֵּא בְזִמָּה; וְאִישׁ אֶת-אֲחֹתוֹ בַת-אָבִיו, עִנָּה-בָךְ.    11 And each hath committed abomination with his neighbour's wife; and each hath lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law; and each in thee hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.
22.12 יב  שֹׁחַד לָקְחוּ-בָךְ, לְמַעַן שְׁפָךְ-דָּם; נֶשֶׁךְ וְתַרְבִּית לָקַחַתְּ, וַתְּבַצְּעִי רֵעַיִךְ בַּעֹשֶׁק, וְאֹתִי שָׁכַחַתְּ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    12 In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken interest and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by oppression, and hast forgotten Me, saith the Lord GOD.
22.13 יג  וְהִנֵּה הִכֵּיתִי כַפִּי, אֶל-בִּצְעֵךְ אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂית; וְעַל-דָּמֵךְ, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ בְּתוֹכֵךְ.    13 Behold, therefore, I have smitten My hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of thee.
22.14 יד  הֲיַעֲמֹד לִבֵּךְ, אִם-תֶּחֱזַקְנָה יָדַיִךְ, לַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה אוֹתָךְ; אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי וְעָשִׂיתִי.    14 Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the LORD have spoken it, and will do it.
22.15 טו  וַהֲפִיצוֹתִי אוֹתָךְ בַּגּוֹיִם, וְזֵרִיתִיךְ בָּאֲרָצוֹת; וַהֲתִמֹּתִי טֻמְאָתֵךְ, מִמֵּךְ.    15 And I will scatter thee among the nations, and disperse thee through the countries; and I will consume thy filthiness out of thee.
22.16 טז  וְנִחַלְתְּ בָּךְ, לְעֵינֵי גוֹיִם; וְיָדַעַתְּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    16 And thou shalt be profaned in thyself, in the sight of the nations; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.' {P}
22.17 יז  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    17 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
22.18 יח  בֶּן-אָדָם, הָיוּ-לִי בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל לסוג (לְסִיג):  כֻּלָּם נְחֹשֶׁת וּבְדִיל וּבַרְזֶל וְעוֹפֶרֶת, בְּתוֹךְ כּוּר--סִגִים כֶּסֶף, הָיוּ.  {ס}    18 'Son of man, the house of Israel is become dross unto Me; all of them are brass and tin and iron and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are the dross of silver. {S}
22.19 יט  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן הֱיוֹת כֻּלְּכֶם, לְסִגִים; לָכֵן הִנְנִי קֹבֵץ אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-תּוֹךְ יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    19 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Because ye are all become dross, therefore, behold, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem.
22.20 כ  קְבֻצַת כֶּסֶף וּנְחֹשֶׁת וּבַרְזֶל וְעוֹפֶרֶת וּבְדִיל, אֶל-תּוֹךְ כּוּר, לָפַחַת-עָלָיו אֵשׁ, לְהַנְתִּיךְ; כֵּן אֶקְבֹּץ בְּאַפִּי וּבַחֲמָתִי, וְהִנַּחְתִּי וְהִתַּכְתִּי אֶתְכֶם.    20 As they gather silver and brass and iron and lead and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in Mine anger and in My fury, and I will cast you in, and melt you.
22.21 כא  וְכִנַּסְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, וְנָפַחְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם בְּאֵשׁ עֶבְרָתִי; וְנִתַּכְתֶּם, בְּתוֹכָהּ.    21 Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you with the fire of My wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof.
22.22 כב  כְּהִתּוּךְ כֶּסֶף בְּתוֹךְ כּוּר, כֵּן תֻּתְּכוּ בְתוֹכָהּ; וִידַעְתֶּם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, שָׁפַכְתִּי חֲמָתִי עֲלֵיכֶם.  {פ}    22 As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the LORD have poured out My fury upon you.' {P}
22.23 כג  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    23 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
22.24 כד  בֶּן-אָדָם--אֱמָר-לָהּ, אַתְּ אֶרֶץ לֹא מְטֹהָרָה הִיא:  לֹא גֻשְׁמָהּ, בְּיוֹם זָעַם.    24 'Son of man, say unto her: Thou art a land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.
22.25 כה  קֶשֶׁר נְבִיאֶיהָ בְּתוֹכָהּ, כַּאֲרִי שׁוֹאֵג טֹרֵף טָרֶף; נֶפֶשׁ אָכָלוּ, חֹסֶן וִיקָר יִקָּחוּ--אַלְמְנוֹתֶיהָ, הִרְבּוּ בְתוֹכָהּ.    25 There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls, they take treasure and precious things, they have made her widows many in the midst thereof.
22.26 כו  כֹּהֲנֶיהָ חָמְסוּ תוֹרָתִי, וַיְחַלְּלוּ קָדָשַׁי--בֵּין-קֹדֶשׁ לְחֹל לֹא הִבְדִּילוּ, וּבֵין-הַטָּמֵא לְטָהוֹר לֹא הוֹדִיעוּ; וּמִשַּׁבְּתוֹתַי הֶעְלִימוּ עֵינֵיהֶם, וָאֵחַל בְּתוֹכָם.    26 Her priests have done violence to My law, and have profaned My holy things; they have put no difference between the holy and the common, neither have they taught difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from My sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
22.27 כז  שָׂרֶיהָ בְקִרְבָּהּ, כִּזְאֵבִים טֹרְפֵי טָרֶף--לִשְׁפָּךְ-דָּם לְאַבֵּד נְפָשׁוֹת, לְמַעַן בְּצֹעַ בָּצַע.    27 Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey: to shed blood, and to destroy souls, so as to get dishonest gain.
22.28 כח  וּנְבִיאֶיהָ, טָחוּ לָהֶם תָּפֵל--חֹזִים שָׁוְא, וְקֹסְמִים לָהֶם כָּזָב; אֹמְרִים, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וַיהוָה, לֹא דִבֵּר.    28 And her prophets have daubed for them with whited plaster, seeing falsehood, and divining lies unto them, saying: Thus saith the Lord GOD, when the LORD hath not spoken.
22.29 כט  עַם הָאָרֶץ עָשְׁקוּ עֹשֶׁק, וְגָזְלוּ גָּזֵל; וְעָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן הוֹנוּ, וְאֶת-הַגֵּר עָשְׁקוּ בְּלֹא מִשְׁפָּט.    29 The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have wronged the poor and needy, and have oppressed the stranger unlawfully.
22.30 ל  וָאֲבַקֵּשׁ מֵהֶם אִישׁ גֹּדֵר-גָּדֵר וְעֹמֵד בַּפֶּרֶץ לְפָנַי, בְּעַד הָאָרֶץ--לְבִלְתִּי שַׁחֲתָהּ; וְלֹא, מָצָאתִי.    30 And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the breach before Me for the land, that I should not destroy it; but I found none.
22.31 לא  וָאֶשְׁפֹּךְ עֲלֵיהֶם זַעְמִי, בְּאֵשׁ עֶבְרָתִי כִּלִּיתִים; דַּרְכָּם בְּרֹאשָׁם נָתַתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    31 Therefore have I poured out Mine indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of My wrath; their own way have I brought upon their heads, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
23.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
23.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם--שְׁתַּיִם נָשִׁים, בְּנוֹת אֵם-אַחַת הָיוּ.    2 'Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother;
23.3 ג  וַתִּזְנֶינָה בְמִצְרַיִם, בִּנְעוּרֵיהֶן זָנוּ; שָׁמָּה, מֹעֲכוּ שְׁדֵיהֶן, וְשָׁם עִשּׂוּ, דַּדֵּי בְּתוּלֵיהֶן.    3 and they committed harlotries in Egypt; they committed harlotries in their youth; there were their bosoms pressed, and there their virgin breasts were bruised.
23.4 ד  וּשְׁמוֹתָן, אָהֳלָה הַגְּדוֹלָה וְאָהֳלִיבָה אֲחוֹתָהּ, וַתִּהְיֶינָה לִי, וַתֵּלַדְנָה בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת; וּשְׁמוֹתָן--שֹׁמְרוֹן אָהֳלָה, וִירוּשָׁלִַם אָהֳלִיבָה.    4 And the names of them were Oholah the elder, and Oholibah her sister; and they became Mine, and they bore sons and daughters. And as for their names, Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem Oholibah.
23.5 ה  וַתִּזֶן אָהֳלָה, תַּחְתָּי; וַתֶּעְגַּב עַל-מְאַהֲבֶיהָ, אֶל-אַשּׁוּר קְרוֹבִים.    5 And Oholah played the harlot when she was Mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians, warriors,
23.6 ו  לְבֻשֵׁי תְכֵלֶת פַּחוֹת וּסְגָנִים, בַּחוּרֵי חֶמֶד כֻּלָּם; פָּרָשִׁים, רֹכְבֵי סוּסִים.    6 clothed with blue, governors and rulers, handsome young men all of them, horsemen riding upon horses.
23.7 ז  וַתִּתֵּן תַּזְנוּתֶיהָ עֲלֵיהֶם, מִבְחַר בְּנֵי-אַשּׁוּר כֻּלָּם; וּבְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָגְבָה בְּכָל-גִּלּוּלֵיהֶם, נִטְמָאָה.    7 And she bestowed her harlotries upon them, the choicest men of Assyria all of them; and on whomsoever she doted, with all their idols she defiled herself.
23.8 ח  וְאֶת-תַּזְנוּתֶיהָ מִמִּצְרַיִם, לֹא עָזָבָה--כִּי אוֹתָהּ שָׁכְבוּ בִנְעוּרֶיהָ, וְהֵמָּה עִשּׂוּ דַּדֵּי בְתוּלֶיהָ; וַיִּשְׁפְּכוּ תַזְנוּתָם, עָלֶיהָ.    8 Neither hath she left her harlotries brought from Egypt; for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised her virgin breasts; and they poured out their lust upon her.
23.9 ט  לָכֵן נְתַתִּיהָ, בְּיַד-מְאַהֲבֶיהָ--בְּיַד בְּנֵי אַשּׁוּר, אֲשֶׁר עָגְבָה עֲלֵיהֶם.    9 Wherefore I delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.
23.10 י  הֵמָּה, גִּלּוּ עֶרְוָתָהּ--בָּנֶיהָ וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ לָקָחוּ, וְאוֹתָהּ בַּחֶרֶב הָרָגוּ; וַתְּהִי-שֵׁם, לַנָּשִׁים, וּשְׁפוּטִים, עָשׂוּ בָהּ.  {ס}    10 These uncovered her nakedness; they took her sons and her daughters, and her they slew with the sword; and she became a byword among women, for judgments were executed upon her. {S}
23.11 יא  וַתֵּרֶא אֲחוֹתָהּ אָהֳלִיבָה, וַתַּשְׁחֵת עַגְבָתָהּ מִמֶּנָּה; וְאֶת-תַּזְנוּתֶיהָ--מִזְּנוּנֵי, אֲחוֹתָהּ.    11 And her sister Oholibah saw this, yet was she more corrupt in her doting than she, and in her harlotries more than her sister in her harlotries.
23.12 יב  אֶל-בְּנֵי אַשּׁוּר עָגָבָה פַּחוֹת וּסְגָנִים קְרֹבִים, לְבֻשֵׁי מִכְלוֹל, פָּרָשִׁים, רֹכְבֵי סוּסִים--בַּחוּרֵי חֶמֶד, כֻּלָּם.    12 She doted upon the Assyrians, governors and rulers, warriors, clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them handsome young men.
23.13 יג  וָאֵרֶא, כִּי נִטְמָאָה:  דֶּרֶךְ אֶחָד, לִשְׁתֵּיהֶן.    13 And I saw that she was defiled; they both took one way.
23.14 יד  וַתּוֹסֶף, אֶל-תַּזְנוּתֶיהָ; וַתֵּרֶא, אַנְשֵׁי מְחֻקֶּה עַל-הַקִּיר, צַלְמֵי כשדיים (כַשְׂדִּים), חֲקֻקִים בַּשָּׁשַׁר.    14 And she increased her harlotries; for she saw men portrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion,
23.15 טו  חֲגוֹרֵי אֵזוֹר בְּמָתְנֵיהֶם, סְרוּחֵי טְבוּלִים בְּרָאשֵׁיהֶם--מַרְאֵה שָׁלִשִׁים, כֻּלָּם:  דְּמוּת בְּנֵי-בָבֶל כַּשְׂדִּים, אֶרֶץ מוֹלַדְתָּם.    15 girded with girdles upon their loins, with pendant turbans upon their heads, all of them captains to look upon, the likeness of the sons of Babylon, even of Chaldea, the land of their nativity.
23.16 טז  ותעגב (וַתַּעְגְּבָה) עֲלֵיהֶם, לְמַרְאֵה עֵינֶיהָ; וַתִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אֲלֵיהֶם, כַּשְׂדִּימָה.    16 And as soon as she saw them she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.
23.17 יז  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֵלֶיהָ בְנֵי-בָבֶל לְמִשְׁכַּב דֹּדִים, וַיְטַמְּאוּ אוֹתָהּ בְּתַזְנוּתָם; וַתִּטְמָא-בָם--וַתֵּקַע נַפְשָׁהּ, מֵהֶם.    17 And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their lust; and she was polluted with them, and her soul was alienated from them.
23.18 יח  וַתְּגַל, תַּזְנוּתֶיהָ, וַתְּגַל, אֶת-עֶרְוָתָהּ; וַתֵּקַע נַפְשִׁי מֵעָלֶיהָ, כַּאֲשֶׁר נָקְעָה נַפְשִׁי מֵעַל אֲחוֹתָהּ.    18 So she uncovered her harlotries, and uncovered her nakedness; then My soul was alienated from her, like as My soul was alienated from her sister.
23.19 יט  וַתַּרְבֶּה, אֶת-תַּזְנוּתֶיהָ, לִזְכֹּר אֶת-יְמֵי נְעוּרֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר זָנְתָה בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    19 Yet she multiplied her harlotries, remembering the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt.
23.20 כ  וַתַּעְגְּבָה, עַל פִּלַגְשֵׁיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר בְּשַׂר-חֲמוֹרִים בְּשָׂרָם, וְזִרְמַת סוּסִים זִרְמָתָם.    20 And she doted upon concubinage with them, whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.
23.21 כא  וַתִּפְקְדִי, אֵת זִמַּת נְעוּרָיִךְ; בַּעְשׂוֹת מִמִּצְרַיִם דַּדַּיִךְ, לְמַעַן שְׁדֵי נְעוּרָיִךְ.  {ס}    21 Thus thou didst call to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, when they from Egypt bruised thy breasts for the bosom of thy youth. {S}
23.22 כב  לָכֵן אָהֳלִיבָה, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי מֵעִיר אֶת-מְאַהֲבַיִךְ עָלַיִךְ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-נָקְעָה נַפְשֵׁךְ מֵהֶם; וַהֲבֵאתִים עָלַיִךְ, מִסָּבִיב.    22 Therefore, O Oholibah, thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy soul is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side:
23.23 כג  בְּנֵי בָבֶל וְכָל-כַּשְׂדִּים, פְּקוֹד וְשׁוֹעַ וְקוֹעַ, כָּל-בְּנֵי אַשּׁוּר, אוֹתָם; בַּחוּרֵי חֶמֶד פַּחוֹת וּסְגָנִים, כֻּלָּם--שָׁלִשִׁים וּקְרוּאִים, רֹכְבֵי סוּסִים כֻּלָּם.    23 the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them, handsome young men, governors and rulers all of them, captains and councillors, all of them riding upon horses.
23.24 כד  וּבָאוּ עָלַיִךְ הֹצֶן רֶכֶב וְגַלְגַּל, וּבִקְהַל עַמִּים--צִנָּה וּמָגֵן וְקוֹבַע, יָשִׂימוּ עָלַיִךְ סָבִיב; וְנָתַתִּי לִפְנֵיהֶם מִשְׁפָּט, וּשְׁפָטוּךְ בְּמִשְׁפְּטֵיהֶם.    24 And they shall come against thee with hosts, chariots, and wheels, and with an assembly of peoples; they shall set themselves in array against thee with buckler and shield and helmet round about; and I will commit the judgment unto them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.
23.25 כה  וְנָתַתִּי קִנְאָתִי בָּךְ, וְעָשׂוּ אוֹתָךְ בְּחֵמָה--אַפֵּךְ וְאָזְנַיִךְ יָסִירוּ, וְאַחֲרִיתֵךְ בַּחֶרֶב תִּפּוֹל; הֵמָּה, בָּנַיִךְ וּבְנוֹתַיִךְ יִקָּחוּ, וְאַחֲרִיתֵךְ, תֵּאָכֵל בָּאֵשׁ.    25 And I will set My jealousy against thee, and they shall deal with thee in fury; they shall take away thy nose and thine ears, and thy residue shall fall by the sword; they shall take thy sons and thy daughters, and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.
23.26 כו  וְהִפְשִׁיטוּךְ, אֶת-בְּגָדָיִךְ; וְלָקְחוּ, כְּלֵי תִפְאַרְתֵּךְ.    26 They shall also strip thee of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.
23.27 כז  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי זִמָּתֵךְ מִמֵּךְ, וְאֶת-זְנוּתֵךְ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְלֹא-תִשְׂאִי עֵינַיִךְ אֲלֵיהֶם, וּמִצְרַיִם לֹא תִזְכְּרִי-עוֹד.  {פ}    27 Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy harlotry brought from the land of Egypt, so that thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more. {P}
23.28 כח  כִּי כֹה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי נֹתְנָךְ, בְּיַד אֲשֶׁר שָׂנֵאת--בְּיַד אֲשֶׁר-נָקְעָה נַפְשֵׁךְ, מֵהֶם.    28 For thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy soul is alienated;
23.29 כט  וְעָשׂוּ אוֹתָךְ בְּשִׂנְאָה, וְלָקְחוּ כָּל-יְגִיעֵךְ, וַעֲזָבוּךְ, עֵירֹם וְעֶרְיָה; וְנִגְלָה עֶרְוַת זְנוּנַיִךְ, וְזִמָּתֵךְ וְתַזְנוּתָיִךְ.    29 and they shall deal with thee in hatred, and shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare; and the nakedness of thy harlotries shall be uncovered, both thy lewdness and thy harlotries.
23.30 ל  עָשֹׂה אֵלֶּה, לָךְ, בִּזְנוֹתֵךְ אַחֲרֵי גוֹיִם, עַל אֲשֶׁר-נִטְמֵאת בְּגִלּוּלֵיהֶם.    30 These things shall be done unto thee, for that thou hast gone astray after the nations, and because thou art polluted with their idols.
23.31 לא  בְּדֶרֶךְ אֲחוֹתֵךְ, הָלָכְתְּ; וְנָתַתִּי כוֹסָהּ, בְּיָדֵךְ.  {ס}    31 In the way of thy sister hast thou walked; therefore will I give her cup into thy hand. {S}
23.32 לב  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, כּוֹס אֲחוֹתֵךְ תִּשְׁתִּי, הָעֲמֻקָּה וְהָרְחָבָה; תִּהְיֶה לִצְחֹק וּלְלַעַג, מִרְבָּה לְהָכִיל.    32 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup, which is deep and large; thou shalt be for a scorn and a derision; it is full to the uttermost.
23.33 לג  שִׁכָּרוֹן וְיָגוֹן, תִּמָּלֵאִי; כּוֹס שַׁמָּה וּשְׁמָמָה, כּוֹס אֲחוֹתֵךְ שֹׁמְרוֹן.    33 Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and appalment, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.
23.34 לד  וְשָׁתִית אוֹתָהּ וּמָצִית, וְאֶת-חֲרָשֶׂיהָ תְּגָרֵמִי--וְשָׁדַיִךְ תְּנַתֵּקִי:  כִּי אֲנִי דִבַּרְתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {ס}    34 Thou shalt even drink it and drain it, and thou shalt craunch the sherds thereof, and shalt tear thy breasts; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD. {S}
23.35 לה  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן שָׁכַחַתְּ אוֹתִי, וַתַּשְׁלִיכִי אוֹתִי אַחֲרֵי גַוֵּךְ; וְגַם-אַתְּ שְׂאִי זִמָּתֵךְ, וְאֶת-תַּזְנוּתָיִךְ.  {ס}    35 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Because thou hast forgotten Me, and cast Me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy harlotries.' {S}
23.36 לו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם, הֲתִשְׁפּוֹט אֶת-אָהֳלָה וְאֶת-אָהֳלִיבָה; וְהַגֵּד לָהֶן, אֵת תוֹעֲבוֹתֵיהֶן.    36 The LORD said moreover unto me: 'Son of man, wilt thou judge Oholah and Oholibah? then declare unto them their abominations.
23.37 לז  כִּי נִאֵפוּ, וְדָם בִּידֵיהֶן, וְאֶת-גִּלּוּלֵיהֶן, נִאֵפוּ; וְגַם אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶן אֲשֶׁר יָלְדוּ-לִי, הֶעֱבִירוּ לָהֶם לְאָכְלָה.    37 For they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, and with their idols have they committed adultery; and their sons, whom they bore unto Me, they have also set apart unto them to be devoured.
23.38 לח  עוֹד זֹאת, עָשׂוּ לִי:  טִמְּאוּ אֶת-מִקְדָּשִׁי בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי חִלֵּלוּ.    38 Moreover this they have done unto Me: they have defiled My sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned My sabbaths.
23.39 לט  וּבְשַׁחֲטָם אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם לְגִלּוּלֵיהֶם, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-מִקְדָּשִׁי בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לְחַלְּלוֹ; וְהִנֵּה-כֹה עָשׂוּ, בְּתוֹךְ בֵּיתִי.    39 For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they came the same day into My sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of My house.
23.40 מ  וְאַף, כִּי תִשְׁלַחְנָה לַאֲנָשִׁים, בָּאִים, מִמֶּרְחָק--אֲשֶׁר מַלְאָךְ שָׁלוּחַ אֲלֵיהֶם, וְהִנֵּה-בָאוּ, לַאֲשֶׁר רָחַצְתְּ כָּחַלְתְּ עֵינַיִךְ, וְעָדִית עֶדִי.    40 And furthermore ye have sent for men that come from far; unto whom a messenger was sent, and, lo, they came; for whom thou didst wash thyself, paint thine eyes, and deck thyself with ornaments;
23.41 מא  וְיָשַׁבְתְּ עַל-מִטָּה כְבוּדָּה, וְשֻׁלְחָן עָרוּךְ לְפָנֶיהָ; וּקְטָרְתִּי וְשַׁמְנִי, שַׂמְתְּ עָלֶיהָ.    41 and sattest upon a stately bed, with a table prepared before it, whereupon thou didst set Mine incense and Mine oil.
23.42 מב  וְקוֹל הָמוֹן, שָׁלֵו בָהּ, וְאֶל-אֲנָשִׁים מֵרֹב אָדָם, מוּבָאִים סובאים (סָבָאִים) מִמִּדְבָּר; וַיִּתְּנוּ צְמִידִים אֶל-יְדֵיהֶן, וַעֲטֶרֶת תִּפְאֶרֶת עַל-רָאשֵׁיהֶן.    42 And the voice of a multitude being at ease was therein; and for the sake of men, they were so many, brought drunken from the wilderness, they put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.
23.43 מג  וָאֹמַר, לַבָּלָה נִאוּפִים; עת (עַתָּה) יזנה (יִזְנוּ) תַזְנוּתֶהָ, וָהִיא.    43 Then said I of her that was worn out by adulteries: Still they commit harlotries with her, even her.
23.44 מד  וַיָּבוֹא אֵלֶיהָ, כְּבוֹא אֶל-אִשָּׁה זוֹנָה; כֵּן בָּאוּ, אֶל-אָהֳלָה וְאֶל-אָהֳלִיבָה--אִשֹּׁת, הַזִּמָּה.    44 For every one went in unto her, as men go in unto a harlot; so went they in unto Oholah and unto Oholibah, the lewd women.
23.45 מה  וַאֲנָשִׁים צַדִּיקִם, הֵמָּה יִשְׁפְּטוּ אוֹתְהֶם--מִשְׁפַּט נֹאֲפוֹת, וּמִשְׁפַּט שֹׁפְכוֹת דָּם:  כִּי נֹאֲפֹת הֵנָּה, וְדָם בִּידֵיהֶן.  {ס}    45 But righteous men, they shall judge them as adulteresses are judged, and as women that shed blood are judged; because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands. {S}
23.46 מו  כִּי כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הַעֲלֵה עֲלֵיהֶם קָהָל, וְנָתֹן אֶתְהֶן לְזַעֲוָה וְלָבַז.    46 For thus saith the Lord GOD: An assembly shall be brought up against them, and they shall be made a horror and a spoil.
23.47 מז  וְרָגְמוּ עֲלֵיהֶן אֶבֶן קָהָל, וּבָרֵא אוֹתְהֶן בְּחַרְבוֹתָם; בְּנֵיהֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיהֶם יַהֲרֹגוּ, וּבָתֵּיהֶן בָּאֵשׁ יִשְׂרֹפוּ.    47 And the assembly shall stone them with stones, and despatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.
23.48 מח  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי זִמָּה, מִן-הָאָרֶץ; וְנִוַּסְּרוּ כָּל-הַנָּשִׁים, וְלֹא תַעֲשֶׂינָה כְּזִמַּתְכֶנָה.    48 Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.
23.49 מט  וְנָתְנוּ זִמַּתְכֶנָה עֲלֵיכֶן, וַחֲטָאֵי גִלּוּלֵיכֶן תִּשֶּׂאינָה; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    49 And your lewdness shall be recompensed upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols; and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.' {P}
24.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלַי בַּשָּׁנָה הַתְּשִׁיעִית, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָעֲשִׂירִי, בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ, לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, saying:
24.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, כתוב- (כְּתָב-) לְךָ אֶת-שֵׁם הַיּוֹם--אֶת-עֶצֶם, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  סָמַךְ מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    2 'Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this selfsame day; this selfsame day the king of Babylon hath invested Jerusalem.
24.3 ג  וּמְשֹׁל אֶל-בֵּית-הַמֶּרִי, מָשָׁל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  שְׁפֹת הַסִּיר שְׁפֹת, וְגַם-יְצֹק בּוֹ מָיִם.    3 And utter a parable concerning the rebellious house, and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Set on the pot, set it on, and also pour water into it;
24.4 ד  אֱסֹף נְתָחֶיהָ אֵלֶיהָ, כָּל-נֵתַח טוֹב יָרֵךְ וְכָתֵף; מִבְחַר עֲצָמִים, מַלֵּא.    4 Gather into it the pieces belonging to it, even every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.
24.5 ה  מִבְחַר הַצֹּאן לָקוֹחַ, וְגַם דּוּר הָעֲצָמִים תַּחְתֶּיהָ; רַתַּח רְתָחֶיהָ, גַּם-בָּשְׁלוּ עֲצָמֶיהָ בְּתוֹכָהּ.  {ס}    5 Take the choice of the flock, and pile also the bones under it; make it boil well, that the bones thereof may also be seethed in the midst of it. {S}
24.6 ו  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אוֹי עִיר הַדָּמִים--סִיר אֲשֶׁר חֶלְאָתָה בָהּ, וְחֶלְאָתָהּ לֹא יָצְאָה מִמֶּנָּה; לִנְתָחֶיהָ לִנְתָחֶיהָ הוֹצִיאָהּ, לֹא-נָפַל עָלֶיהָ גּוֹרָל.    6 Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose filth is therein, and whose filth is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; no lot is fallen upon it.
24.7 ז  כִּי דָמָהּ בְּתוֹכָהּ הָיָה, עַל-צְחִיחַ סֶלַע שָׂמָתְהוּ; לֹא שְׁפָכַתְהוּ עַל-הָאָרֶץ, לְכַסּוֹת עָלָיו עָפָר.    7 For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the bare rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust;
24.8 ח  לְהַעֲלוֹת חֵמָה לִנְקֹם נָקָם, נָתַתִּי אֶת-דָּמָהּ עַל-צְחִיחַ סָלַע--לְבִלְתִּי, הִכָּסוֹת.  {פ}    8 that it might cause fury to come up, that vengeance might be taken, I have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it should not be covered. {P}
24.9 ט  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אוֹי, עִיר הַדָּמִים; גַּם-אֲנִי, אַגְדִּיל הַמְּדוּרָה.    9 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great,
24.10 י  הַרְבֵּה הָעֵצִים הַדְלֵק הָאֵשׁ, הָתֵם הַבָּשָׂר; וְהַרְקַח, הַמֶּרְקָחָה, וְהָעֲצָמוֹת, יֵחָרוּ.    10 heaping on the wood, kindling the fire, that the flesh may be consumed; and preparing the mixture, that the bones also may be burned;
24.11 יא  וְהַעֲמִידֶהָ עַל-גֶּחָלֶיהָ, רֵקָה:  לְמַעַן תֵּחַם וְחָרָה נְחֻשְׁתָּהּ, וְנִתְּכָה בְתוֹכָהּ טֻמְאָתָהּ--תִּתֻּם, חֶלְאָתָהּ.    11 then will I set it empty upon the coals thereof, that it may be hot, and the bottom thereof may burn, and that the impurity of it may be molten in it, that the filth of it may be consumed.
24.12 יב  תְּאֻנִים, הֶלְאָת, וְלֹא-תֵצֵא מִמֶּנָּה רַבַּת חֶלְאָתָהּ, בְּאֵשׁ חֶלְאָתָהּ.    12 It hath wearied itself with toil; yet its great filth goeth not forth out of it, yea, its noisome filth.
24.13 יג  בְּטֻמְאָתֵךְ, זִמָּה:  יַעַן טִהַרְתִּיךְ, וְלֹא טָהַרְתְּ--מִטֻּמְאָתֵךְ לֹא תִטְהֲרִי-עוֹד, עַד-הֲנִיחִי אֶת-חֲמָתִי בָּךְ.    13 Because of thy filthy lewdness, because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have satisfied My fury upon thee.
24.14 יד  אֲנִי יְהוָה דִּבַּרְתִּי בָּאָה וְעָשִׂיתִי, לֹא-אֶפְרַע וְלֹא-אָחוּס וְלֹא אֶנָּחֵם:  כִּדְרָכַיִךְ וְכַעֲלִילוֹתַיִךְ שְׁפָטוּךְ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    14 I the LORD have spoken it; it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
24.15 טו  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    15 Also the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
24.16 טז  בֶּן-אָדָם, הִנְנִי לֹקֵחַ מִמְּךָ אֶת-מַחְמַד עֵינֶיךָ בְּמַגֵּפָה; וְלֹא תִסְפֹּד וְלֹא תִבְכֶּה, וְלוֹא תָבוֹא דִּמְעָתֶךָ.    16 'Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; yet neither shalt thou make lamentation nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.
24.17 יז  הֵאָנֵק דֹּם, מֵתִים אֵבֶל לֹא-תַעֲשֶׂה--פְּאֵרְךָ חֲבוֹשׁ עָלֶיךָ, וּנְעָלֶיךָ תָּשִׂים בְּרַגְלֶיךָ; וְלֹא תַעְטֶה עַל-שָׂפָם, וְלֶחֶם אֲנָשִׁים לֹא תֹאכֵל.    17 Sigh in silence; make no mourning for the dead, bind thy headtire upon thee, and put thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thine upper lip, and eat not the bread of men.'
24.18 יח  וָאֲדַבֵּר אֶל-הָעָם בַּבֹּקֶר, וַתָּמָת אִשְׁתִּי בָּעָרֶב; וָאַעַשׂ בַּבֹּקֶר, כַּאֲשֶׁר צֻוֵּיתִי.    18 So I spoke unto the people in the morning, and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded.
24.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלַי, הָעָם:  הֲלֹא-תַגִּיד לָנוּ מָה-אֵלֶּה לָּנוּ, כִּי אַתָּה עֹשֶׂה.    19 And the people said unto me: 'Wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?'
24.20 כ  וָאֹמַר, אֲלֵיהֶם:  דְּבַר-יְהוָה--הָיָה אֵלַי, לֵאמֹר.    20 Then I said unto them: 'The word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
24.21 כא  אֱמֹר לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי מְחַלֵּל אֶת-מִקְדָּשִׁי גְּאוֹן עֻזְּכֶם, מַחְמַד עֵינֵיכֶם וּמַחְמַל נַפְשְׁכֶם; וּבְנֵיכֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר עֲזַבְתֶּם, בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ.    21 Speak unto the house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will profane My sanctuary, the pride of your power, the desire of your eyes, and the longing of your soul; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left behind shall fall by the sword.
24.22 כב  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי:  עַל-שָׂפָם לֹא תַעְטוּ, וְלֶחֶם אֲנָשִׁים לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ.    22 And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your upper lips, nor eat the bread of men;
24.23 כג  וּפְאֵרֵכֶם עַל-רָאשֵׁיכֶם, וְנַעֲלֵיכֶם בְּרַגְלֵיכֶם--לֹא תִסְפְּדוּ, וְלֹא תִבְכּוּ; וּנְמַקֹּתֶם, בַּעֲוֺנֹתֵיכֶם, וּנְהַמְתֶּם, אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו.    23 and your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet; ye shall not make lamentation nor weep; but ye shall pine away in your iniquities, and moan one toward another.
24.24 כד  וְהָיָה יְחֶזְקֵאל לָכֶם לְמוֹפֵת, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה תַּעֲשׂוּ:  בְּבוֹאָהּ--וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {ס}    24 Thus shall Ezekiel be unto you a sign; according to all that he hath done shall ye do; when this cometh, then shall ye know that I am the Lord GOD. {S}
24.25 כה  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם--הֲלוֹא בְּיוֹם קַחְתִּי מֵהֶם אֶת-מָעוּזָּם, מְשׂוֹשׂ תִּפְאַרְתָּם:  אֶת-מַחְמַד עֵינֵיהֶם וְאֶת-מַשָּׂא נַפְשָׁם, בְּנֵיהֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיהֶם.    25 And thou, son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them their stronghold, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and the yearning of their soul, their sons and their daughters,
24.26 כו  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יָבוֹא הַפָּלִיט אֵלֶיךָ, לְהַשְׁמָעוּת, אָזְנָיִם.    26 that in that day he that escapeth shall come unto thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?
24.27 כז  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִפָּתַח פִּיךָ אֶת-הַפָּלִיט, וּתְדַבֵּר, וְלֹא תֵאָלֵם עוֹד; וְהָיִיתָ לָהֶם לְמוֹפֵת, וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    27 In that day shall thy mouth be opened together with him that is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb; so shalt thou be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
25.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
25.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן; וְהִנָּבֵא, עֲלֵיהֶם.    2 'Son of man, set thy face toward the children of Ammon, and prophesy against them;
25.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ לִבְנֵי עַמּוֹן, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה יַעַן אָמְרֵךְ הֶאָח אֶל-מִקְדָּשִׁי כִי-נִחָל, וְאֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי נָשַׁמָּה, וְאֶל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה, כִּי הָלְכוּ בַּגּוֹלָה.    3 and say unto the children of Ammon: Hear the word of the Lord GOD: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because thou saidst: Aha! against My sanctuary, when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel, when it was made desolate, and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity;
25.4 ד  לָכֵן הִנְנִי נֹתְנָךְ לִבְנֵי-קֶדֶם לְמוֹרָשָׁה, וְיִשְּׁבוּ טִירוֹתֵיהֶם בָּךְ, וְנָתְנוּ בָךְ, מִשְׁכְּנֵיהֶם; הֵמָּה יֹאכְלוּ פִרְיֵךְ, וְהֵמָּה יִשְׁתּוּ חֲלָבֵךְ.    4 therefore, behold, I will deliver thee to the children of the east for a possession, and they shall set their encampments in thee, and make their dwellings in thee; they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.
25.5 ה  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-רַבָּה לִנְוֵה גְמַלִּים, וְאֶת-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן לְמִרְבַּץ-צֹאן; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    5 And I will make Rabbah a pasture for camels, and the children of Ammon a couching-place for flocks; and ye shall know that I am the LORD. {P}
25.6 ו  כִּי כֹה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן מַחְאֲךָ יָד, וְרַקְעֲךָ בְּרָגֶל; וַתִּשְׂמַח בְּכָל-שָׁאטְךָ בְּנֶפֶשׁ, אֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    6 For thus saith the Lord GOD: Because thou hast clapped thy hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced with all the disdain of thy soul against the land of Israel;
25.7 ז  לָכֵן הִנְנִי נָטִיתִי אֶת-יָדִי עָלֶיךָ, וּנְתַתִּיךָ לבג (לְבַז) לַגּוֹיִם, וְהִכְרַתִּיךָ מִן-הָעַמִּים, וְהַאֲבַדְתִּיךָ מִן-הָאֲרָצוֹת; אַשְׁמִידְךָ, וְיָדַעְתָּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    7 therefore, behold, I stretch out My hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the nations; and I will cut thee off from the peoples, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries; I will destroy thee, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD. {P}
25.8 ח  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  יַעַן, אֲמֹר מוֹאָב וְשֵׂעִיר, הִנֵּה כְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם, בֵּית יְהוּדָה.    8 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because that Moab and Seir do say: Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the nations,
25.9 ט  לָכֵן הִנְנִי פֹתֵחַ אֶת-כֶּתֶף מוֹאָב, מֵהֶעָרִים--מֵעָרָיו, מִקָּצֵהוּ:  צְבִי, אֶרֶץ בֵּית הַיְשִׁימֹת--בַּעַל מְעוֹן, וקריתמה (וְקִרְיָתָיְמָה).    9 therefore, behold, I will open the flank of Moab on the side of the cities, on the side of his cities which are on his frontiers, the beauteous country of Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim,
25.10 י  לִבְנֵי-קֶדֶם עַל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וּנְתַתִּיהָ לְמוֹרָשָׁה, לְמַעַן לֹא-תִזָּכֵר בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן, בַּגּוֹיִם.    10 together with the children of Ammon, unto the children of the east, and I will give them for a possession, that the children of Ammon may not be remembered among the nations;
25.11 יא  וּבְמוֹאָב, אֶעֱשֶׂה שְׁפָטִים; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    11 and I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that I am the LORD. {P}
25.12 יב  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן עֲשׂוֹת אֱדוֹם בִּנְקֹם נָקָם לְבֵית יְהוּדָה--וַיֶּאְשְׁמוּ אָשׁוֹם, וְנִקְּמוּ בָהֶם.    12 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;
25.13 יג  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְנָטִתִי יָדִי עַל-אֱדוֹם, וְהִכְרַתִּי מִמֶּנָּה אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה; וּנְתַתִּיהָ חָרְבָּה מִתֵּימָן, וּדְדָנֶה בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ.    13 therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: I will stretch out My hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman, even unto Dedan shall they fall by the sword.
25.14 יד  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-נִקְמָתִי בֶּאֱדוֹם, בְּיַד עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְעָשׂוּ בֶאֱדוֹם, כְּאַפִּי וְכַחֲמָתִי; וְיָדְעוּ, אֶת-נִקְמָתִי--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    14 And I will lay My vengeance upon Edom by the hand of My people Israel; and they shall do in Edom according to Mine anger and according to My fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord GOD.
25.15 טו  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן עֲשׂוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים בִּנְקָמָה; וַיִּנָּקְמוּ נָקָם בִּשְׁאָט בְּנֶפֶשׁ, לְמַשְׁחִית אֵיבַת עוֹלָם.    15 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with disdain of soul to destroy, for the old hatred;
25.16 טז  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי נוֹטֶה יָדִי עַל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְהִכְרַתִּי אֶת-כְּרֵתִים; וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי, אֶת-שְׁאֵרִית חוֹף הַיָּם.    16 therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will stretch out My hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites, and destroy the remnant of the sea-coast.
25.17 יז  וְעָשִׂיתִי בָם נְקָמוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת, בְּתוֹכְחוֹת חֵמָה; וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּתִתִּי אֶת-נִקְמָתִי בָּם.  {פ}    17 And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall lay My vengeance upon them.' {P}
26.1 א  וַיְהִי בְּעַשְׁתֵּי-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ, הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
26.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר-אָמְרָה צֹּר עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם הֶאָח--נִשְׁבְּרָה דַּלְתוֹת הָעַמִּים, נָסֵבָּה אֵלָי:  אִמָּלְאָה, הָחֳרָבָה.    2 'Son of man, because that Tyre hath said against Jerusalem: aha, she is broken that was the gate of the peoples; she is turned unto me; I shall be filled with her that is laid waste;
26.3 ג  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי עָלַיִךְ, צֹר; וְהַעֲלֵיתִי עָלַיִךְ גּוֹיִם רַבִּים, כְּהַעֲלוֹת הַיָּם לְגַלָּיו.    3 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth its waves to come up.
26.4 ד  וְשִׁחֲתוּ חֹמוֹת צֹר, וְהָרְסוּ מִגְדָּלֶיהָ, וְסִחֵיתִי עֲפָרָהּ, מִמֶּנָּה; וְנָתַתִּי אוֹתָהּ, לִצְחִיחַ סָלַע.    4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre, and break down her towers; I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her a bare rock.
26.5 ה  מִשְׁטַח חֲרָמִים תִּהְיֶה, בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם--כִּי אֲנִי דִבַּרְתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה; וְהָיְתָה לְבַז, לַגּוֹיִם.    5 She shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD; and she shall become a spoil to the nations.
26.6 ו  וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה, בַּחֶרֶב תֵּהָרַגְנָה; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    6 And her daughters that are in the field shall be slain with the sword; and they shall know that I am the LORD. {P}
26.7 ז  כִּי כֹה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא אֶל-צֹר נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל מִצָּפוֹן, מֶלֶךְ מְלָכִים--בְּסוּס וּבְרֶכֶב וּבְפָרָשִׁים, וְקָהָל וְעַם-רָב.    7 For thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will bring upon Tyre Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and a company, and much people.
26.8 ח  בְּנוֹתַיִךְ בַּשָּׂדֶה, בַּחֶרֶב יַהֲרֹג; וְנָתַן עָלַיִךְ דָּיֵק, וְשָׁפַךְ עָלַיִךְ סֹלְלָה, וְהֵקִים עָלַיִךְ, צִנָּה.    8 He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field; and he shall make forts against thee, and cast up a mound against thee, and set up bucklers against thee.
26.9 ט  וּמְחִי קָבָלּוֹ, יִתֵּן בְּחֹמוֹתָיִךְ; וּמִגְדְּלֹתַיִךְ--יִתֹּץ, בְּחַרְבוֹתָיו.    9 And he shall set his battering engines against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.
26.10 י  מִשִּׁפְעַת סוּסָיו, יְכַסֵּךְ אֲבָקָם; מִקּוֹל פָּרַשׁ וְגַלְגַּל וָרֶכֶב, תִּרְעַשְׁנָה חוֹמוֹתַיִךְ, בְּבֹאוֹ בִּשְׁעָרַיִךְ, כִּמְבוֹאֵי עִיר מְבֻקָּעָה.    10 By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee; at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, thy walls shall shake, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.
26.11 יא  בְּפַרְסוֹת סוּסָיו, יִרְמֹס אֶת-כָּל-חוּצוֹתָיִךְ; עַמֵּךְ בַּחֶרֶב יַהֲרֹג, וּמַצְּבוֹת עֻזֵּךְ לָאָרֶץ תֵּרֵד.    11 With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets; he shall slay thy people with the sword, and the pillars of thy strength shall go down to the ground.
26.12 יב  וְשָׁלְלוּ חֵילֵךְ, וּבָזְזוּ רְכֻלָּתֵךְ, וְהָרְסוּ חוֹמוֹתַיִךְ, וּבָתֵּי חֶמְדָּתֵךְ יִתֹּצוּ; וַאֲבָנַיִךְ וְעֵצַיִךְ וַעֲפָרֵךְ, בְּתוֹךְ מַיִם יָשִׂימוּ.    12 And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise; and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy the houses of thy delight; and thy stones and thy timber and thy dust shall they lay in the midst of the waters.
26.13 יג  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי, הֲמוֹן שִׁירָיִךְ; וְקוֹל כִּנּוֹרַיִךְ, לֹא יִשָּׁמַע עוֹד.    13 And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease, and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.
26.14 יד  וּנְתַתִּיךְ לִצְחִיחַ סֶלַע, מִשְׁטַח חֲרָמִים תִּהְיֶה--לֹא תִבָּנֶה, עוֹד:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה דִּבַּרְתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {ס}    14 And I will make thee a bare rock; thou shalt be a place for the spreading of nets, thou shalt be built no more; for I the LORD have spoken, saith the Lord GOD. {S}
26.15 טו  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לְצוֹר:  הֲלֹא מִקּוֹל מַפַּלְתֵּךְ, בֶּאֱנֹק חָלָל בֵּהָרֵג הֶרֶג בְּתוֹכֵךְ, יִרְעֲשׁוּ, הָאִיִּים.    15 Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyre: Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded groan, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?
26.16 טז  וְיָרְדוּ מֵעַל כִּסְאוֹתָם, כֹּל נְשִׂיאֵי הַיָּם, וְהֵסִירוּ אֶת-מְעִילֵיהֶם, וְאֶת-בִּגְדֵי רִקְמָתָם יִפְשֹׁטוּ; חֲרָדוֹת יִלְבָּשׁוּ, עַל-הָאָרֶץ יֵשֵׁבוּ, וְחָרְדוּ לִרְגָעִים, וְשָׁמְמוּ עָלָיִךְ.    16 Then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and strip off their richly woven garments; they shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble every moment, and be appalled at thee.
26.17 יז  וְנָשְׂאוּ עָלַיִךְ קִינָה, וְאָמְרוּ לָךְ, אֵיךְ אָבַדְתְּ, נוֹשֶׁבֶת מִיַּמִּים:  הָעִיר הַהֻלָּלָה, אֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה חֲזָקָה בַיָּם הִיא וְיֹשְׁבֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתְנוּ חִתִּיתָם, לְכָל-יוֹשְׁבֶיהָ.    17 And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee: how art thou destroyed, that wast peopled from the seas, the renowned city, that wast strong in the sea, thou and thy inhabitants, that caused your terror to be on all that inhabit the earth!
26.18 יח  עַתָּה יֶחְרְדוּ הָאִיִּן, יוֹם מַפַּלְתֵּךְ; וְנִבְהֲלוּ הָאִיִּים אֲשֶׁר-בַּיָּם, מִצֵּאתֵךְ.  {ס}    18 Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be affrighted at thy going out. {S}
26.19 יט  כִּי כֹה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּתִתִּי אֹתָךְ עִיר נֶחֱרֶבֶת, כֶּעָרִים אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נוֹשָׁבוּ; בְּהַעֲלוֹת עָלַיִךְ אֶת-תְּהוֹם, וְכִסּוּךְ הַמַּיִם הָרַבִּים.    19 For thus saith the Lord GOD: When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and the great waters shall cover thee;
26.20 כ  וְהוֹרַדְתִּיךְ אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר אֶל-עַם עוֹלָם, וְהוֹשַׁבְתִּיךְ בְּאֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּיּוֹת כָּחֳרָבוֹת מֵעוֹלָם אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר--לְמַעַן, לֹא תֵשֵׁבִי; וְנָתַתִּי צְבִי, בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים.    20 then will I bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, to the people of old time, and will make thee to dwell in the nether parts of the earth, like the places that are desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I will set glory in the land of the living;
26.21 כא  בַּלָּהוֹת אֶתְּנֵךְ, וְאֵינֵךְ; וּתְבֻקְשִׁי, וְלֹא-תִמָּצְאִי עוֹד לְעוֹלָם--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    21 I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more; though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
27.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
27.2 ב  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, שָׂא עַל-צֹר קִינָה.    2 'And thou, son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyre,
27.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ לְצוֹר, הישבתי (הַיֹּשֶׁבֶת) עַל-מְבוֹאֹת יָם, רֹכֶלֶת הָעַמִּים, אֶל-אִיִּים רַבִּים;  {ס}  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, צוֹר, אַתְּ אָמַרְתְּ אֲנִי כְּלִילַת יֹפִי.    3 and say unto Tyre, that dwelleth at the entry of the sea, that is the merchant of the peoples unto many isles: {S} Thus saith the Lord GOD: thou, O Tyre, hast said: I am of perfect beauty.
27.4 ד  בְּלֵב יַמִּים, גְּבוּלָיִךְ; בֹּנַיִךְ, כָּלְלוּ יָפְיֵךְ.    4 Thy borders are in the heart of the seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty.
27.5 ה  בְּרוֹשִׁים מִשְּׂנִיר בָּנוּ לָךְ, אֵת כָּל-לֻחֹתָיִם; אֶרֶז מִלְּבָנוֹן לָקָחוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת תֹּרֶן עָלָיִךְ.    5 Of cypress-trees from Senir have they fashioned all thy planks; they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.
27.6 ו  אַלּוֹנִים, מִבָּשָׁן, עָשׂוּ, מִשּׁוֹטָיִךְ; קַרְשֵׁךְ עָשׂוּ-שֵׁן בַּת-אֲשֻׁרִים, מֵאִיֵּי כִּתִּיִּם.    6 Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; thy deck have they made of ivory inlaid in larch, from the isles of the Kittites.
27.7 ז  שֵׁשׁ-בְּרִקְמָה מִמִּצְרַיִם הָיָה מִפְרָשֵׂךְ, לִהְיוֹת לָךְ לְנֵס; תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן מֵאִיֵּי אֱלִישָׁה, הָיָה מְכַסֵּךְ.    7 Of fine linen with richly woven work from Egypt was thy sail, that it might be to thee for an ensign; blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was thine awning.
27.8 ח  יֹשְׁבֵי צִידוֹן וְאַרְוַד, הָיוּ שָׁטִים לָךְ; חֲכָמַיִךְ צוֹר הָיוּ בָךְ, הֵמָּה חֹבְלָיִךְ.    8 The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad were thy rowers; thy wise men, O Tyre, were in thee, they were thy pilots.
27.9 ט  זִקְנֵי גְבַל וַחֲכָמֶיהָ הָיוּ בָךְ, מַחֲזִיקֵי בִּדְקֵךְ; כָּל-אֳנִיּוֹת הַיָּם וּמַלָּחֵיהֶם הָיוּ בָךְ, לַעֲרֹב מַעֲרָבֵךְ.    9 The elders of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy calkers; all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to exchange thy merchandise.
27.10 י  פָּרַס וְלוּד וּפוּט הָיוּ בְחֵילֵךְ, אַנְשֵׁי מִלְחַמְתֵּךְ; מָגֵן וְכוֹבַע תִּלּוּ-בָךְ, הֵמָּה נָתְנוּ הֲדָרֵךְ.    10 Persia and Lud and Put were in thine army, thy men of war; they hanged the shield and helmet in thee, they set forth thy comeliness.
27.11 יא  בְּנֵי אַרְוַד וְחֵילֵךְ, עַל-חוֹמוֹתַיִךְ סָבִיב, וְגַמָּדִים, בְּמִגְדְּלוֹתַיִךְ הָיוּ; שִׁלְטֵיהֶם תִּלּוּ עַל-חוֹמוֹתַיִךְ, סָבִיב--הֵמָּה, כָּלְלוּ יָפְיֵךְ.    11 The men of Arvad and Helech were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadim were in thy towers; they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have perfected thy beauty.
27.12 יב  תַּרְשִׁישׁ סֹחַרְתֵּךְ, מֵרֹב כָּל-הוֹן; בְּכֶסֶף בַּרְזֶל בְּדִיל וְעוֹפֶרֶת, נָתְנוּ עִזְבוֹנָיִךְ.    12 Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kinds of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded for thy wares.
27.13 יג  יָוָן תֻּבַל וָמֶשֶׁךְ, הֵמָּה רֹכְלָיִךְ; בְּנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם וּכְלֵי נְחֹשֶׁת, נָתְנוּ מַעֲרָבֵךְ.    13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy traffickers; they traded the persons of men and vessels of brass for thy merchandise.
27.14 יד  מִבֵּית, תּוֹגַרְמָה, סוּסִים וּפָרָשִׁים וּפְרָדִים, נָתְנוּ עִזְבוֹנָיִךְ.    14 They of the house of Togarmah traded for thy wares with horses and horsemen and mules.
27.15 טו  בְּנֵי דְדָן רֹכְלַיִךְ, אִיִּים רַבִּים סְחֹרַת יָדֵךְ; קַרְנוֹת שֵׁן והובנים (וְהָבְנִים), הֵשִׁיבוּ אֶשְׁכָּרֵךְ.    15 The men of Dedan were thy traffickers; many isles were the mart of thy hand; they brought thee as tribute horns of ivory and ebony.
27.16 טז  אֲרָם סֹחַרְתֵּךְ, מֵרֹב מַעֲשָׂיִךְ; בְּנֹפֶךְ אַרְגָּמָן וְרִקְמָה וּבוּץ, וְרָאמֹת וְכַדְכֹּד, נָתְנוּ, בְּעִזְבוֹנָיִךְ.    16 Aram was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of thy wealth; they traded for thy wares with carbuncles, purple, and richly woven work, and fine linen, and coral, and rubies.
27.17 יז  יְהוּדָה וְאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֵמָּה רֹכְלָיִךְ; בְּחִטֵּי מִנִּית וּפַנַּג וּדְבַשׁ וָשֶׁמֶן, וָצֹרִי, נָתְנוּ, מַעֲרָבֵךְ.    17 Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy traffickers; they traded for thy merchandise wheat of Minnith, and balsam, and honey, and oil, and balm.
27.18 יח  דַּמֶּשֶׂק סֹחַרְתֵּךְ בְּרֹב מַעֲשַׂיִךְ, מֵרֹב כָּל-הוֹן; בְּיֵין חֶלְבּוֹן, וְצֶמֶר צָחַר.    18 Damascus was thy merchant for the multitude of thy wealth, by reason of the multitude of all riches, with the wine of Helbon, and white wool.
27.19 יט  וְדָן וְיָוָן מְאוּזָּל, בְּעִזְבוֹנַיִךְ נָתָנּוּ; בַּרְזֶל עָשׁוֹת קִדָּה וְקָנֶה, בְּמַעֲרָבֵךְ הָיָה.    19 Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for thy wares; massive iron, cassia, and calamus, were among thy merchandise.
27.20 כ  דְּדָן, רֹכַלְתֵּךְ, בְּבִגְדֵי-חֹפֶשׁ, לְרִכְבָּה.    20 Dedan was thy trafficker in precious cloths for riding.
27.21 כא  עֲרַב וְכָל-נְשִׂיאֵי קֵדָר, הֵמָּה סֹחֲרֵי יָדֵךְ; בְּכָרִים וְאֵילִם וְעַתּוּדִים, בָּם סֹחֲרָיִךְ.    21 Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they were the merchants of thy hand; in lambs, and rams, and goats, in these were they thy merchants.
27.22 כב  רֹכְלֵי שְׁבָא וְרַעְמָה, הֵמָּה רֹכְלָיִךְ; בְּרֹאשׁ כָּל-בֹּשֶׂם וּבְכָל-אֶבֶן יְקָרָה, וְזָהָב, נָתְנוּ, עִזְבוֹנָיִךְ.    22 The traffickers of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy traffickers; they traded for thy wares with chief of all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold.
27.23 כג  חָרָן וְכַנֵּה וָעֶדֶן, רֹכְלֵי שְׁבָא; אַשּׁוּר, כִּלְמַד רֹכַלְתֵּךְ.    23 Haran and Canneh and Eden, the traffickers of Sheba, Asshur was as thine apprentice in traffic.
27.24 כד  הֵמָּה רֹכְלַיִךְ, בְּמַכְלֻלִים, בִּגְלוֹמֵי תְּכֵלֶת וְרִקְמָה, וּבְגִנְזֵי בְּרֹמִים; בַּחֲבָלִים חֲבֻשִׁים וַאֲרֻזִים, בְּמַרְכֻלְתֵּךְ.    24 These were thy traffickers in gorgeous fabrics, in wrappings of blue and richly woven work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords and cedar-lined, among thy merchandise.
27.25 כה  אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ, שָׁרוֹתַיִךְ מַעֲרָבֵךְ; וַתִּמָּלְאִי וַתִּכְבְּדִי מְאֹד, בְּלֵב יַמִּים.    25 The ships of Tarshish brought thee tribute for thy merchandise; so wast thou replenished, and made very heavy in the heart of the seas.
27.26 כו  בְּמַיִם רַבִּים הֱבִאוּךְ, הַשָּׁטִים אֹתָךְ; רוּחַ, הַקָּדִים, שְׁבָרֵךְ, בְּלֵב יַמִּים.    26 Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters; the east wind hath broken thee in the heart of the seas.
27.27 כז  הוֹנֵךְ, וְעִזְבוֹנַיִךְ, מַעֲרָבֵךְ, מַלָּחַיִךְ וְחֹבְלָיִךְ; מַחֲזִיקֵי בִדְקֵךְ וְעֹרְבֵי מַעֲרָבֵךְ וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי מִלְחַמְתֵּךְ אֲשֶׁר-בָּךְ, וּבְכָל-קְהָלֵךְ אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹכֵךְ, יִפְּלוּ בְּלֵב יַמִּים, בְּיוֹם מַפַּלְתֵּךְ.    27 Thy riches, and thy wares, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the exchangers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, with all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the heart of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
27.28 כח  לְקוֹל, זַעֲקַת חֹבְלָיִךְ, יִרְעֲשׁוּ, מִגְרֹשׁוֹת.    28 At the sound of the cry of thy pilots the waves shall shake.
27.29 כט  וְיָרְדוּ מֵאֳנִיּוֹתֵיהֶם, כֹּל תֹּפְשֵׂי מָשׁוֹט--מַלָּחִים, כֹּל חֹבְלֵי הַיָּם:  אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, יַעֲמֹדוּ.    29 And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land,
27.30 ל  וְהִשְׁמִיעוּ עָלַיִךְ בְּקוֹלָם, וְיִזְעֲקוּ מָרָה; וְיַעֲלוּ עָפָר עַל-רָאשֵׁיהֶם, בָּאֵפֶר יִתְפַּלָּשׁוּ.    30 And shall cause their voice to be heard over thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall roll themselves in the ashes;
27.31 לא  וְהִקְרִיחוּ אֵלַיִךְ קָרְחָה, וְחָגְרוּ שַׂקִּים; וּבָכוּ אֵלַיִךְ בְּמַר-נֶפֶשׁ, מִסְפֵּד מָר.    31 And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee in bitterness of soul with bitter lamentation.
27.32 לב  וְנָשְׂאוּ אֵלַיִךְ בְּנִיהֶם קִינָה, וְקוֹנְנוּ עָלָיִךְ:  מִי כְצוֹר, כְּדֻמָה בְּתוֹךְ הַיָּם.    32 And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee: who was there like Tyre, fortified in the midst of the sea?
27.33 לג  בְּצֵאת עִזְבוֹנַיִךְ מִיַּמִּים, הִשְׂבַּעַתְּ עַמִּים רַבִּים; בְּרֹב הוֹנַיִךְ וּמַעֲרָבַיִךְ, הֶעֱשַׁרְתְּ מַלְכֵי-אָרֶץ.    33 When thy wares came forth out of the seas, thou didst fill many peoples; with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise didst thou enrich the kings of the earth.
27.34 לד  עֵת נִשְׁבֶּרֶת מִיַּמִּים, בְּמַעֲמַקֵּי-מָיִם; מַעֲרָבֵךְ וְכָל-קְהָלֵךְ, בְּתוֹכֵךְ נָפָלוּ.    34 Now that thou art broken by the seas in the depths of the waters, and thy merchandise and all thy company are fallen in the midst of thee,
27.35 לה  כֹּל יֹשְׁבֵי הָאִיִּים, שָׁמְמוּ עָלָיִךְ; וּמַלְכֵיהֶם שָׂעֲרוּ שַׂעַר, רָעֲמוּ פָּנִים.    35 All the inhabitants of the isles are appalled at thee, and their kings are horribly afraid, they are troubled in their countenance;
27.36 לו  סֹחֲרִים, בָּעַמִּים, שָׁרְקוּ, עָלָיִךְ; בַּלָּהוֹת הָיִית, וְאֵינֵךְ עַד-עוֹלָם.  {פ}    36 The merchants among the peoples hiss at thee; thou art become a terror, and never shalt be any more.' {P}
28.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
28.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם אֱמֹר לִנְגִיד צֹר כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן גָּבַהּ לִבְּךָ וַתֹּאמֶר אֵל אָנִי--מוֹשַׁב אֱלֹהִים יָשַׁבְתִּי, בְּלֵב יַמִּים; וְאַתָּה אָדָם וְלֹא-אֵל, וַתִּתֵּן לִבְּךָ כְּלֵב אֱלֹהִים.    2 'Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyre: Thus saith the Lord GOD: because thy heart is lifted up, and thou hast said: I am a god, I sit in the seat of God, in the heart of the seas; yet thou art man, and not God, though thou didst set thy heart as the heart of God--
28.3 ג  הִנֵּה חָכָם אַתָּה, מדנאל (מִדָּנִיֵּאל):  כָּל-סָתוּם, לֹא עֲמָמוּךָ.    3 Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel! there is no secret that they can hide from thee!
28.4 ד  בְּחָכְמָתְךָ, וּבִתְבוּנָתְךָ, עָשִׂיתָ לְּךָ, חָיִל; וַתַּעַשׂ זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, בְּאוֹצְרוֹתֶיךָ.    4 By thy wisdom and by thy discernment thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures;
28.5 ה  בְּרֹב חָכְמָתְךָ בִּרְכֻלָּתְךָ, הִרְבִּיתָ חֵילֶךָ; וַיִּגְבַּהּ לְבָבְךָ, בְּחֵילֶךָ.  {ס}    5 In thy great wisdom by thy traffic hast thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches-- {S}
28.6 ו  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  יַעַן תִּתְּךָ אֶת-לְבָבְךָ, כְּלֵב אֱלֹהִים.    6 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: because thou hast set thy heart as the heart of God;
28.7 ז  לָכֵן, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא עָלֶיךָ זָרִים--עָרִיצֵי, גּוֹיִם; וְהֵרִיקוּ חַרְבוֹתָם עַל-יְפִי חָכְמָתֶךָ, וְחִלְּלוּ יִפְעָתֶךָ.    7 Therefore, behold, I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations; and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.
28.8 ח  לַשַּׁחַת, יוֹרִדוּךָ; וָמַתָּה מְמוֹתֵי חָלָל, בְּלֵב יַמִּים.    8 They shall bring thee down to the pit; and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain, in the heart of the seas.
28.9 ט  הֶאָמֹר תֹּאמַר אֱלֹהִים אָנִי, לִפְנֵי הֹרְגֶךָ:  וְאַתָּה אָדָם וְלֹא-אֵל, בְּיַד מְחַלְלֶיךָ.    9 Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee: I am God? But thou art man, and not God, in the hand of them that defile thee.
28.10 י  מוֹתֵי עֲרֵלִים תָּמוּת, בְּיַד-זָרִים:  כִּי אֲנִי דִבַּרְתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    10 Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers; for I have spoken, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
28.11 יא  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
28.12 יב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שָׂא קִינָה עַל-מֶלֶךְ צוֹר; וְאָמַרְתָּ לּוֹ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אַתָּה חוֹתֵם תָּכְנִית, מָלֵא חָכְמָה וּכְלִיל יֹפִי.    12 'Son of man, take up a lamentation for the king of Tyre, and say unto him: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Thou seal most accurate, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty,
28.13 יג  בְּעֵדֶן גַּן-אֱלֹהִים הָיִיתָ, כָּל-אֶבֶן יְקָרָה מְסֻכָתֶךָ אֹדֶם פִּטְדָה וְיָהֲלֹם תַּרְשִׁישׁ שֹׁהַם וְיָשְׁפֵה, סַפִּיר נֹפֶךְ, וּבָרְקַת וְזָהָב; מְלֶאכֶת תֻּפֶּיךָ וּנְקָבֶיךָ בָּךְ, בְּיוֹם הִבָּרַאֲךָ כּוֹנָנוּ.    13 thou wast in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the carnelian, the topaz, and the emerald, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the carbuncle, and the smaragd, and gold; the workmanship of thy settings and of thy sockets was in thee, in the day that thou wast created they were prepared.
28.14 יד  אַתְּ-כְּרוּב--מִמְשַׁח, הַסּוֹכֵךְ; וּנְתַתִּיךָ, בְּהַר קֹדֶשׁ אֱלֹהִים הָיִיתָ--בְּתוֹךְ אַבְנֵי-אֵשׁ, הִתְהַלָּכְתָּ.    14 Thou wast the far-covering cherub; and I set thee, so that thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of stones of fire.
28.15 טו  תָּמִים אַתָּה בִּדְרָכֶיךָ, מִיּוֹם הִבָּרְאָךְ, עַד-נִמְצָא עַוְלָתָה, בָּךְ.    15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till unrighteousness was found in thee.
28.16 טז  בְּרֹב רְכֻלָּתְךָ, מָלוּ תוֹכְךָ חָמָס--וַתֶּחֱטָא; וָאֲחַלֶּלְךָ מֵהַר אֱלֹהִים וָאַבֶּדְךָ כְּרוּב הַסֹּכֵךְ, מִתּוֹךְ אַבְנֵי-אֵשׁ.    16 By the multitude of thy traffic they filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned; therefore have I cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God; and I have destroyed thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.
28.17 יז  גָּבַהּ לִבְּךָ בְּיָפְיֶךָ, שִׁחַתָּ חָכְמָתְךָ עַל-יִפְעָתֶךָ; עַל-אֶרֶץ הִשְׁלַכְתִּיךָ, לִפְנֵי מְלָכִים נְתַתִּיךָ--לְרַאֲוָה בָךְ.    17 Thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness; I have cast thee to the ground, I have laid thee before kings, that they may gaze upon thee.
28.18 יח  מֵרֹב עֲוֺנֶיךָ, בְּעֶוֶל רְכֻלָּתְךָ, חִלַּלְתָּ, מִקְדָּשֶׁיךָ; וָאוֹצִא-אֵשׁ מִתּוֹכְךָ, הִיא אֲכָלַתְךָ, וָאֶתֶּנְךָ לְאֵפֶר עַל-הָאָרֶץ, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-רֹאֶיךָ.    18 By the multitude of thine iniquities, in the unrighteousness of thy traffic, thou hast profaned thy sanctuaries; therefore have I brought forth a fire from the midst of thee, it hath devoured thee, and I have turned thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee.
28.19 יט  כָּל-יוֹדְעֶיךָ, בָּעַמִּים, שָׁמְמוּ, עָלֶיךָ; בַּלָּהוֹת הָיִיתָ, וְאֵינְךָ עַד-עוֹלָם.  {פ}    19 All they that know thee among the peoples shall be appalled at thee; thou art become a terror, and thou shalt never be any more.' {P}
28.20 כ  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    20 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
28.21 כא  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ אֶל-צִידוֹן, וְהִנָּבֵא, עָלֶיהָ.    21 'Son of man, set thy face toward Zidon, and prophesy against it,
28.22 כב  וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי עָלַיִךְ צִידוֹן, וְנִכְבַּדְתִּי בְּתוֹכֵךְ; וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בַּעֲשׂוֹתִי בָהּ שְׁפָטִים--וְנִקְדַּשְׁתִּי בָהּ.    22 and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of thee; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.
28.23 כג  וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי-בָהּ דֶּבֶר וָדָם, בְּחוּצוֹתֶיהָ, וְנִפְלַל חָלָל בְּתוֹכָהּ, בְּחֶרֶב עָלֶיהָ מִסָּבִיב; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    23 For I will send into her pestilence and blood in her streets; and the wounded shall fall in the midst of her by the sword upon her on every side; and they shall know that I am the LORD.
28.24 כד  וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה עוֹד לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל, סִלּוֹן מַמְאִיר וְקוֹץ מַכְאִב, מִכֹּל סְבִיבֹתָם, הַשָּׁאטִים אוֹתָם; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי אֲנִי אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    24 And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor a piercing thorn of any that are round about them, that did have them in disdain; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD. {P}
28.25 כה  כֹּה-אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּקַבְּצִי אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל מִן-הָעַמִּים אֲשֶׁר נָפֹצוּ בָם, וְנִקְדַּשְׁתִּי בָם לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם; וְיָשְׁבוּ, עַל-אַדְמָתָם, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי, לְעַבְדִּי לְיַעֲקֹב.    25 Thus saith the Lord GOD: When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the nations, then shall they dwell in their own land which I gave to My servant Jacob.
28.26 כו  וְיָשְׁבוּ עָלֶיהָ, לָבֶטַח, וּבָנוּ בָתִּים וְנָטְעוּ כְרָמִים, וְיָשְׁבוּ לָבֶטַח:  בַּעֲשׂוֹתִי שְׁפָטִים, בְּכֹל הַשָּׁאטִים אֹתָם מִסְּבִיבוֹתָם--וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.  {פ}    26 And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell safely; when I have executed judgments upon all those that have them in disdain round about them; and they shall know that I am the LORD their God.' {P}
29.1 א  בַּשָּׁנָה, הָעֲשִׂרִית, בָּעֲשִׂרִי, בִּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ--הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
29.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם--שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ, עַל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ מִצְרָיִם; וְהִנָּבֵא עָלָיו, וְעַל-מִצְרַיִם כֻּלָּהּ.    2 'Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt;
29.3 ג  דַּבֵּר וְאָמַרְתָּ כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי עָלֶיךָ פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, הַתַּנִּים הַגָּדוֹל, הָרֹבֵץ בְּתוֹךְ יְאֹרָיו:  אֲשֶׁר אָמַר לִי יְאֹרִי, וַאֲנִי עֲשִׂיתִנִי.    3 speak, and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, that hath said: My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself.
29.4 ד  וְנָתַתִּי חחיים (חַחִים) בִּלְחָיֶיךָ, וְהִדְבַּקְתִּי דְגַת-יְאֹרֶיךָ בְּקַשְׂקְשֹׂתֶיךָ; וְהַעֲלִיתִיךָ, מִתּוֹךְ יְאֹרֶיךָ, וְאֵת כָּל-דְּגַת יְאֹרֶיךָ, בְּקַשְׂקְשֹׂתֶיךָ תִּדְבָּק.    4 And I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales; and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales.
29.5 ה  וּנְטַשְׁתִּיךָ הַמִּדְבָּרָה, אוֹתְךָ וְאֵת כָּל-דְּגַת יְאֹרֶיךָ, עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה תִּפּוֹל, לֹא תֵאָסֵף וְלֹא תִקָּבֵץ--לְחַיַּת הָאָרֶץ וּלְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, נְתַתִּיךָ לְאָכְלָה.    5 And I will cast thee into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers; thou shalt fall upon the open field; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered; to the beasts of the earth and to the fowls of the heaven have I given thee for food.
29.6 ו  וְיָדְעוּ כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי מִצְרַיִם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, יַעַן הֱיוֹתָם מִשְׁעֶנֶת קָנֶה, לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    6 And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the LORD, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.
29.7 ז  בְּתָפְשָׂם בְּךָ בכפך (בַכַּף) תֵּרוֹץ, וּבָקַעְתָּ לָהֶם כָּל-כָּתֵף; וּבְהִשָּׁעֲנָם עָלֶיךָ תִּשָּׁבֵר, וְהַעֲמַדְתָּ לָהֶם כָּל-מָתְנָיִם.  {ס}    7 When they take hold of thee with the hand, thou dost break, and rend all their shoulders; and when they lean upon thee, thou breakest, and makest all their loins to be at a stand. {S}
29.8 ח  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא עָלַיִךְ, חָרֶב; וְהִכְרַתִּי מִמֵּךְ, אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה.    8 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and will cut off from thee man and beast.
29.9 ט  וְהָיְתָה אֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם לִשְׁמָמָה וְחָרְבָּה, וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה:  יַעַן אָמַר יְאֹר לִי, וַאֲנִי עָשִׂיתִי.    9 And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste, and they shall know that I am the LORD; because he hath said: The river is mine, and I have made it.
29.10 י  לָכֵן הִנְנִי אֵלֶיךָ, וְאֶל-יְאֹרֶיךָ; וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לְחָרְבוֹת חֹרֶב שְׁמָמָה, מִמִּגְדֹּל סְוֵנֵה, וְעַד-גְּבוּל כּוּשׁ.    10 Therefore, behold, I am against thee, and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from Migdol to Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.
29.11 יא  לֹא תַעֲבָר-בָּהּ רֶגֶל אָדָם, וְרֶגֶל בְּהֵמָה לֹא תַעֲבָר-בָּהּ; וְלֹא תֵשֵׁב, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה.    11 No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.
29.12 יב  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם שְׁמָמָה בְּתוֹךְ אֲרָצוֹת נְשַׁמּוֹת, וְעָרֶיהָ בְּתוֹךְ עָרִים מָחֳרָבוֹת תִּהְיֶיןָ שְׁמָמָה, אַרְבָּעִים, שָׁנָה; וַהֲפִצֹתִי אֶת-מִצְרַיִם בַּגּוֹיִם, וְזֵרִיתִים בָּאֲרָצוֹת.  {ס}    12 And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be desolate forty years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries. {S}
29.13 יג  כִּי כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  מִקֵּץ אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, אֲקַבֵּץ אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, מִן-הָעַמִּים, אֲשֶׁר-נָפֹצוּ שָׁמָּה.    13 For thus saith the Lord GOD: At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the peoples whither they were scattered;
29.14 יד  וְשַׁבְתִּי, אֶת-שְׁבוּת מִצְרַיִם, וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי אֹתָם אֶרֶץ פַּתְרוֹס, עַל-אֶרֶץ מְכוּרָתָם; וְהָיוּ שָׁם, מַמְלָכָה שְׁפָלָה.    14 and I will turn the captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their origin; and they shall be there a lowly kingdom.
29.15 טו  מִן-הַמַּמְלָכוֹת תִּהְיֶה שְׁפָלָה, וְלֹא-תִתְנַשֵּׂא עוֹד עַל-הַגּוֹיִם; וְהִמְעַטְתִּים--לְבִלְתִּי, רְדוֹת בַּגּוֹיִם.    15 It shall be the lowliest of the kingdoms, neither shall it any more lift itself up above the nations; and I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.
29.16 טז  וְלֹא יִהְיֶה-עוֹד לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל לְמִבְטָח מַזְכִּיר עָוֺן, בִּפְנוֹתָם אַחֲרֵיהֶם; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי אֲנִי אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    16 And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, bringing iniquity to remembrance, when they turn after them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.' {P}
29.17 יז  וַיְהִי, בְּעֶשְׂרִים וָשֶׁבַע שָׁנָה, בָּרִאשׁוֹן, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ; הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    17 And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
29.18 יח  בֶּן-אָדָם, נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל הֶעֱבִיד אֶת-חֵילוֹ עֲבֹדָה גְדוֹלָה אֶל-צֹר--כָּל-רֹאשׁ מֻקְרָח, וְכָל-כָּתֵף מְרוּטָה; וְשָׂכָר לֹא-הָיָה לוֹ וּלְחֵילוֹ, מִצֹּר, עַל-הָעֲבֹדָה, אֲשֶׁר-עָבַד עָלֶיהָ.  {ס}    18 'Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre; every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled; yet had he no wages, nor his army, from Tyre, for the service that he had served against it; {S}
29.19 יט  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי נֹתֵן לִנְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְנָשָׂא הֲמֹנָהּ וְשָׁלַל שְׁלָלָהּ, וּבָזַז בִּזָּהּ, וְהָיְתָה שָׂכָר, לְחֵילוֹ.    19 therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall carry off her abundance, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.
29.20 כ  פְּעֻלָּתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-עָבַד בָּהּ, נָתַתִּי לוֹ אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    20 I have given him the land of Egypt as his hire for which he served, because they wrought for Me, saith the Lord GOD.
29.21 כא  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אַצְמִיחַ קֶרֶן לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּלְךָ אֶתֵּן פִּתְחוֹן-פֶּה, בְּתוֹכָם; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    21 In that day will I cause a horn to shoot up unto the house of Israel, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
30.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
30.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם--הִנָּבֵא וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הֵילִילוּ, הָהּ לַיּוֹם.    2 'Son of man, prophesy, and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: wail ye: Woe worth the day!
30.3 ג  כִּי-קָרוֹב יוֹם, וְקָרוֹב יוֹם לַיהוָה:  יוֹם עָנָן, עֵת גּוֹיִם יִהְיֶה.    3 For the day is near, even the day of the LORD is near, a day of clouds, it shall be the time of the nations.
30.4 ד  וּבָאָה חֶרֶב, בְּמִצְרַיִם, וְהָיְתָה חַלְחָלָה בְּכוּשׁ, בִּנְפֹל חָלָל בְּמִצְרָיִם; וְלָקְחוּ הֲמוֹנָהּ, וְנֶהֶרְסוּ יְסֹדוֹתֶיהָ.    4 And a sword shall come upon Egypt, and convulsion shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt; and they shall take away her abundance, and her foundation shall be broken down.
30.5 ה  כּוּשׁ וּפוּט וְלוּד וְכָל-הָעֶרֶב וְכוּב, וּבְנֵי אֶרֶץ הַבְּרִית--אִתָּם, בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ.  {פ}    5 Ethiopia, and Put, and Lud, and all the mingled people, and Cub, and the children of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword. {P}
30.6 ו  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, וְנָפְלוּ סֹמְכֵי מִצְרַיִם, וְיָרַד גְּאוֹן עֻזָּהּ; מִמִּגְדֹּל סְוֵנֵה, בַּחֶרֶב יִפְּלוּ-בָהּ--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    6 Thus saith the LORD: they also that uphold Egypt shall fall, and the pride of her power shall come down; from Migdol to Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.
30.7 ז  וְנָשַׁמּוּ, בְּתוֹךְ אֲרָצוֹת נְשַׁמּוֹת; וְעָרָיו, בְּתוֹךְ-עָרִים נַחֲרָבוֹת תִּהְיֶינָה.    7 And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted.
30.8 ח  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּתִתִּי-אֵשׁ בְּמִצְרַיִם, וְנִשְׁבְּרוּ כָּל-עֹזְרֶיהָ.    8 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and all her helpers are destroyed.
30.9 ט  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יֵצְאוּ מַלְאָכִים מִלְּפָנַי בַּצִּים, לְהַחֲרִיד, אֶת-כּוּשׁ בֶּטַח; וְהָיְתָה חַלְחָלָה בָהֶם בְּיוֹם מִצְרַיִם, כִּי הִנֵּה בָּאָה.  {ס}    9 In that day shall messengers go forth from before Me in ships to make the confident Ethiopians afraid; and there shall come convulsion upon them in the day of Egypt; for, lo, it cometh. {S}
30.10 י  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי אֶת-הֲמוֹן מִצְרַיִם, בְּיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל.    10 Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease, by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.
30.11 יא  הוּא וְעַמּוֹ אִתּוֹ, עָרִיצֵי גוֹיִם--מוּבָאִים, לְשַׁחֵת הָאָרֶץ; וְהֵרִיקוּ חַרְבוֹתָם עַל-מִצְרַיִם, וּמָלְאוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ חָלָל.    11 He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought in to destroy the land; and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.
30.12 יב  וְנָתַתִּי יְאֹרִים חָרָבָה, וּמָכַרְתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ בְּיַד-רָעִים; וַהֲשִׁמֹּתִי אֶרֶץ וּמְלֹאָהּ, בְּיַד-זָרִים--אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי.  {ס}    12 And I will make the rivers dry, and will give the land over into the hand of evil men; and I will make the land desolate, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers; I the LORD have spoken it. {S}
30.13 יג  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי גִלּוּלִים וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי אֱלִילִים מִנֹּף, וְנָשִׂיא מֵאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם, לֹא יִהְיֶה-עוֹד; וְנָתַתִּי יִרְאָה, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    13 Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will also destroy the idols, and I will cause the things of nought to cease from Noph; and there shall be no more a prince out of the land of Egypt; and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.
30.14 יד  וַהֲשִׁמֹּתִי, אֶת-פַּתְרוֹס, וְנָתַתִּי אֵשׁ, בְּצֹעַן; וְעָשִׂיתִי שְׁפָטִים, בְּנֹא.    14 And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set a fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments in No.
30.15 טו  וְשָׁפַכְתִּי חֲמָתִי, עַל-סִין מָעוֹז מִצְרָיִם; וְהִכְרַתִּי, אֶת-הֲמוֹן נֹא.    15 And I will pour My fury upon Sin, the stronghold of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.
30.16 טז  וְנָתַתִּי אֵשׁ, בְּמִצְרַיִם--חוּל תחיל (תָּחוּל) סִין, וְנֹא תִּהְיֶה לְהִבָּקֵעַ; וְנֹף, צָרֵי יוֹמָם.    16 And I will set a fire in Egypt; Sin shall be in great convulsion, and No shall be rent asunder; and in Noph shall come adversaries in the day-time.
30.17 יז  בַּחוּרֵי אָוֶן וּפִי-בֶסֶת, בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ; וְהֵנָּה, בַּשְּׁבִי תֵלַכְנָה.    17 The young men of Aven and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword; and these cities shall go into captivity.
30.18 יח  וּבִתְחַפְנְחֵס, חָשַׂךְ הַיּוֹם, בְּשִׁבְרִי-שָׁם אֶת-מֹטוֹת מִצְרַיִם, וְנִשְׁבַּת-בָּהּ גְּאוֹן עֻזָּהּ; הִיא עָנָן יְכַסֶּנָּה, וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ בַּשְּׁבִי תֵלַכְנָה.    18 At Tehaphnehes also the day shall withdraw itself, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt, and the pride of her power shall cease in her; as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.
30.19 יט  וְעָשִׂיתִי שְׁפָטִים, בְּמִצְרָיִם; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    19 Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
30.20 כ  וַיְהִי, בְּאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, בָּרִאשׁוֹן, בְּשִׁבְעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ; הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    20 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
30.21 כא  בֶּן-אָדָם, אֶת-זְרוֹעַ פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם שָׁבָרְתִּי; וְהִנֵּה לֹא-חֻבְּשָׁה לָתֵת רְפֻאוֹת לָשׂוּם חִתּוּל, לְחָבְשָׁהּ לְחָזְקָהּ--לִתְפֹּשׂ בֶּחָרֶב.  {ס}    21 'Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it hath not been bound up to be healed, to put a roller, that it be bound up and wax strong, that it hold the sword. {S}
30.22 כב  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי אֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, וְשָׁבַרְתִּי אֶת-זְרֹעֹתָיו, אֶת-הַחֲזָקָה וְאֶת-הַנִּשְׁבָּרֶת; וְהִפַּלְתִּי אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, מִיָּדוֹ.    22 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.
30.23 כג  וַהֲפִצוֹתִי אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, בַּגּוֹיִם; וְזֵרִיתִם, בָּאֲרָצוֹת.    23 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.
30.24 כד  וְחִזַּקְתִּי, אֶת-זְרֹעוֹת מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-חַרְבִּי, בְּיָדוֹ; וְשָׁבַרְתִּי אֶת-זְרֹעוֹת פַּרְעֹה, וְנָאַק נַאֲקוֹת חָלָל לְפָנָיו.    24 And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put My sword in his hand; but I will break the arms of Pharaoh, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.
30.25 כה  וְהַחֲזַקְתִּי, אֶת-זְרֹעוֹת מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, וּזְרֹעוֹת פַּרְעֹה, תִּפֹּלְנָה; וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּתִתִּי חַרְבִּי בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וְנָטָה אוֹתָהּ, אֶל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    25 And I will hold up the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall put My sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.
30.26 כו  וַהֲפִצוֹתִי אֶת-מִצְרַיִם בַּגּוֹיִם, וְזֵרִיתִי אוֹתָם בָּאֲרָצוֹת; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    26 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them through the countries; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
31.1 א  וַיְהִי, בְּאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, בַּשְּׁלִישִׁי, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ; הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
31.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, אֱמֹר אֶל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם וְאֶל-הֲמוֹנוֹ:  אֶל-מִי, דָּמִיתָ בְגָדְלֶךָ.    2 'Son of man, say unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude: whom art thou like in thy greatness?
31.3 ג  הִנֵּה אַשּׁוּר אֶרֶז בַּלְּבָנוֹן, יְפֵה עָנָף וְחֹרֶשׁ מֵצַל--וּגְבַהּ קוֹמָה; וּבֵין עֲבֹתִים, הָיְתָה צַמַּרְתּוֹ.    3 Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of a high stature; and its top was among the thick boughs.
31.4 ד  מַיִם גִּדְּלוּהוּ, תְּהוֹם רֹמְמָתְהוּ; אֶת-נַהֲרֹתֶיהָ, הֹלֵךְ סְבִיבוֹת מַטָּעָהּ, וְאֶת-תְּעָלֹתֶיהָ שִׁלְחָה, אֶל כָּל-עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה.    4 The waters nourished it, the deep made it to grow; her rivers ran round about her plantation, and she sent out her conduits unto all the trees of the field.
31.5 ה  עַל-כֵּן גָּבְהָא קֹמָתוֹ, מִכֹּל עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה; וַתִּרְבֶּינָה סַרְעַפֹּתָיו וַתֶּאֱרַכְנָה פֹארֹתָו, מִמַּיִם רַבִּים--בְּשַׁלְּחוֹ.    5 Therefore its stature was exalted above all the trees of the field; and its boughs were multiplied, and its branches became long, because of the multitude of waters, when it shot them forth.
31.6 ו  בִּסְעַפֹּתָיו קִנְנוּ, כָּל-עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְתַחַת פֹּארֹתָיו יָלְדוּ, כֹּל חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה; וּבְצִלּוֹ, יֵשְׁבוּ, כֹּל, גּוֹיִם רַבִּים.    6 All the fowls of heaven made their nests in its boughs, and all the beasts of the field did bring forth their young under its branches, and under its shadow dwelt all great nations.
31.7 ז  וַיְּיִף בְּגָדְלוֹ, בְּאֹרֶךְ דָּלִיּוֹתָיו:  כִּי-הָיָה שָׁרְשׁוֹ, אֶל-מַיִם רַבִּים.    7 Thus was it fair in its greatness, in the length of its branches; for its root was by many waters.
31.8 ח  אֲרָזִים לֹא-עֲמָמֻהוּ, בְּגַן-אֱלֹהִים--בְּרוֹשִׁים לֹא דָמוּ אֶל-סְעַפֹּתָיו, וְעַרְמֹנִים לֹא-הָיוּ כְּפֹרֹאתָיו:  כָּל-עֵץ, בְּגַן-אֱלֹהִים--לֹא-דָמָה אֵלָיו, בְּיָפְיוֹ.    8 The cedars in the garden of God could not hide it; the cypress-trees were not like its boughs, and the plane-trees were not as its branches; nor was any tree in the garden of God like unto it in its beauty.
31.9 ט  יָפֶה עֲשִׂיתִיו, בְּרֹב דָּלִיּוֹתָיו; וַיְקַנְאֻהוּ, כָּל-עֲצֵי-עֵדֶן, אֲשֶׁר, בְּגַן הָאֱלֹהִים.  {פ}    9 I made it fair by the multitude of its branches; so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied it. {P}
31.10 י  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר גָּבַהְתָּ בְּקוֹמָה; וַיִּתֵּן צַמַּרְתּוֹ אֶל-בֵּין עֲבוֹתִים, וְרָם לְבָבוֹ בְּגָבְהוֹ.    10 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Because thou art exalted in stature, and he hath set his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height;
31.11 יא  וְאֶתְּנֵהוּ--בְּיַד, אֵיל גּוֹיִם; עָשׂוֹ יַעֲשֶׂה לוֹ, כְּרִשְׁעוֹ גֵּרַשְׁתִּהוּ.    11 I do even deliver him into the hand of the mighty one of the nations; he shall surely deal with him; I do drive him out according to his wickedness.
31.12 יב  וַיִּכְרְתֻהוּ זָרִים עָרִיצֵי גוֹיִם, וַיִּטְּשֻׁהוּ; אֶל-הֶהָרִים וּבְכָל-גֵּאָיוֹת נָפְלוּ דָלִיּוֹתָיו, וַתִּשָּׁבַרְנָה פֹרֹאתָיו בְּכֹל אֲפִיקֵי הָאָרֶץ, וַיֵּרְדוּ מִצִּלּוֹ כָּל-עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ, וַיִּטְּשֻׁהוּ.    12 And strangers, the terrible of the nations, do cut him off, and cast him down; upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs lie broken in all the channels of the land; and all the peoples of the earth do go down from his shadow, and do leave him.
31.13 יג  עַל-מַפַּלְתּוֹ יִשְׁכְּנוּ, כָּל-עוֹף הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְאֶל-פֹּרֹאתָיו הָיוּ, כֹּל חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה.    13 Upon his carcass all the fowls of the heaven do dwell, and upon his branches are all the beasts of the field;
31.14 יד  לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִגְבְּהוּ בְקוֹמָתָם כָּל-עֲצֵי-מַיִם, וְלֹא-יִתְּנוּ אֶת-צַמַּרְתָּם אֶל-בֵּין עֲבֹתִים, וְלֹא-יַעַמְדוּ אֵלֵיהֶם בְּגָבְהָם, כָּל-שֹׁתֵי מָיִם:  כִּי-כֻלָּם נִתְּנוּ לַמָּוֶת אֶל-אֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּית, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי אָדָם--אֶל-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר.  {פ}    14 to the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves in their stature, neither set their top among the thick boughs, nor that their mighty ones stand up in their height, even all that drink water; for they are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit. {P}
31.15 טו  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּיוֹם רִדְתּוֹ שְׁאוֹלָה הֶאֱבַלְתִּי כִּסֵּתִי עָלָיו אֶת-תְּהוֹם, וָאֶמְנַע נַהֲרוֹתֶיהָ, וַיִּכָּלְאוּ מַיִם רַבִּים; וָאַקְדִּר עָלָיו לְבָנוֹן, וְכָל-עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה עָלָיו עֻלְפֶּה.    15 Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the day when he went down to the nether-world I caused the deep to mourn and cover itself for him, and I restrained the rivers thereof, and the great waters were stayed; and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field fainted for him.
31.16 טז  מִקּוֹל מַפַּלְתּוֹ הִרְעַשְׁתִּי גוֹיִם, בְּהוֹרִדִי אֹתוֹ שְׁאוֹלָה אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר; וַיִּנָּחֲמוּ בְּאֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּית, כָּל-עֲצֵי-עֵדֶן--מִבְחַר וְטוֹב-לְבָנוֹן, כָּל-שֹׁתֵי מָיִם.    16 I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down to the nether-world with them that descend into the pit; and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, were comforted in the nether parts of the earth.
31.17 יז  גַּם-הֵם, אִתּוֹ יָרְדוּ שְׁאוֹלָה--אֶל-חַלְלֵי-חָרֶב; וּזְרֹעוֹ יָשְׁבוּ בְצִלּוֹ, בְּתוֹךְ גּוֹיִם.    17 They also went down into the nether-world with him unto them that are slain by the sword; yea, they that were in his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the nations.
31.18 יח  אֶל-מִי דָמִיתָ כָּכָה בְּכָבוֹד וּבְגֹדֶל, בַּעֲצֵי-עֵדֶן; וְהוּרַדְתָּ אֶת-עֲצֵי-עֵדֶן אֶל-אֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּית, בְּתוֹךְ עֲרֵלִים תִּשְׁכַּב אֶת-חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב--הוּא פַרְעֹה וְכָל-הֲמוֹנֹה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    18 To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet shall thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth; thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcised, with them that are slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
32.1 א  וַיְהִי בִּשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, בִּשְׁנֵי-עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ; הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
32.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שָׂא קִינָה עַל-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו, כְּפִיר גּוֹיִם נִדְמֵיתָ; וְאַתָּה, כַּתַּנִּים בַּיַּמִּים, וַתָּגַח בְּנַהֲרוֹתֶיךָ וַתִּדְלַח-מַיִם בְּרַגְלֶיךָ, וַתִּרְפֹּס נַהֲרוֹתָם.  {ס}    2 'Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him: thou didst liken thyself unto a young lion of the nations; whereas thou art as a dragon in the seas; and thou didst gush forth with thy rivers, and didst trouble the waters with thy feet, and foul their rivers. {S}
32.3 ג  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וּפָרַשְׂתִּי עָלֶיךָ אֶת-רִשְׁתִּי, בִּקְהַל עַמִּים רַבִּים; וְהֶעֱלוּךָ, בְּחֶרְמִי.    3 Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will therefore spread out My net over thee with a company of many peoples; and they shall bring thee up in My net.
32.4 ד  וּנְטַשְׁתִּיךָ בָאָרֶץ, עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה אֲטִילֶךָ; וְהִשְׁכַּנְתִּי עָלֶיךָ כָּל-עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְהִשְׂבַּעְתִּי מִמְּךָ חַיַּת כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.    4 And I will cast thee upon the land, I will hurl thee upon the open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to settle upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.
32.5 ה  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-בְּשָׂרְךָ, עַל-הֶהָרִים; וּמִלֵּאתִי הַגֵּאָיוֹת, רָמוּתֶךָ.    5 And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys with thy foulness.
32.6 ו  וְהִשְׁקֵיתִי אֶרֶץ צָפָתְךָ מִדָּמְךָ, אֶל-הֶהָרִים; וַאֲפִקִים, יִמָּלְאוּן מִמֶּךָּ.    6 I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the channels shall be full of thee.
32.7 ז  וְכִסֵּיתִי בְכַבּוֹתְךָ שָׁמַיִם, וְהִקְדַּרְתִּי אֶת-כֹּכְבֵיהֶם; שֶׁמֶשׁ בֶּעָנָן אֲכַסֶּנּוּ, וְיָרֵחַ לֹא-יָאִיר אוֹרוֹ.    7 And when I shall extinguish thee, I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof black; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.
32.8 ח  כָּל-מְאוֹרֵי אוֹר בַּשָּׁמַיִם, אַקְדִּירֵם עָלֶיךָ; וְנָתַתִּי חֹשֶׁךְ עַל-אַרְצְךָ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    8 All the bright lights of heaven will I make black over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD.
32.9 ט  וְהִכְעַסְתִּי--לֵב, עַמִּים רַבִּים:  בַּהֲבִיאִי שִׁבְרְךָ בַּגּוֹיִם, עַל-אֲרָצוֹת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְדַעְתָּם.    9 I will also vex the hearts of many peoples, when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not known.
32.10 י  וַהֲשִׁמּוֹתִי עָלֶיךָ עַמִּים רַבִּים, וּמַלְכֵיהֶם יִשְׂעֲרוּ עָלֶיךָ שַׂעַר, בְּעוֹפְפִי חַרְבִּי, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם; וְחָרְדוּ לִרְגָעִים אִישׁ לְנַפְשׁוֹ, בְּיוֹם מַפַּלְתֶּךָ.  {פ}    10 Yea, I will make many peoples appalled at thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish My sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall. {P}
32.11 יא  כִּי כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  חֶרֶב מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, תְּבוֹאֶךָ.    11 For thus saith the Lord GOD: The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.
32.12 יב  בְּחַרְבוֹת גִּבּוֹרִים אַפִּיל הֲמוֹנֶךָ, עָרִיצֵי גוֹיִם כֻּלָּם; וְשָׁדְדוּ אֶת-גְּאוֹן מִצְרַיִם, וְנִשְׁמַד כָּל-הֲמוֹנָהּ.    12 By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall; the terrible of the nations are they all; and they shall spoil the pride of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.
32.13 יג  וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי, אֶת-כָּל-בְּהֶמְתָּהּ, מֵעַל, מַיִם רַבִּים; וְלֹא תִדְלָחֵם רֶגֶל-אָדָם עוֹד, וּפַרְסוֹת בְּהֵמָה לֹא תִדְלָחֵם.    13 I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside many waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
32.14 יד  אָז אַשְׁקִיעַ מֵימֵיהֶם, וְנַהֲרוֹתָם כַּשֶּׁמֶן אוֹלִיךְ--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    14 Then will I make their waters to settle, and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord GOD.
32.15 טו  בְּתִתִּי אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם שְׁמָמָה וּנְשַׁמָּה, אֶרֶץ מִמְּלֹאָהּ--בְּהַכּוֹתִי, אֶת-כָּל-יוֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    15 When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate and waste, a land destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the LORD.
32.16 טז  קִינָה הִיא וְקוֹנְנוּהָ, בְּנוֹת הַגּוֹיִם תְּקוֹנֵנָּה אוֹתָהּ:  עַל-מִצְרַיִם וְעַל-כָּל-הֲמוֹנָהּ תְּקוֹנֵנָּה אוֹתָהּ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    16 This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament; the daughters of the nations shall lament therewith; for Egypt, and for all her multitude, shall they lament therewith, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
32.17 יז  וַיְהִי בִּשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ, הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    17 It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
32.18 יח  בֶּן-אָדָם--נְהֵה עַל-הֲמוֹן מִצְרַיִם, וְהוֹרִדֵהוּ; אוֹתָהּ וּבְנוֹת גּוֹיִם אַדִּרִם, אֶל-אֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּיּוֹת--אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר.    18 'Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, with the daughters of the mighty nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit.
32.19 יט  מִמִּי, נָעָמְתָּ; רְדָה וְהָשְׁכְּבָה, אֶת-עֲרֵלִים.    19 Whom dost thou pass in beauty? Go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.
32.20 כ  בְּתוֹךְ חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב, יִפֹּלוּ; חֶרֶב נִתָּנָה, מָשְׁכוּ אוֹתָהּ וְכָל-הֲמוֹנֶיהָ.    20 They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword; she is delivered to the sword; draw her down and all her multitudes.
32.21 כא  יְדַבְּרוּ-לוֹ אֵלֵי גִבּוֹרִים, מִתּוֹךְ שְׁאוֹל--אֶת-עֹזְרָיו; יָרְדוּ שָׁכְבוּ הָעֲרֵלִים, חַלְלֵי-חָרֶב.    21 The strong among the mighty shall speak of him out of the midst of the nether-world with them that helped him; they are gone down, they lie still, even the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
32.22 כב  שָׁם אַשּׁוּר וְכָל-קְהָלָהּ, סְבִיבוֹתָיו קִבְרֹתָיו; כֻּלָּם חֲלָלִים, הַנֹּפְלִים בֶּחָרֶב.    22 Asshur is there and all her company; their graves are round about them; all of them slain, fallen by the sword;
32.23 כג  אֲשֶׁר נִתְּנוּ קִבְרֹתֶיהָ, בְּיַרְכְּתֵי-בוֹר, וַיְהִי קְהָלָהּ, סְבִיבוֹת קְבֻרָתָהּ; כֻּלָּם חֲלָלִים נֹפְלִים בַּחֶרֶב, אֲשֶׁר-נָתְנוּ חִתִּית בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים.    23 whose graves are set in the uttermost parts of the pit, and her company is round about her grave; all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who caused terror in the land of the living.
32.24 כד  שָׁם עֵילָם וְכָל-הֲמוֹנָהּ, סְבִיבוֹת קְבֻרָתָהּ; כֻּלָּם חֲלָלִים הַנֹּפְלִים בַּחֶרֶב אֲשֶׁר-יָרְדוּ עֲרֵלִים אֶל-אֶרֶץ תַּחְתִּיּוֹת, אֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ חִתִּיתָם בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים, וַיִּשְׂאוּ כְלִמָּתָם, אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר.    24 There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave; all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, who caused their terror in the land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit.
32.25 כה  בְּתוֹךְ חֲלָלִים נָתְנוּ מִשְׁכָּב לָהּ, בְּכָל-הֲמוֹנָהּ--סְבִיבוֹתָיו, קִבְרֹתֶהָ; כֻּלָּם עֲרֵלִים חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב כִּי-נִתַּן חִתִּיתָם בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים, וַיִּשְׂאוּ כְלִמָּתָם אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר, בְּתוֹךְ חֲלָלִים, נִתָּן.    25 They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her multitude; her graves are round about them; all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword; because their terror was caused in the land of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit; they are put in the midst of them that are slain.
32.26 כו  שָׁם מֶשֶׁךְ תֻּבַל וְכָל-הֲמוֹנָהּ, סְבִיבוֹתָיו קִבְרוֹתֶיהָ; כֻּלָּם עֲרֵלִים מְחֻלְלֵי חֶרֶב, כִּי-נָתְנוּ חִתִּיתָם בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים.    26 There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude; her graves are round about them; all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword; because they caused their terror in the land of the living.
32.27 כז  וְלֹא יִשְׁכְּבוּ אֶת-גִּבּוֹרִים, נֹפְלִים מֵעֲרֵלִים:  אֲשֶׁר יָרְדוּ-שְׁאוֹל בִּכְלֵי-מִלְחַמְתָּם וַיִּתְּנוּ אֶת-חַרְבוֹתָם תַּחַת רָאשֵׁיהֶם, וַתְּהִי עֲוֺנֹתָם עַל-עַצְמוֹתָם--כִּי-חִתִּית גִּבּוֹרִים, בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים.    27 And they that are inferior to the uncircumcised shall not lie with the mighty that are gone down to the nether-world with their weapons of war, whose swords are laid under their heads, and whose iniquities are upon their bones; because the terror of the mighty was in the land of the living.
32.28 כח  וְאַתָּה, בְּתוֹךְ עֲרֵלִים תִּשָּׁבַר וְתִשְׁכַּב--אֶת-חַלְלֵי-חָרֶב.    28 But thou, in the midst of the uncircumcised shalt thou be broken and lie, even with them that are slain by the sword.
32.29 כט  שָׁמָּה אֱדוֹם, מְלָכֶיהָ וְכָל-נְשִׂיאֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר-נִתְּנוּ בִגְבוּרָתָם, אֶת-חַלְלֵי-חָרֶב:  הֵמָּה אֶת-עֲרֵלִים יִשְׁכָּבוּ, וְאֶת-יֹרְדֵי בוֹר.    29 There is Edom, her kings and all her princes, who for all their might are laid with them that are slain by the sword; they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.
32.30 ל  שָׁמָּה נְסִיכֵי צָפוֹן כֻּלָּם, וְכָל-צִדֹנִי:  אֲשֶׁר-יָרְדוּ אֶת-חֲלָלִים, בְּחִתִּיתָם מִגְבוּרָתָם בּוֹשִׁים, וַיִּשְׁכְּבוּ עֲרֵלִים אֶת-חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב, וַיִּשְׂאוּ כְלִמָּתָם אֶת-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר.    30 There are the princes of the north, all of them, and all the Zidonians, who are gone down with the slain, ashamed for all the terror which they caused by their might, and they lie uncircumcised with them that are slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit.
32.31 לא  אוֹתָם יִרְאֶה פַרְעֹה, וְנִחַם עַל-כָּל-הֲמוֹנֹה--חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב פַּרְעֹה וְכָל-חֵילוֹ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    31 These shall Pharaoh see, and shall be comforted over all his multitude; even Pharaoh and all his army, slain by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.
32.32 לב  כִּי-נָתַתִּי אֶת-חתיתו (חִתִּיתִי), בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים; וְהֻשְׁכַּב בְּתוֹךְ עֲרֵלִים אֶת-חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב, פַּרְעֹה וְכָל-הֲמוֹנֹה--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    32 For I have put My terror in the land of the living; and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised, with them that are slain by the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
33.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
33.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי-עַמְּךָ וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, אֶרֶץ, כִּי-אָבִיא עָלֶיהָ חָרֶב; וְלָקְחוּ עַם-הָאָרֶץ אִישׁ אֶחָד, מִקְצֵיהֶם, וְנָתְנוּ אֹתוֹ לָהֶם, לְצֹפֶה.    2 'Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them: When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man from among them, and set him for their watchman;
33.3 ג  וְרָאָה אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, בָּאָה עַל-הָאָרֶץ; וְתָקַע בַּשּׁוֹפָר, וְהִזְהִיר אֶת-הָעָם.    3 if, when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the horn, and warn the people;
33.4 ד  וְשָׁמַע הַשֹּׁמֵעַ אֶת-קוֹל הַשּׁוֹפָר, וְלֹא נִזְהָר, וַתָּבוֹא חֶרֶב, וַתִּקָּחֵהוּ--דָּמוֹ, בְּרֹאשׁוֹ יִהְיֶה.    4 then whosoever heareth the sound of the horn, and taketh not warning, if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head;
33.5 ה  אֵת קוֹל הַשּׁוֹפָר שָׁמַע וְלֹא נִזְהָר, דָּמוֹ בּוֹ יִהְיֶה:  וְהוּא נִזְהָר, נַפְשׁוֹ מִלֵּט.    5 he heard the sound of the horn, and took not warning, his blood shall be upon him; whereas if he had taken warning, he would have delivered his soul.
33.6 ו  וְהַצֹּפֶה כִּי-יִרְאֶה אֶת-הַחֶרֶב בָּאָה, וְלֹא-תָקַע בַּשּׁוֹפָר וְהָעָם לֹא-נִזְהָר, וַתָּבוֹא חֶרֶב, וַתִּקַּח מֵהֶם נָפֶשׁ--הוּא בַּעֲוֺנוֹ נִלְקָח, וְדָמוֹ מִיַּד-הַצֹּפֶה אֶדְרֹשׁ.  {פ}    6 But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the horn, and the people be not warned, and the sword do come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand. {P}
33.7 ז  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, צֹפֶה נְתַתִּיךָ לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְשָׁמַעְתָּ מִפִּי דָּבָר, וְהִזְהַרְתָּ אֹתָם מִמֶּנִּי.    7 So thou, son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore, when thou shalt hear the word at My mouth, warn them from Me.
33.8 ח  בְּאָמְרִי לָרָשָׁע, רָשָׁע מוֹת תָּמוּת, וְלֹא דִבַּרְתָּ, לְהַזְהִיר רָשָׁע מִדַּרְכּוֹ--הוּא רָשָׁע בַעֲוֺנוֹ יָמוּת, וְדָמוֹ מִיָּדְךָ אֲבַקֵּשׁ.    8 When I say unto the wicked: O wicked man, thou shalt surely die, and thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way; that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand.
33.9 ט  וְאַתָּה כִּי-הִזְהַרְתָּ רָשָׁע מִדַּרְכּוֹ, לָשׁוּב מִמֶּנָּה, וְלֹא-שָׁב, מִדַּרְכּוֹ--הוּא בַּעֲוֺנוֹ יָמוּת, וְאַתָּה נַפְשְׁךָ הִצַּלְתָּ.  {פ}    9 Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, and he turn not from his way; he shall die in his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul. {P}
33.10 י  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, אֱמֹר אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֵּן אֲמַרְתֶּם לֵאמֹר, כִּי-פְשָׁעֵינוּ וְחַטֹּאתֵינוּ עָלֵינוּ; וּבָם אֲנַחְנוּ נְמַקִּים, וְאֵיךְ נִחְיֶה.    10 Therefore, O thou son of man, say unto the house of Israel: Thus ye speak, saying: Our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and we pine away in them; how then can we live?
33.11 יא  אֱמֹר אֲלֵיהֶם חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-אֶחְפֹּץ בְּמוֹת הָרָשָׁע, כִּי אִם-בְּשׁוּב רָשָׁע מִדַּרְכּוֹ, וְחָיָה:  שׁוּבוּ שׁוּבוּ מִדַּרְכֵיכֶם הָרָעִים, וְלָמָּה תָמוּתוּ--בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    11 Say unto them: As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? {P}
33.12 יב  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, אֱמֹר אֶל-בְּנֵי-עַמְּךָ צִדְקַת הַצַּדִּיק לֹא תַצִּילֶנּוּ בְּיוֹם פִּשְׁעוֹ, וְרִשְׁעַת הָרָשָׁע לֹא-יִכָּשֶׁל בָּהּ, בְּיוֹם שׁוּבוֹ מֵרִשְׁעוֹ; וְצַדִּיק, לֹא יוּכַל לִחְיוֹת בָּהּ--בְּיוֹם חֲטֹאתוֹ.    12 And thou, son of man, say unto the children of thy people: The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression; and as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not stumble thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall he that is righteous be able to live thereby in the day that he sinneth.
33.13 יג  בְּאָמְרִי לַצַּדִּיק חָיֹה יִחְיֶה, וְהוּא-בָטַח עַל-צִדְקָתוֹ וְעָשָׂה עָוֶל--כָּל-צִדְקֹתָו לֹא תִזָּכַרְנָה, וּבְעַוְלוֹ אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה בּוֹ יָמוּת.    13 When I say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if he trust to his righteousness, and commit iniquity, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath committed, for it shall he die.
33.14 יד  וּבְאָמְרִי לָרָשָׁע, מוֹת תָּמוּת; וְשָׁב, מֵחַטָּאתוֹ, וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט, וּצְדָקָה.    14 Again, when I say unto the wicked: Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;
33.15 טו  חֲבֹל יָשִׁיב רָשָׁע, גְּזֵלָה יְשַׁלֵּם, בְּחֻקּוֹת הַחַיִּים הָלַךְ, לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת עָוֶל--חָיוֹ יִחְיֶה, לֹא יָמוּת.    15 if the wicked restore the pledge, give back that which he had taken by robbery, walk in the statutes of life, committing no iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.
33.16 טז  כָּל-חַטֹּאתָו אֲשֶׁר חָטָא, לֹא תִזָּכַרְנָה לוֹ:  מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה עָשָׂה, חָיוֹ יִחְיֶה.    16 None of his sins that he hath committed shall be remembered against him; he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.
33.17 יז  וְאָמְרוּ בְּנֵי עַמְּךָ, לֹא יִתָּכֵן דֶּרֶךְ אֲדֹנָי; וְהֵמָּה, דַּרְכָּם לֹא-יִתָּכֵן.    17 Yet the children of thy people say: The way of the Lord is not equal; but as for them, their way is not equal.
33.18 יח  בְּשׁוּב-צַדִּיק מִצִּדְקָתוֹ, וְעָשָׂה עָוֶל--וּמֵת, בָּהֶם.    18 When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.
33.19 יט  וּבְשׁוּב רָשָׁע מֵרִשְׁעָתוֹ, וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה--עֲלֵיהֶם, הוּא יִחְיֶה.    19 And when the wicked turneth from his wickedness, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.
33.20 כ  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, לֹא יִתָּכֵן דֶּרֶךְ אֲדֹנָי; אִישׁ כִּדְרָכָיו אֶשְׁפּוֹט אֶתְכֶם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    20 Yet ye say: The way of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.' {P}
33.21 כא  וַיְהִי בִּשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, בָּעֲשִׂרִי בַּחֲמִשָּׁה לַחֹדֶשׁ--לְגָלוּתֵנוּ; בָּא-אֵלַי הַפָּלִיט מִירוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר, הֻכְּתָה הָעִיר.    21 And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying: 'The city is smitten.'
33.22 כב  וְיַד-יְהוָה הָיְתָה אֵלַי בָּעֶרֶב, לִפְנֵי בּוֹא הַפָּלִיט, וַיִּפְתַּח אֶת-פִּי, עַד-בּוֹא אֵלַי בַּבֹּקֶר; וַיִּפָּתַח פִּי, וְלֹא נֶאֱלַמְתִּי עוֹד.  {פ}    22 Now the hand of the LORD had been upon me in the evening, before he that was escaped came; and He had opened my mouth against his coming to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb. {P}
33.23 כג  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    23 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
33.24 כד  בֶּן-אָדָם, יֹשְׁבֵי הֶחֳרָבוֹת הָאֵלֶּה עַל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל אֹמְרִים לֵאמֹר, אֶחָד הָיָה אַבְרָהָם, וַיִּירַשׁ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וַאֲנַחְנוּ רַבִּים, לָנוּ נִתְּנָה הָאָרֶץ לְמוֹרָשָׁה.  {ס}    24 'Son of man, they that inhabit those waste places in the land of Israel speak, saying: Abraham was one, and he inherited the land; but we are many; the land is given us for inheritance. {S}
33.25 כה  לָכֵן אֱמֹר אֲלֵהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, עַל-הַדָּם תֹּאכֵלוּ וְעֵינֵכֶם תִּשְׂאוּ אֶל-גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם--וְדָם תִּשְׁפֹּכוּ; וְהָאָרֶץ, תִּירָשׁוּ.    25 Wherefore say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD. Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes unto your idols, and shed blood; and shall ye possess the land?
33.26 כו  עֲמַדְתֶּם עַל-חַרְבְּכֶם עֲשִׂיתֶן תּוֹעֵבָה, וְאִישׁ אֶת-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ טִמֵּאתֶם; וְהָאָרֶץ, תִּירָשׁוּ.  {ס}    26 Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife; and shall ye possess the land? {S}
33.27 כז  כֹּה-תֹאמַר אֲלֵהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, חַי-אָנִי, אִם-לֹא אֲשֶׁר בֶּחֳרָבוֹת בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ, וַאֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה לַחַיָּה נְתַתִּיו לְאָכְלוֹ; וַאֲשֶׁר בַּמְּצָדוֹת וּבַמְּעָרוֹת, בַּדֶּבֶר יָמוּתוּ.    27 Thus shalt thou say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: As I live, surely they that are in the waste places shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that are in the strongholds and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.
33.28 כח  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ שְׁמָמָה וּמְשַׁמָּה, וְנִשְׁבַּת גְּאוֹן עֻזָּהּ; וְשָׁמְמוּ הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֵין עוֹבֵר.    28 And I will make the land most desolate, and the pride of her power shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through.
33.29 כט  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּתִתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ שְׁמָמָה וּמְשַׁמָּה, עַל כָּל-תּוֹעֲבֹתָם אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ.  {פ}    29 Then shall they know that I am the LORD, when I have made the land most desolate, because of all their abominations which they have committed. {P}
33.30 ל  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם--בְּנֵי עַמְּךָ הַנִּדְבָּרִים בְּךָ אֵצֶל הַקִּירוֹת, וּבְפִתְחֵי הַבָּתִּים; וְדִבֶּר-חַד אֶת-אַחַד, אִישׁ אֶת-אָחִיו לֵאמֹר, בֹּאוּ-נָא וְשִׁמְעוּ, מָה הַדָּבָר הַיּוֹצֵא מֵאֵת יְהוָה.    30 And as for thee, son of man, the children of thy people that talk of thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying: Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the LORD;
33.31 לא  וְיָבוֹאוּ אֵלֶיךָ כִּמְבוֹא-עָם וְיֵשְׁבוּ לְפָנֶיךָ, עַמִּי, וְשָׁמְעוּ אֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ, וְאוֹתָם לֹא יַעֲשׂוּ:  כִּי-עֲגָבִים בְּפִיהֶם הֵמָּה עֹשִׂים, אַחֲרֵי בִצְעָם לִבָּם הֹלֵךְ.    31 and come unto thee as the people cometh, and sit before thee as My people, and hear thy words, but do them not--for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness;
33.32 לב  וְהִנְּךָ לָהֶם כְּשִׁיר עֲגָבִים, יְפֵה קוֹל וּמֵטִב נַגֵּן; וְשָׁמְעוּ, אֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ, וְעֹשִׂים אֵינָם, אוֹתָם.    32 and, lo, thou art unto them as a love song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument; so they hear thy words, but they do them not--
33.33 לג  וּבְבֹאָהּ:  הִנֵּה בָאָה--וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי נָבִיא הָיָה בְתוֹכָם.  {פ}    33 when this cometh to pass--behold, it cometh--then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.' {P}
34.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
34.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, הִנָּבֵא עַל-רוֹעֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; הִנָּבֵא וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם לָרֹעִים כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הוֹי רֹעֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ רֹעִים אוֹתָם--הֲלוֹא הַצֹּאן, יִרְעוּ הָרֹעִים.    2 'Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, even to the shepherds: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Woe unto the shepherds of Israel that have fed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the sheep?
34.3 ג  אֶת-הַחֵלֶב תֹּאכֵלוּ וְאֶת-הַצֶּמֶר תִּלְבָּשׁוּ, הַבְּרִיאָה תִּזְבָּחוּ; הַצֹּאן, לֹא תִרְעוּ.    3 Ye did eat the fat, and ye clothed you with the wool, ye killed the fatlings; but ye fed not the sheep.
34.4 ד  אֶת-הַנַּחְלוֹת לֹא חִזַּקְתֶּם וְאֶת-הַחוֹלָה לֹא-רִפֵּאתֶם, וְלַנִּשְׁבֶּרֶת לֹא חֲבַשְׁתֶּם, וְאֶת-הַנִּדַּחַת לֹא הֲשֵׁבֹתֶם, וְאֶת-הָאֹבֶדֶת לֹא בִקַּשְׁתֶּם; וּבְחָזְקָה רְדִיתֶם אֹתָם, וּבְפָרֶךְ.    4 The weak have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought back that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force have ye ruled over them and with rigour.
34.5 ה  וַתְּפוּצֶינָה, מִבְּלִי רֹעֶה; וַתִּהְיֶינָה לְאָכְלָה לְכָל-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, וַתְּפוּצֶינָה.    5 So were they scattered, because there was no shepherd; and they became food to all the beasts of the field, and were scattered.
34.6 ו  יִשְׁגּוּ צֹאנִי בְּכָל-הֶהָרִים, וְעַל כָּל-גִּבְעָה רָמָה; וְעַל כָּל-פְּנֵי הָאָרֶץ נָפֹצוּ צֹאנִי, וְאֵין דּוֹרֵשׁ וְאֵין מְבַקֵּשׁ.    6 My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill, yea, upon all the face of the earth were My sheep scattered, and there was none that did search or seek.
34.7 ז  לָכֵן רֹעִים, שִׁמְעוּ אֶת-דְּבַר יְהוָה.    7 Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD:
34.8 ח  חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-לֹא יַעַן הֱיוֹת-צֹאנִי לָבַז וַתִּהְיֶינָה צֹאנִי לְאָכְלָה לְכָל-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה מֵאֵין רֹעֶה, וְלֹא-דָרְשׁוּ רֹעַי, אֶת-צֹאנִי; וַיִּרְעוּ הָרֹעִים אוֹתָם, וְאֶת-צֹאנִי לֹא רָעוּ.    8 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely forasmuch as My sheep became a prey, and My sheep became food to all the beasts of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did My shepherds search for My sheep, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not My sheep;
34.9 ט  לָכֵן, הָרֹעִים--שִׁמְעוּ, דְּבַר-יְהוָה.    9 therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD:
34.10 י  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי אֶל-הָרֹעִים וְדָרַשְׁתִּי אֶת-צֹאנִי מִיָּדָם וְהִשְׁבַּתִּים מֵרְעוֹת צֹאן, וְלֹא-יִרְעוּ עוֹד הָרֹעִים, אוֹתָם; וְהִצַּלְתִּי צֹאנִי מִפִּיהֶם, וְלֹא-תִהְיֶיןָ לָהֶם לְאָכְלָה.  {ס}    10 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require My sheep at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the sheep; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; and I will deliver My sheep from their mouth, that they may not be food for them. {S}
34.11 יא  כִּי כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הִנְנִי-אָנִי, וְדָרַשְׁתִּי אֶת-צֹאנִי וּבִקַּרְתִּים.    11 For thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, here am I, and I will search for My sheep, and seek them out.
34.12 יב  כְּבַקָּרַת רֹעֶה עֶדְרוֹ בְּיוֹם-הֱיוֹתוֹ בְתוֹךְ-צֹאנוֹ, נִפְרָשׁוֹת--כֵּן, אֲבַקֵּר אֶת-צֹאנִי; וְהִצַּלְתִּי אֶתְהֶם, מִכָּל-הַמְּקוֹמֹת אֲשֶׁר נָפֹצוּ שָׁם, בְּיוֹם עָנָן, וַעֲרָפֶל.    12 As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are separated, so will I seek out My sheep; and I will deliver them out of all places whither they have been scattered in the day of clouds and thick darkness.
34.13 יג  וְהוֹצֵאתִים מִן-הָעַמִּים, וְקִבַּצְתִּים מִן-הָאֲרָצוֹת, וַהֲבִיאוֹתִים, אֶל-אַדְמָתָם; וּרְעִיתִים, אֶל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּאֲפִיקִים, וּבְכֹל מוֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ.    13 And I will bring them out from the peoples, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their own land; and I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by the streams, and in all the habitable places of the country.
34.14 יד  בְּמִרְעֶה-טּוֹב אֶרְעֶה אֹתָם, וּבְהָרֵי מְרוֹם-יִשְׂרָאֵל יִהְיֶה נְוֵהֶם; שָׁם תִּרְבַּצְנָה בְּנָוֶה טּוֹב, וּמִרְעֶה שָׁמֵן תִּרְעֶינָה אֶל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    14 I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be; there shall they lie down in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.
34.15 טו  אֲנִי אֶרְעֶה צֹאנִי וַאֲנִי אַרְבִּיצֵם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    15 I will feed My sheep, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord GOD.
34.16 טז  אֶת-הָאֹבֶדֶת אֲבַקֵּשׁ, וְאֶת-הַנִּדַּחַת אָשִׁיב, וְלַנִּשְׁבֶּרֶת אֶחֱבֹשׁ, וְאֶת-הַחוֹלָה אֲחַזֵּק; וְאֶת-הַשְּׁמֵנָה וְאֶת-הַחֲזָקָה אַשְׁמִיד, אֶרְעֶנָּה בְמִשְׁפָּט.    16 I will seek that which was lost, and will bring back that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick; and the fat and the strong I will destroy, I will feed them in justice.
34.17 יז  וְאַתֵּנָה צֹאנִי, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הִנְנִי שֹׁפֵט בֵּין-שֶׂה לָשֶׂה, לָאֵילִים וְלָעַתּוּדִים.    17 And as for you, O My flock, thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, even the rams and the he-goats.
34.18 יח  הַמְעַט מִכֶּם, הַמִּרְעֶה הַטּוֹב תִּרְעוּ, וְיֶתֶר מִרְעֵיכֶם, תִּרְמְסוּ בְּרַגְלֵיכֶם; וּמִשְׁקַע-מַיִם תִּשְׁתּוּ--וְאֵת הַנּוֹתָרִים, בְּרַגְלֵיכֶם תִּרְפֹּשׂוּן.    18 Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have fed upon the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pasture? and to have drunk of the settled waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?
34.19 יט  וְצֹאנִי--מִרְמַס רַגְלֵיכֶם תִּרְעֶינָה, וּמִרְפַּשׂ רַגְלֵיכֶם תִּשְׁתֶּינָה.  {פ}    19 And as for My sheep, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. {P}
34.20 כ  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--אֲלֵיהֶם:  הִנְנִי-אָנִי--וְשָׁפַטְתִּי בֵּין-שֶׂה בִרְיָה, וּבֵין שֶׂה רָזָה.    20 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD unto them: Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat cattle and the lean cattle.
34.21 כא  יַעַן, בְּצַד וּבְכָתֵף תֶּהְדֹּפוּ, וּבְקַרְנֵיכֶם תְּנַגְּחוּ, כָּל-הַנַּחְלוֹת--עַד אֲשֶׁר הֲפִיצוֹתֶם אוֹתָנָה, אֶל-הַחוּצָה.    21 Because ye thrust with side and with shoulder, and push all the weak with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;
34.22 כב  וְהוֹשַׁעְתִּי לְצֹאנִי, וְלֹא-תִהְיֶינָה עוֹד לָבַז; וְשָׁפַטְתִּי, בֵּין שֶׂה לָשֶׂה.    22 therefore will I save My flock, and they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle.
34.23 כג  וַהֲקִמֹתִי עֲלֵיהֶם רֹעֶה אֶחָד, וְרָעָה אֶתְהֶן--אֵת, עַבְדִּי דָוִיד; הוּא יִרְעֶה אֹתָם, וְהוּא-יִהְיֶה לָהֶן לְרֹעֶה.    23 And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even My servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd.
34.24 כד  וַאֲנִי יְהוָה, אֶהְיֶה לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים, וְעַבְדִּי דָוִד, נָשִׂיא בְתוֹכָם:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי.    24 And I the LORD will be their God, and My servant David prince among them; I the LORD have spoken.
34.25 כה  וְכָרַתִּי לָהֶם בְּרִית שָׁלוֹם, וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי חַיָּה-רָעָה מִן-הָאָרֶץ; וְיָשְׁבוּ בַמִּדְבָּר לָבֶטַח, וְיָשְׁנוּ בַּיְּעָרִים.    25 And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.
34.26 כו  וְנָתַתִּי אוֹתָם וּסְבִיבוֹת גִּבְעָתִי, בְּרָכָה; וְהוֹרַדְתִּי הַגֶּשֶׁם בְּעִתּוֹ, גִּשְׁמֵי בְרָכָה יִהְיוּ.    26 And I will make them and the places round about My hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in its season; there shall be showers of blessing.
34.27 כז  וְנָתַן עֵץ הַשָּׂדֶה אֶת-פִּרְיוֹ, וְהָאָרֶץ תִּתֵּן יְבוּלָהּ, וְהָיוּ עַל-אַדְמָתָם, לָבֶטַח; וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּשִׁבְרִי אֶת-מֹטוֹת עֻלָּם, וְהִצַּלְתִּים, מִיַּד הָעֹבְדִים בָּהֶם.    27 And the tree of the field shall yield its fruit, and the earth shall yield her produce, and they shall be safe in their land; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I have broken the bars of their yoke, and have delivered them out of the hand of those that made bondmen of them.
34.28 כח  וְלֹא-יִהְיוּ עוֹד בַּז לַגּוֹיִם, וְחַיַּת הָאָרֶץ לֹא תֹאכְלֵם; וְיָשְׁבוּ לָבֶטַח, וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד.    28 And they shall no more be a prey to the nations, neither shall the beast of the earth devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.
34.29 כט  וַהֲקִמֹתִי לָהֶם מַטָּע, לְשֵׁם; וְלֹא-יִהְיוּ עוֹד אֲסֻפֵי רָעָב, בָּאָרֶץ, וְלֹא-יִשְׂאוּ עוֹד, כְּלִמַּת הַגּוֹיִם.    29 And I will raise up unto them a plantation for renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the nations any more.
34.30 ל  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם--אִתָּם; וְהֵמָּה, עַמִּי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    30 And they shall know that I the LORD their God am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are My people, saith the Lord GOD.
34.31 לא  וְאַתֵּן צֹאנִי צֹאן מַרְעִיתִי, אָדָם אַתֶּם:  אֲנִי, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    31 And ye My sheep, the sheep of My pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
35.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
35.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ עַל-הַר שֵׂעִיר; וְהִנָּבֵא, עָלָיו.    2 'Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it,
35.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ לּוֹ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי אֵלֶיךָ, הַר-שֵׂעִיר; וְנָטִיתִי יָדִי עָלֶיךָ, וּנְתַתִּיךָ שְׁמָמָה וּמְשַׁמָּה.    3 and say unto it: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against thee, O mount Seir, and I will stretch out My hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate.
35.4 ד  עָרֶיךָ חָרְבָּה אָשִׂים, וְאַתָּה שְׁמָמָה תִהְיֶה; וְיָדַעְתָּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    4 I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.
35.5 ה  יַעַן, הֱיוֹת לְךָ אֵיבַת עוֹלָם, וַתַּגֵּר אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-יְדֵי-חָרֶב--בְּעֵת אֵידָם, בְּעֵת עֲוֺן קֵץ.    5 Because thou hast had a hatred of old, and hast hurled the children of Israel unto the power of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time of the iniquity of the end;
35.6 ו  לָכֵן חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, כִּי-לְדָם אֶעֶשְׂךָ, וְדָם יִרְדְּפֶךָ; אִם-לֹא דָם שָׂנֵאתָ, וְדָם יִרְדְּפֶךָ.    6 therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee; surely thou hast hated thine own blood, therefore blood shall pursue thee.
35.7 ז  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-הַר שֵׂעִיר, לְשִׁמְמָה וּשְׁמָמָה; וְהִכְרַתִּי מִמֶּנּוּ, עֹבֵר וָשָׁב.    7 Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him that passeth through and him that returneth.
35.8 ח  וּמִלֵּאתִי אֶת-הָרָיו, חֲלָלָיו; גִּבְעוֹתֶיךָ וְגֵיאוֹתֶיךָ וְכָל-אֲפִיקֶיךָ, חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב יִפְּלוּ בָהֶם.    8 And I will fill his mountains with his slain; in thy hills and in thy valleys and in all thy streams shall they fall that are slain with the sword.
35.9 ט  שִׁמְמוֹת עוֹלָם אֶתֶּנְךָ, וְעָרֶיךָ לֹא תישבנה (תָשׁוֹבְנָה); וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    9 I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not return; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
35.10 י  יַעַן אֲמָרְךָ אֶת-שְׁנֵי הַגּוֹיִם וְאֶת-שְׁתֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת, לִי תִהְיֶינָה--וִירַשְׁנוּהָ; וַיהוָה, שָׁם הָיָה.  {ס}    10 Because thou hast said: These two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the LORD was there; {S}
35.11 יא  לָכֵן חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְעָשִׂיתִי כְּאַפְּךָ וּכְקִנְאָתְךָ, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָה מִשִּׂנְאָתֶיךָ בָּם; וְנוֹדַעְתִּי בָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר אֶשְׁפְּטֶךָ.    11 therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will do according to thine anger and according to thine envy, which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make Myself known among them, when I shall judge thee.
35.12 יב  וְיָדַעְתָּ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, שָׁמַעְתִּי אֶת-כָּל-נָאָצוֹתֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתָּ עַל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר שממה (שָׁמֵמוּ):  לָנוּ נִתְּנוּ, לְאָכְלָה.    12 And thou shalt know that I the LORD have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying: They are laid desolate, they are given us to devour.
35.13 יג  וַתַּגְדִּילוּ עָלַי בְּפִיכֶם, וְהַעְתַּרְתֶּם עָלַי דִּבְרֵיכֶם:  אֲנִי, שָׁמָעְתִּי.  {ס}    13 And ye have magnified yourselves against Me with your mouth, and have multiplied your words against Me; I have heard it. {S}
35.14 יד  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  כִּשְׂמֹחַ, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, שְׁמָמָה, אֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ.    14 Thus saith the Lord GOD: When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate.
35.15 טו  כְּשִׂמְחָתְךָ לְנַחֲלַת בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁמֵמָה--כֵּן אֶעֱשֶׂה-לָּךְ:  שְׁמָמָה תִהְיֶה הַר-שֵׂעִיר וְכָל-אֱדוֹם כֻּלָּהּ, וְיָדְעוּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    15 As thou didst rejoice over the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee; thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Edom, even all of it; and they shall know that I am the LORD. {P}
36.1 א  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הִנָּבֵא אֶל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאָמַרְתָּ--הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-יְהוָה.    1 And thou, son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say: Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD.
36.2 ב  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן אָמַר הָאוֹיֵב עֲלֵיכֶם הֶאָח; וּבָמוֹת עוֹלָם, לְמוֹרָשָׁה הָיְתָה לָּנוּ.    2 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because the enemy hath said against you: Aha! even the ancient high places are ours in possession;
36.3 ג  לָכֵן הִנָּבֵא וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  יַעַן בְּיַעַן שַׁמּוֹת וְשָׁאֹף אֶתְכֶם מִסָּבִיב, לִהְיוֹתְכֶם מוֹרָשָׁה לִשְׁאֵרִית הַגּוֹיִם, וַתֵּעֲלוּ עַל-שְׂפַת לָשׁוֹן, וְדִבַּת-עָם.    3 therefore prophesy, and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because, even because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession unto the rest of the nations, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and the evil report of the people;
36.4 ד  לָכֵן הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה לֶהָרִים וְלַגְּבָעוֹת לָאֲפִיקִים וְלַגֵּאָיוֹת, וְלֶחֳרָבוֹת הַשֹּׁמְמוֹת וְלֶעָרִים הַנֶּעֱזָבוֹת, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ לְבַז וּלְלַעַג, לִשְׁאֵרִית הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר מִסָּבִיב.    4 therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD: Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes and to the cities that are forsaken, which are become a prey and derision to the residue of the nations that are round about;
36.5 ה  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אִם-לֹא בְּאֵשׁ קִנְאָתִי דִבַּרְתִּי עַל-שְׁאֵרִית הַגּוֹיִם, וְעַל-אֱדוֹם כֻּלָּא:  אֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ-אֶת-אַרְצִי לָהֶם לְמוֹרָשָׁה בְּשִׂמְחַת כָּל-לֵבָב, בִּשְׁאָט נֶפֶשׁ--לְמַעַן מִגְרָשָׁהּ, לָבַז.    5 therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Surely in the fire of My jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the nations, and against all Edom, that have appointed My land unto themselves for a possession with the joy of all their heart, with disdain of soul, to cast it out for a prey;
36.6 ו  לָכֵן, הִנָּבֵא עַל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאָמַרְתָּ לֶהָרִים וְלַגְּבָעוֹת לָאֲפִיקִים וְלַגֵּאָיוֹת כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי בְקִנְאָתִי וּבַחֲמָתִי דִּבַּרְתִּי, יַעַן כְּלִמַּת גּוֹיִם, נְשָׂאתֶם.    6 therefore prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I have spoken in My jealousy and in My fury, because ye have borne the shame of the nations;
36.7 ז  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אֲנִי, נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי:  אִם-לֹא הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר לָכֶם מִסָּבִיב, הֵמָּה כְּלִמָּתָם יִשָּׂאוּ.    7 therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: I have lifted up My hand: Surely the nations that are round about you, they shall bear their shame.
36.8 ח  וְאַתֶּם הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַנְפְּכֶם תִּתֵּנוּ, וּפֶרְיְכֶם תִּשְׂאוּ, לְעַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי קֵרְבוּ, לָבוֹא.    8 But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to My people Israel; for they are at hand to come.
36.9 ט  כִּי, הִנְנִי אֲלֵיכֶם; וּפָנִיתִי אֲלֵיכֶם, וְנֶעֱבַדְתֶּם וְנִזְרַעְתֶּם.    9 For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown;
36.10 י  וְהִרְבֵּיתִי עֲלֵיכֶם אָדָם, כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל כֻּלֹּה; וְנֹשְׁבוּ, הֶעָרִים, וְהֶחֳרָבוֹת, תִּבָּנֶינָה.    10 and I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it; and the cities shall be inhabited, and the waste places shall be builded;
36.11 יא  וְהִרְבֵּיתִי עֲלֵיכֶם אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה, וְרָבוּ וּפָרוּ; וְהוֹשַׁבְתִּי אֶתְכֶם כְּקַדְמוֹתֵיכֶם, וְהֵיטִבֹתִי מֵרִאשֹׁתֵיכֶם, וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    11 and I will multiply upon you man and beast, and they shall increase and be fruitful; and I will cause you to be inhabited after your former estate, and will do better unto you than at your beginnings; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.
36.12 יב  וְהוֹלַכְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם אָדָם אֶת-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וִירֵשׁוּךָ, וְהָיִיתָ לָהֶם, לְנַחֲלָה; וְלֹא-תוֹסִף עוֹד, לְשַׁכְּלָם.  {ס}    12 Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel, and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance; and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of children. {S}
36.13 יג  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַעַן אֹמְרִים לָכֶם, אֹכֶלֶת אָדָם אתי (אָתְּ); וּמְשַׁכֶּלֶת גויך (גּוֹיַיִךְ), הָיִית.    13 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Because they say unto you: Thou land art a devourer of men, and hast been a bereaver of thy nations;
36.14 יד  לָכֵן, אָדָם לֹא-תֹאכְלִי עוֹד, וגויך (וְגוֹיַיִךְ), לֹא תכשלי- (תְשַׁכְּלִי-) עוֹד--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    14 therefore thou shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith the Lord GOD;
36.15 טו  וְלֹא-אַשְׁמִיעַ אֵלַיִךְ עוֹד כְּלִמַּת הַגּוֹיִם, וְחֶרְפַּת עַמִּים לֹא תִשְׂאִי-עוֹד; וגויך (וְגוֹיַיִךְ) לֹא-תַכְשִׁלִי עוֹד, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    15 neither will I suffer the shame of the nations any more to be heard against thee, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the peoples any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to stumble any more, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
36.16 טז  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    16 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
36.17 יז  בֶּן-אָדָם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל יֹשְׁבִים עַל-אַדְמָתָם, וַיְטַמְּאוּ אוֹתָהּ, בְּדַרְכָּם וּבַעֲלִילוֹתָם:  כְּטֻמְאַת, הַנִּדָּה, הָיְתָה דַרְכָּם, לְפָנָי.    17 'Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their doings; their way before Me was as the uncleanness of a woman in her impurity.
36.18 יח  וָאֶשְׁפֹּךְ חֲמָתִי עֲלֵיהֶם, עַל-הַדָּם אֲשֶׁר-שָׁפְכוּ עַל-הָאָרֶץ; וּבְגִלּוּלֵיהֶם, טִמְּאוּהָ.    18 Wherefore I poured out My fury upon them for the blood which they had shed upon the land, and because they had defiled it with their idols;
36.19 יט  וָאָפִיץ אֹתָם בַּגּוֹיִם, וַיִּזָּרוּ בָּאֲרָצוֹת:  כְּדַרְכָּם וְכַעֲלִילוֹתָם, שְׁפַטְתִּים.    19 and I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through the countries; according to their way and according to their doings I judged them.
36.20 כ  וַיָּבוֹא, אֶל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ שָׁם, וַיְחַלְּלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי--בֶּאֱמֹר לָהֶם עַם-יְהוָה אֵלֶּה, וּמֵאַרְצוֹ יָצָאוּ.    20 And when they came unto the nations, whither they came, they profaned My holy name; in that men said of them: These are the people of the LORD, and are gone forth out of His land.
36.21 כא  וָאֶחְמֹל, עַל-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי, אֲשֶׁר חִלְּלֻהוּ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ שָׁמָּה.  {פ}    21 But I had pity for My holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations, whither they came. {P}
36.22 כב  לָכֵן אֱמֹר לְבֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לֹא לְמַעַנְכֶם אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי אִם-לְשֵׁם-קָדְשִׁי אֲשֶׁר חִלַּלְתֶּם, בַּגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתֶם שָׁם.    22 Therefore say unto the house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: I do not this for your sake, O house of Israel, but for My holy name, which ye have profaned among the nations, whither ye came.
36.23 כג  וְקִדַּשְׁתִּי אֶת-שְׁמִי הַגָּדוֹל, הַמְחֻלָּל בַּגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר חִלַּלְתֶּם, בְּתוֹכָם; וְיָדְעוּ הַגּוֹיִם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּהִקָּדְשִׁי בָכֶם, לְעֵינֵיהֶם.    23 And I will sanctify My great name, which hath been profaned among the nations, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the nations shall know that I am the LORD, saith the Lord GOD, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
36.24 כד  וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִן-הַגּוֹיִם, וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִכָּל-הָאֲרָצוֹת; וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-אַדְמַתְכֶם.    24 For I will take you from among the nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and will bring you into your own land.
36.25 כה  וְזָרַקְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם מַיִם טְהוֹרִים, וּטְהַרְתֶּם:  מִכֹּל טֻמְאוֹתֵיכֶם וּמִכָּל-גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם, אֲטַהֵר אֶתְכֶם.    25 And I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.
36.26 כו  וְנָתַתִּי לָכֶם לֵב חָדָשׁ, וְרוּחַ חֲדָשָׁה אֶתֵּן בְּקִרְבְּכֶם; וַהֲסִרֹתִי אֶת-לֵב הָאֶבֶן, מִבְּשַׂרְכֶם, וְנָתַתִּי לָכֶם, לֵב בָּשָׂר.    26 A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.
36.27 כז  וְאֶת-רוּחִי, אֶתֵּן בְּקִרְבְּכֶם; וְעָשִׂיתִי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-בְּחֻקַּי תֵּלֵכוּ, וּמִשְׁפָּטַי תִּשְׁמְרוּ, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם.    27 And I will put My spirit within you, and cause you to walk in My statutes, and ye shall keep Mine ordinances, and do them.
36.28 כח  וִישַׁבְתֶּם בָּאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לַאֲבֹתֵיכֶם; וִהְיִיתֶם לִי, לְעָם, וְאָנֹכִי, אֶהְיֶה לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים.    28 And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be My people, and I will be your God.
36.29 כט  וְהוֹשַׁעְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, מִכֹּל טֻמְאוֹתֵיכֶם; וְקָרָאתִי אֶל-הַדָּגָן וְהִרְבֵּיתִי אֹתוֹ, וְלֹא-אֶתֵּן עֲלֵיכֶם רָעָב.    29 And I will save you from all your uncleannesses; and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.
36.30 ל  וְהִרְבֵּיתִי אֶת-פְּרִי הָעֵץ, וּתְנוּבַת הַשָּׂדֶה:  לְמַעַן, אֲשֶׁר לֹא תִקְחוּ עוֹד חֶרְפַּת רָעָב--בַּגּוֹיִם.    30 And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye may receive no more the reproach of famine among the nations.
36.31 לא  וּזְכַרְתֶּם אֶת-דַּרְכֵיכֶם הָרָעִים, וּמַעַלְלֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר לֹא-טוֹבִים; וּנְקֹטֹתֶם, בִּפְנֵיכֶם, עַל עֲוֺנֹתֵיכֶם, וְעַל תּוֹעֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.    31 Then shall ye remember your evil ways, and your doings that were not good; and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.
36.32 לב  לֹא לְמַעַנְכֶם אֲנִי-עֹשֶׂה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--יִוָּדַע, לָכֶם:  בּוֹשׁוּ וְהִכָּלְמוּ מִדַּרְכֵיכֶם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    32 Not for your sake do I this, saith the Lord GOD, be it known unto you; be ashamed and confounded for your ways, O house of Israel. {S}
36.33 לג  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּיוֹם טַהֲרִי אֶתְכֶם, מִכֹּל עֲוֺנוֹתֵיכֶם--וְהוֹשַׁבְתִּי, אֶת-הֶעָרִים, וְנִבְנוּ, הֶחֳרָבוֹת.    33 Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the day that I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to be inhabited, and the waste places shall be builded.
36.34 לד  וְהָאָרֶץ הַנְּשַׁמָּה, תֵּעָבֵד, תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה שְׁמָמָה, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-עוֹבֵר.    34 And the land that was desolate shall be tilled, whereas it was a desolation in the sight of all that passed by.
36.35 לה  וְאָמְרוּ, הָאָרֶץ הַלֵּזוּ הַנְּשַׁמָּה, הָיְתָה, כְּגַן-עֵדֶן; וְהֶעָרִים הֶחֳרֵבוֹת וְהַנְשַׁמּוֹת וְהַנֶּהֱרָסוֹת, בְּצוּרוֹת יָשָׁבוּ.    35 And they shall say: This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are fortified and inhabited.
36.36 לו  וְיָדְעוּ הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר יִשָּׁאֲרוּ סְבִיבוֹתֵיכֶם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה בָּנִיתִי הַנֶּהֱרָסוֹת, נָטַעְתִּי הַנְּשַׁמָּה:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי וְעָשִׂיתִי.  {ס}    36 Then the nations that are left round about you shall know that I the LORD have builded the ruined places, and planted that which was desolate; I the LORD have spoken it, and I will do it. {S}
36.37 לז  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, עוֹד זֹאת אִדָּרֵשׁ לְבֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהֶם:  אַרְבֶּה אֹתָם כַּצֹּאן, אָדָם.    37 Thus saith the Lord GOD: I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men like a flock.
36.38 לח  כְּצֹאן קָדָשִׁים, כְּצֹאן יְרוּשָׁלִַם בְּמוֹעֲדֶיהָ--כֵּן תִּהְיֶינָה הֶעָרִים הֶחֳרֵבוֹת, מְלֵאוֹת צֹאן אָדָם; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}    38 As the flock for sacrifice, as the flock of Jerusalem in her appointed seasons, so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men; and they shall know that I am the LORD.' {P}
37.1 א  הָיְתָה עָלַי, יַד-יְהוָה, וַיּוֹצִאֵנִי בְרוּחַ יְהוָה, וַיְנִיחֵנִי בְּתוֹךְ הַבִּקְעָה; וְהִיא, מְלֵאָה עֲצָמוֹת.    1 The hand of the LORD was upon me, and the LORD carried me out in a spirit, and set me down in the midst of the valley, and it was full of bones;
37.2 ב  וְהֶעֱבִירַנִי עֲלֵיהֶם, סָבִיב סָבִיב; וְהִנֵּה רַבּוֹת מְאֹד עַל-פְּנֵי הַבִּקְעָה, וְהִנֵּה יְבֵשׁוֹת מְאֹד.    2 and He caused me to pass by them round about, and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.
37.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי--בֶּן-אָדָם, הֲתִחְיֶינָה הָעֲצָמוֹת הָאֵלֶּה; וָאֹמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה אַתָּה יָדָעְתָּ.    3 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, can these bones live?' And I answered: 'O Lord GOD, Thou knowest.'
37.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הִנָּבֵא עַל-הָעֲצָמוֹת הָאֵלֶּה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם--הָעֲצָמוֹת הַיְבֵשׁוֹת, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-יְהוָה.    4 Then He said unto me: 'Prophesy over these bones, and say unto them: O ye dry bones, hear the word of the LORD:
37.5 ה  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לָעֲצָמוֹת הָאֵלֶּה:  הִנֵּה אֲנִי מֵבִיא בָכֶם, רוּחַ--וִחְיִיתֶם.    5 Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live.
37.6 ו  וְנָתַתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם גִּידִים וְהַעֲלֵתִי עֲלֵיכֶם בָּשָׂר, וְקָרַמְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם עוֹר, וְנָתַתִּי בָכֶם רוּחַ, וִחְיִיתֶם; וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    6 And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.'
37.7 ז  וְנִבֵּאתִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר צֻוֵּיתִי; וַיְהִי-קוֹל כְּהִנָּבְאִי, וְהִנֵּה-רַעַשׁ, וַתִּקְרְבוּ עֲצָמוֹת, עֶצֶם אֶל-עַצְמוֹ.    7 So I prophesied as I was commanded; and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a commotion, and the bones came together, bone to its bone.
37.8 ח  וְרָאִיתִי וְהִנֵּה-עֲלֵיהֶם גִּדִים, וּבָשָׂר עָלָה, וַיִּקְרַם עֲלֵיהֶם עוֹר, מִלְמָעְלָה; וְרוּחַ, אֵין בָּהֶם.    8 And I beheld, and, lo, there were sinews upon them, and flesh came up, and skin covered them above; but there was no breath in them.
37.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הִנָּבֵא אֶל-הָרוּחַ; הִנָּבֵא בֶן-אָדָם וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-הָרוּחַ  {ס}  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, מֵאַרְבַּע רוּחוֹת בֹּאִי הָרוּחַ, וּפְחִי בַּהֲרוּגִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְיִחְיוּ.    9 Then said He unto me: 'Prophesy unto the breath, prophesy, son of man, and say to the breath: {S} Thus saith the Lord GOD: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.'
37.10 י  וְהִנַּבֵּאתִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּנִי; וַתָּבוֹא בָהֶם הָרוּחַ וַיִּחְיוּ, וַיַּעַמְדוּ עַל-רַגְלֵיהֶם--חַיִל, גָּדוֹל מְאֹד-מְאֹד.    10 So I prophesied as He commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great host.
37.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם, הָעֲצָמוֹת הָאֵלֶּה כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל הֵמָּה; הִנֵּה אֹמְרִים, יָבְשׁוּ עַצְמוֹתֵינוּ וְאָבְדָה תִקְוָתֵנוּ--נִגְזַרְנוּ לָנוּ.    11 Then He said unto me: 'Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel; behold, they say: Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost; we are clean cut off.
37.12 יב  לָכֵן הִנָּבֵא וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה אֲנִי פֹתֵחַ אֶת-קִבְרוֹתֵיכֶם וְהַעֲלֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם מִקִּבְרוֹתֵיכֶם, עַמִּי; וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    12 Therefore prophesy, and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O My people; and I will bring you into the land of Israel.
37.13 יג  וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה:  בְּפִתְחִי אֶת-קִבְרוֹתֵיכֶם, וּבְהַעֲלוֹתִי אֶתְכֶם מִקִּבְרוֹתֵיכֶם--עַמִּי.    13 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I have opened your graves, and caused you to come up out of your graves, O My people.
37.14 יד  וְנָתַתִּי רוּחִי בָכֶם וִחְיִיתֶם, וְהִנַּחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם עַל-אַדְמַתְכֶם; וִידַעְתֶּם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי וְעָשִׂיתִי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}    14 And I will put My spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I will place you in your own land; and ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken, and performed it, saith the LORD.' {P}
37.15 טו  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    15 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
37.16 טז  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, קַח-לְךָ עֵץ אֶחָד, וּכְתֹב עָלָיו לִיהוּדָה, וְלִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל חֲבֵרָו; וּלְקַח, עֵץ אֶחָד, וּכְתוֹב עָלָיו לְיוֹסֵף עֵץ אֶפְרַיִם, וְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל חֲבֵרָו.    16 'And thou, son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it: For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions; then take another stick, and write upon it: For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and of all the house of Israel his companions;
37.17 יז  וְקָרַב אֹתָם אֶחָד אֶל-אֶחָד, לְךָ--לְעֵץ אֶחָד; וְהָיוּ לַאֲחָדִים, בְּיָדֶךָ.    17 and join them for thee one to another into one stick, that they may become one in thy hand.
37.18 יח  וְכַאֲשֶׁר יֹאמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ, בְּנֵי עַמְּךָ לֵאמֹר:  הֲלוֹא-תַגִּיד לָנוּ, מָה-אֵלֶּה לָּךְ.    18 And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying: Wilt thou not tell us what thou meanest by these?
37.19 יט  דַּבֵּר אֲלֵהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה אֲנִי לֹקֵחַ אֶת-עֵץ יוֹסֵף אֲשֶׁר בְּיַד-אֶפְרַיִם, וְשִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל חֲבֵרָו; וְנָתַתִּי אוֹתָם עָלָיו אֶת-עֵץ יְהוּדָה, וַעֲשִׂיתִם לְעֵץ אֶחָד, וְהָיוּ אֶחָד, בְּיָדִי.    19 say into them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions; and I will put them unto him together with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in My hand.
37.20 כ  וְהָיוּ הָעֵצִים אֲשֶׁר-תִּכְתֹּב עֲלֵיהֶם, בְּיָדְךָ--לְעֵינֵיהֶם.    20 And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thy hand before their eyes.
37.21 כא  וְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה אֲנִי לֹקֵחַ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִבֵּין הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר הָלְכוּ-שָׁם; וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֹתָם מִסָּבִיב, וְהֵבֵאתִי אוֹתָם אֶל-אַדְמָתָם.    21 And say unto them: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the nations, whither they are gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land;
37.22 כב  וְעָשִׂיתִי אֹתָם לְגוֹי אֶחָד בָּאָרֶץ, בְּהָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמֶלֶךְ אֶחָד יִהְיֶה לְכֻלָּם, לְמֶלֶךְ; וְלֹא יהיה- (יִהְיוּ-) עוֹד לִשְׁנֵי גוֹיִם, וְלֹא יֵחָצוּ עוֹד לִשְׁתֵּי מַמְלָכוֹת עוֹד.    22 and I will make them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one king shall be king to them all; and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all;
37.23 כג  וְלֹא יִטַּמְּאוּ עוֹד, בְּגִלּוּלֵיהֶם וּבְשִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם, וּבְכֹל, פִּשְׁעֵיהֶם; וְהוֹשַׁעְתִּי אֹתָם, מִכֹּל מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ בָהֶם, וְטִהַרְתִּי אוֹתָם וְהָיוּ-לִי לְעָם, וַאֲנִי אֶהְיֶה לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים.    23 neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions; but I will save them out of all their dwelling-places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them; so shall they be My people, and I will be their God.
37.24 כד  וְעַבְדִּי דָוִד מֶלֶךְ עֲלֵיהֶם, וְרוֹעֶה אֶחָד יִהְיֶה לְכֻלָּם; וּבְמִשְׁפָּטַי יֵלֵכוּ, וְחֻקּוֹתַי יִשְׁמְרוּ וְעָשׂוּ אוֹתָם.    24 And My servant David shall be king over them, and they all shall have one shepherd; they shall also walk in Mine ordinances, and observe My statutes, and do them.
37.25 כה  וְיָשְׁבוּ עַל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לְעַבְדִּי לְיַעֲקֹב, אֲשֶׁר יָשְׁבוּ-בָהּ, אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם; וְיָשְׁבוּ עָלֶיהָ הֵמָּה וּבְנֵיהֶם וּבְנֵי בְנֵיהֶם, עַד-עוֹלָם, וְדָוִד עַבְדִּי, נָשִׂיא לָהֶם לְעוֹלָם.    25 And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob My servant, wherein your fathers dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, they, and their children, and their children's children, for ever; and David My servant shall be their prince for ever.
37.26 כו  וְכָרַתִּי לָהֶם בְּרִית שָׁלוֹם, בְּרִית עוֹלָם יִהְיֶה אוֹתָם; וּנְתַתִּים וְהִרְבֵּיתִי אוֹתָם, וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-מִקְדָּשִׁי בְּתוֹכָם לְעוֹלָם.    26 Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them--it shall be an everlasting covenant with them; and I will establish them, and multiply them, and will set My sanctuary in the midst of them for ever.
37.27 כז  וְהָיָה מִשְׁכָּנִי עֲלֵיהֶם, וְהָיִיתִי לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים; וְהֵמָּה, יִהְיוּ-לִי לְעָם.    27 My dwelling-place also shall be over them; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people.
37.28 כח  וְיָדְעוּ, הַגּוֹיִם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, מְקַדֵּשׁ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בִּהְיוֹת מִקְדָּשִׁי בְּתוֹכָם, לְעוֹלָם.  {פ}    28 And the nations shall know that I am the LORD that sanctify Israel, when My sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for ever.' {P}
38.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
38.2 ב  בֶּן-אָדָם, שִׂים פָּנֶיךָ אֶל-גּוֹג אֶרֶץ הַמָּגוֹג--נְשִׂיא, רֹאשׁ מֶשֶׁךְ וְתֻבָל; וְהִנָּבֵא, עָלָיו.    2 'Son of man, set thy face toward Gog, of the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,
38.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הִנְנִי אֵלֶיךָ, גּוֹג--נְשִׂיא, רֹאשׁ מֶשֶׁךְ וְתֻבָל.    3 and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal;
38.4 ד  וְשׁוֹבַבְתִּיךָ, וְנָתַתִּי חַחִים בִּלְחָיֶיךָ; וְהוֹצֵאתִי אוֹתְךָ וְאֶת-כָּל-חֵילֶךָ סוּסִים וּפָרָשִׁים, לְבֻשֵׁי מִכְלוֹל כֻּלָּם--קָהָל רָב צִנָּה וּמָגֵן, תֹּפְשֵׂי חֲרָבוֹת כֻּלָּם.    4 and I will turn thee about, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed most gorgeously, a great company with buckler and shield, all of them handling swords:
38.5 ה  פָּרַס כּוּשׁ וּפוּט, אִתָּם; כֻּלָּם, מָגֵן וְכוֹבָע.    5 Persia, Cush, and Put with them, all of them with shield and helmet;
38.6 ו  גֹּמֶר, וְכָל-אֲגַפֶּיהָ--בֵּית תּוֹגַרְמָה, יַרְכְּתֵי צָפוֹן וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲגַפָּיו; עַמִּים רַבִּים, אִתָּךְ.    6 Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah in the uttermost parts of the north, and all his bands; even many peoples with thee.
38.7 ז  הִכֹּן, וְהָכֵן לְךָ--אַתָּה, וְכָל-קְהָלֶךָ הַנִּקְהָלִים עָלֶיךָ; וְהָיִיתָ לָהֶם, לְמִשְׁמָר.    7 Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou guarded of them.
38.8 ח  מִיָּמִים רַבִּים, תִּפָּקֵד--בְּאַחֲרִית הַשָּׁנִים תָּבוֹא אֶל-אֶרֶץ מְשׁוֹבֶבֶת מֵחֶרֶב מְקֻבֶּצֶת מֵעַמִּים רַבִּים, עַל הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ לְחָרְבָּה תָּמִיד; וְהִיא מֵעַמִּים הוּצָאָה, וְיָשְׁבוּ לָבֶטַח כֻּלָּם.    8 After many days thou shalt be mustered for service, in the latter years thou shalt come against the land that is brought back from the sword, that is gathered out of many peoples, against the mountains of Israel, which have been a continual waste; but it is brought forth out of the peoples, and they dwell safely all of them.
38.9 ט  וְעָלִיתָ כַּשֹּׁאָה תָבוֹא, כֶּעָנָן לְכַסּוֹת הָאָרֶץ תִּהְיֶה--אַתָּה, וְכָל-אֲגַפֶּיךָ, וְעַמִּים רַבִּים, אוֹתָךְ.  {ס}    9 And thou shalt ascend, thou shalt come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many peoples with thee. {S}
38.10 י  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יַעֲלוּ דְבָרִים עַל-לְבָבֶךָ, וְחָשַׁבְתָּ, מַחֲשֶׁבֶת רָעָה.    10 Thus saith the Lord GOD: It shall come to pass in that day, that things shall come into thy mind, and thou shalt devise an evil device;
38.11 יא  וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֶעֱלֶה עַל-אֶרֶץ פְּרָזוֹת--אָבוֹא הַשֹּׁקְטִים, יֹשְׁבֵי לָבֶטַח; כֻּלָּם, יֹשְׁבִים בְּאֵין חוֹמָה, וּבְרִיחַ וּדְלָתַיִם, אֵין לָהֶם.    11 and thou shalt say: I will go up against the land of unwalled villages; I will come upon them that are at quiet, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates;
38.12 יב  לִשְׁלֹל שָׁלָל, וְלָבֹז בַּז--לְהָשִׁיב יָדְךָ עַל-חֳרָבוֹת נוֹשָׁבוֹת, וְאֶל-עַם מְאֻסָּף מִגּוֹיִם, עֹשֶׂה מִקְנֶה וְקִנְיָן, יֹשְׁבֵי עַל-טַבּוּר הָאָרֶץ.    12 to take the spoil and to take the prey; to turn thy hand against the waste places that are now inhabited, and against the people that are gathered out of the nations, that have gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the middle of the earth.
38.13 יג  שְׁבָא וּדְדָן וְסֹחֲרֵי תַרְשִׁישׁ וְכָל-כְּפִירֶיהָ, יֹאמְרוּ לְךָ, הֲלִשְׁלֹל שָׁלָל אַתָּה בָא, הֲלָבֹז בַּז הִקְהַלְתָּ קְהָלֶךָ--לָשֵׂאת כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, לָקַחַת מִקְנֶה וְקִנְיָן, לִשְׁלֹל, שָׁלָל גָּדוֹל.  {ס}    13 Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the magnates thereof, shall say unto thee: Comest thou to take the spoil? hast thou assembled thy company to take the prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take great spoil? {S}
38.14 יד  לָכֵן, הִנָּבֵא בֶן-אָדָם, וְאָמַרְתָּ לְגוֹג, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הֲלוֹא בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, בְּשֶׁבֶת עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל לָבֶטַח--תֵּדָע.    14 Therefore, son of man, prophesy, and say unto Gog: Thus saith the Lord GOD: In that day when My people Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know it?
38.15 טו  וּבָאתָ מִמְּקוֹמְךָ, מִיַּרְכְּתֵי צָפוֹן--אַתָּה, וְעַמִּים רַבִּים אִתָּךְ:  רֹכְבֵי סוּסִים כֻּלָּם, קָהָל גָּדוֹל וְחַיִל רָב.    15 And thou shalt come from thy place out of the uttermost parts of the north, thou, and many peoples with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company and a mighty army;
38.16 טז  וְעָלִיתָ עַל-עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֶּעָנָן לְכַסּוֹת הָאָרֶץ; בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים תִּהְיֶה, וַהֲבִאוֹתִיךָ עַל-אַרְצִי, לְמַעַן דַּעַת הַגּוֹיִם אֹתִי בְּהִקָּדְשִׁי בְךָ לְעֵינֵיהֶם, גּוֹג.  {ס}    16 and thou shalt come up against My people Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the end of days, and I will bring thee against My land, that the nations may know Me, when I shall be sanctified through thee, O Gog, before their eyes. {S}
38.17 יז  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הַאַתָּה-הוּא אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי בְּיָמִים קַדְמוֹנִים בְּיַד עֲבָדַי נְבִיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַנִּבְּאִים בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, שָׁנִים--לְהָבִיא אֹתְךָ, עֲלֵיהֶם.  {ס}    17 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Art thou he of whom I spoke in old time by My servants the prophets of Israel, that prophesied in those days for many years, that I would bring thee against them? {S}
38.18 יח  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, בְּיוֹם בּוֹא גוֹג עַל-אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  תַּעֲלֶה חֲמָתִי, בְּאַפִּי.    18 And it shall come to pass in that day, when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, that My fury shall arise up in My nostrils.
38.19 יט  וּבְקִנְאָתִי בְאֵשׁ-עֶבְרָתִי, דִּבַּרְתִּי:  אִם-לֹא בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִהְיֶה רַעַשׁ גָּדוֹל, עַל, אַדְמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    19 For in My jealousy and in the fire of My wrath have I spoken: Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel;
38.20 כ  וְרָעֲשׁוּ מִפָּנַי דְּגֵי הַיָּם וְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וְחַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, וְכָל-הָרֶמֶשׂ הָרֹמֵשׂ עַל-הָאֲדָמָה, וְכֹל הָאָדָם, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה; וְנֶהֶרְסוּ הֶהָרִים, וְנָפְלוּ הַמַּדְרֵגוֹת, וְכָל-חוֹמָה, לָאָרֶץ תִּפּוֹל.    20 so that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field and all creeping things that creep upon the ground, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at My presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.
38.21 כא  וְקָרָאתִי עָלָיו לְכָל-הָרַי חֶרֶב, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  חֶרֶב אִישׁ, בְּאָחִיו תִּהְיֶה.    21 And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord GOD; every man's sword shall be against his brother.
38.22 כב  וְנִשְׁפַּטְתִּי אִתּוֹ, בְּדֶבֶר וּבְדָם; וְגֶשֶׁם שׁוֹטֵף וְאַבְנֵי אֶלְגָּבִישׁ אֵשׁ וְגָפְרִית, אַמְטִיר עָלָיו וְעַל-אֲגַפָּיו, וְעַל-עַמִּים רַבִּים, אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ.    22 And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will cause to rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many peoples that are with him, an overflowing shower, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.
38.23 כג  וְהִתְגַּדִּלְתִּי, וְהִתְקַדִּשְׁתִּי, וְנוֹדַעְתִּי, לְעֵינֵי גּוֹיִם רַבִּים; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {ס}    23 Thus will I magnify Myself, and sanctify Myself, and I will make Myself known in the eyes of many nations; and they shall know that I am the LORD. {S}
39.1 א  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הִנָּבֵא עַל-גּוֹג, וְאָמַרְתָּ, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הִנְנִי אֵלֶיךָ, גּוֹג--נְשִׂיא, רֹאשׁ מֶשֶׁךְ וְתֻבָל.    1 And thou, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say: Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal;
39.2 ב  וְשֹׁבַבְתִּיךָ, וְשִׁשֵּׁאתִיךָ, וְהַעֲלִיתִיךָ, מִיַּרְכְּתֵי צָפוֹן; וַהֲבִאוֹתִךָ, עַל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 and I will turn thee about and lead thee on, and will cause thee to come up from the uttermost parts of the north; and I will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel;
39.3 ג  וְהִכֵּיתִי קַשְׁתְּךָ, מִיַּד שְׂמֹאולֶךָ; וְחִצֶּיךָ, מִיַּד יְמִינְךָ אַפִּיל.    3 and I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.
39.4 ד  עַל-הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל תִּפּוֹל, אַתָּה וְכָל-אֲגַפֶּיךָ, וְעַמִּים, אֲשֶׁר אִתָּךְ:  לְעֵיט צִפּוֹר כָּל-כָּנָף וְחַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, נְתַתִּיךָ לְאָכְלָה.    4 Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the peoples that are with thee; I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort and to the beasts of the field, to be devoured.
39.5 ה  עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה, תִּפּוֹל:  כִּי אֲנִי דִבַּרְתִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    5 Thou shalt fall upon the open field; for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.
39.6 ו  וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי-אֵשׁ בְּמָגוֹג, וּבְיֹשְׁבֵי הָאִיִּים לָבֶטַח; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה.    6 And I will send a fire on Magog, and on them that dwell safely in the isles; and they shall know that I am the LORD.
39.7 ז  וְאֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי אוֹדִיעַ, בְּתוֹךְ עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלֹא-אַחֵל אֶת-שֵׁם-קָדְשִׁי, עוֹד; וְיָדְעוּ הַגּוֹיִם כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, קָדוֹשׁ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    7 And My holy name will I make known in the midst of My people Israel; neither will I suffer My holy name to be profaned any more; and the nations shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel.
39.8 ח  הִנֵּה בָאָה וְנִהְיָתָה, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  הוּא הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי.    8 Behold, it cometh, and it shall be done, saith the Lord GOD; This is the day whereof I have spoken.
39.9 ט  וְיָצְאוּ יֹשְׁבֵי עָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבִעֲרוּ וְהִשִּׂיקוּ בְּנֶשֶׁק וּמָגֵן וְצִנָּה בְּקֶשֶׁת וּבְחִצִּים, וּבְמַקֵּל יָד, וּבְרֹמַח; וּבִעֲרוּ בָהֶם אֵשׁ, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים.    9 And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall make fires of the weapons and use them as fuel, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the hand-staves, and the spears, and they shall make fires of them seven years;
39.10 י  וְלֹא-יִשְׂאוּ עֵצִים מִן-הַשָּׂדֶה, וְלֹא יַחְטְבוּ מִן-הַיְּעָרִים--כִּי בַנֶּשֶׁק, יְבַעֲרוּ-אֵשׁ; וְשָׁלְלוּ אֶת-שֹׁלְלֵיהֶם, וּבָזְזוּ אֶת-בֹּזְזֵיהֶם--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {ס}    10 so that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests, for they shall make fires of the weapons; and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord GOD. {S}
39.11 יא  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם הַהוּא אֶתֵּן לְגוֹג מְקוֹם-שָׁם קֶבֶר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, גֵּי הָעֹבְרִים קִדְמַת הַיָּם, וְחֹסֶמֶת הִיא, אֶת-הָעֹבְרִים; וְקָבְרוּ שָׁם, אֶת-גּוֹג וְאֶת-כָּל-הֲמוֹנֹה, וְקָרְאוּ, גֵּיא הֲמוֹן גּוֹג.    11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place fit for burial in Israel, the valley of them that pass through on the east of the sea; and it shall stop them that pass through; and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude; and they shall call it the valley of Hamon-gog.
39.12 יב  וּקְבָרוּם בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמַעַן טַהֵר אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, שִׁבְעָה, חֳדָשִׁים.    12 And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying them, that they may cleanse the land.
39.13 יג  וְקָבְרוּ כָּל-עַם הָאָרֶץ, וְהָיָה לָהֶם לְשֵׁם--יוֹם, הִכָּבְדִי, נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    13 Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them, and it shall be to them a renown; in the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord GOD.
39.14 יד  וְאַנְשֵׁי תָמִיד יַבְדִּילוּ, עֹבְרִים בָּאָרֶץ, מְקַבְּרִים אֶת-הָעֹבְרִים אֶת-הַנּוֹתָרִים עַל-פְּנֵי הָאָרֶץ, לְטַהֲרָהּ--מִקְצֵה שִׁבְעָה-חֳדָשִׁים, יַחְקֹרוּ.    14 And they shall set apart men of continual employment, that shall pass through the land to bury with them that pass through those that remain upon the face of the land, to cleanse it; after the end of seven months shall they search.
39.15 טו  וְעָבְרוּ הָעֹבְרִים, בָּאָרֶץ, וְרָאָה עֶצֶם אָדָם, וּבָנָה אֶצְלוֹ צִיּוּן--עַד קָבְרוּ אֹתוֹ הַמְקַבְּרִים, אֶל-גֵּיא הֲמוֹן גּוֹג.    15 And when they that pass through shall pass through the land, and any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog.
39.16 טז  וְגַם שֶׁם-עִיר הֲמוֹנָה, וְטִהֲרוּ הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}    16 And Hamonah shall also be the name of a city. Thus shall they cleanse the land. {P}
39.17 יז  וְאַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אֱמֹר לְצִפּוֹר כָּל-כָּנָף וּלְכֹל חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה הִקָּבְצוּ וָבֹאוּ הֵאָסְפוּ מִסָּבִיב, עַל-זִבְחִי אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי זֹבֵחַ לָכֶם זֶבַח גָּדוֹל, עַל הָרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַאֲכַלְתֶּם בָּשָׂר, וּשְׁתִיתֶם דָּם.    17 And thou, son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD: Speak unto the birds of every sort, and to every beast of the field: Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to My feast that I do prepare for you, even a great feast, upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood.
39.18 יח  בְּשַׂר גִּבּוֹרִים תֹּאכֵלוּ, וְדַם-נְשִׂיאֵי הָאָרֶץ תִּשְׁתּוּ; אֵילִים כָּרִים וְעַתּוּדִים פָּרִים, מְרִיאֵי בָשָׁן כֻּלָּם.    18 The flesh of the mighty shall ye eat, and the blood of the princes of the earth shall ye drink; rams, lambs, and goats, bullocks, fatlings of Bashan are they all of them.
39.19 יט  וַאֲכַלְתֶּם-חֵלֶב לְשָׂבְעָה, וּשְׁתִיתֶם דָּם לְשִׁכָּרוֹן, מִזִּבְחִי, אֲשֶׁר-זָבַחְתִּי לָכֶם.    19 And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of My feast which I have prepared for you.
39.20 כ  וּשְׂבַעְתֶּם עַל-שֻׁלְחָנִי סוּס וָרֶכֶב, גִּבּוֹר וְכָל-אִישׁ מִלְחָמָה--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    20 And ye shall be filled at My table with horses and horsemen, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord GOD.
39.21 כא  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-כְּבוֹדִי, בַּגּוֹיִם; וְרָאוּ כָל-הַגּוֹיִם, אֶת-מִשְׁפָּטִי אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי, וְאֶת-יָדִי, אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי בָהֶם.    21 And I will set My glory among the nations, and all the nations shall see My judgment that I have executed, and My hand that I have laid upon them.
39.22 כב  וְיָדְעוּ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, מִן-הַיּוֹם הַהוּא, וָהָלְאָה.    22 So the house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God, from that day and forward.
39.23 כג  וְיָדְעוּ הַגּוֹיִם כִּי בַעֲוֺנָם גָּלוּ בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל אֲשֶׁר מָעֲלוּ-בִי, וָאַסְתִּר פָּנַי, מֵהֶם; וָאֶתְּנֵם בְּיַד צָרֵיהֶם, וַיִּפְּלוּ בַחֶרֶב כֻּלָּם.    23 And the nations shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they broke faith with Me, and I hid My face from them; so I gave them into the hand of their adversaries, and they fell all of them by the sword.
39.24 כד  כְּטֻמְאָתָם וּכְפִשְׁעֵיהֶם, עָשִׂיתִי אֹתָם; וָאַסְתִּר פָּנַי, מֵהֶם.  {ס}    24 According to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions did I unto them; and I hid My face from them. {S}
39.25 כה  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, עַתָּה אָשִׁיב אֶת-שבית (שְׁבוּת) יַעֲקֹב, וְרִחַמְתִּי כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְקִנֵּאתִי, לְשֵׁם קָדְשִׁי.    25 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Now will I bring back the captivity of Jacob, and have compassion upon the whole house of Israel; and I will be jealous for My holy name.
39.26 כו  וְנָשׂוּ, אֶת-כְּלִמָּתָם, וְאֶת-כָּל-מַעֲלָם, אֲשֶׁר מָעֲלוּ-בִי--בְּשִׁבְתָּם עַל-אַדְמָתָם לָבֶטַח, וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד.    26 And they shall bear their shame, and all their breach of faith which they have committed against Me, when they shall dwell safely in their land, and none shall make them afraid;
39.27 כז  בְּשׁוֹבְבִי אוֹתָם, מִן-הָעַמִּים, וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֹתָם, מֵאַרְצוֹת אֹיְבֵיהֶם; וְנִקְדַּשְׁתִּי בָם, לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם רַבִּים.    27 when I have brought them back from the peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations.
39.28 כח  וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, בְּהַגְלוֹתִי אֹתָם אֶל-הַגּוֹיִם, וְכִנַּסְתִּים עַל-אַדְמָתָם; וְלֹא-אוֹתִיר עוֹד מֵהֶם, שָׁם.    28 And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, in that I caused them to go into captivity among the nations, and have gathered them unto their own land; and I will leave none of them any more there;
39.29 כט  וְלֹא-אַסְתִּיר עוֹד פָּנַי, מֵהֶם, אֲשֶׁר שָׁפַכְתִּי אֶת-רוּחִי עַל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    29 neither will I hide My face any more from them; for I have poured out My spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.' {P}
40.1 א  בְּעֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה לְגָלוּתֵנוּ בְּרֹאשׁ הַשָּׁנָה בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ, בְּאַרְבַּע עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, אַחַר, אֲשֶׁר הֻכְּתָה הָעִיר--בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, הָיְתָה עָלַי יַד-יְהוָה, וַיָּבֵא אֹתִי, שָׁמָּה.    1 In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day, the hand of the LORD was upon me, and He brought me thither.
40.2 ב  בְּמַרְאוֹת אֱלֹהִים, הֱבִיאַנִי אֶל-אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְנִיחֵנִי, אֶל-הַר גָּבֹהַּ מְאֹד, וְעָלָיו כְּמִבְנֵה-עִיר, מִנֶּגֶב.    2 In the visions of God brought He me into the land of Israel, and set me down upon a very high mountain, whereon was as it were the frame of a city on the south.
40.3 ג  וַיָּבֵיא אוֹתִי שָׁמָּה, וְהִנֵּה-אִישׁ מַרְאֵהוּ כְּמַרְאֵה נְחֹשֶׁת, וּפְתִיל-פִּשְׁתִּים בְּיָדוֹ, וּקְנֵה הַמִּדָּה; וְהוּא עֹמֵד, בַּשָּׁעַר.    3 And He brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.
40.4 ד  וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלַי הָאִישׁ, בֶּן-אָדָם רְאֵה בְעֵינֶיךָ וּבְאָזְנֶיךָ שְּׁמָע וְשִׂים לִבְּךָ לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי מַרְאֶה אוֹתָךְ--כִּי לְמַעַן הַרְאוֹתְכָה, הֻבָאתָה הֵנָּה; הַגֵּד אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה רֹאֶה, לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    4 And the man said unto me: 'Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall show thee, for to the intent that I might show them unto thee art thou brought thither; declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel.'
40.5 ה  וְהִנֵּה חוֹמָה מִחוּץ לַבַּיִת, סָבִיב סָבִיב; וּבְיַד הָאִישׁ קְנֵה הַמִּדָּה, שֵׁשׁ-אַמּוֹת בָּאַמָּה וָטֹפַח, וַיָּמָד אֶת-רֹחַב הַבִּנְיָן קָנֶה אֶחָד, וְקוֹמָה קָנֶה אֶחָד.    5 And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring reed of six cubits long, of a cubit and a hand-breadth each; so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed, and the height, one reed.
40.6 ו  וַיָּבוֹא, אֶל-שַׁעַר אֲשֶׁר פָּנָיו דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִימָה, וַיַּעַל, בְּמַעֲלוֹתָו; וַיָּמָד אֶת-סַף הַשַּׁעַר, קָנֶה אֶחָד רֹחַב, וְאֵת סַף אֶחָד, קָנֶה אֶחָד רֹחַב.    6 Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and went up the steps thereof; and he measured the jamb of the gate, one reed broad, and the other jamb, one reed broad.
40.7 ז  וְהַתָּא, קָנֶה אֶחָד אֹרֶךְ וְקָנֶה אֶחָד רֹחַב, וּבֵין הַתָּאִים, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת; וְסַף הַשַּׁעַר מֵאֵצֶל אֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר, מֵהַבַּיִת--קָנֶה אֶחָד.    7 And every cell was one reed long, and one reed broad; and the space between the cells was five cubits; and the jambs of the gate by the porch of the gate within were one reed.
40.8 ח  וַיָּמָד אֶת-אֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר, מֵהַבַּיִת--קָנֶה אֶחָד.    8 He measured also the porch of the gate toward the house, one reed.
40.9 ט  וַיָּמָד אֶת-אֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר, שְׁמֹנֶה אַמּוֹת, וְאֵילָו, שְׁתַּיִם אַמּוֹת; וְאֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר, מֵהַבָּיִת.    9 Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward.
40.10 י  וְתָאֵי הַשַּׁעַר דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים, שְׁלֹשָׁה מִפֹּה וּשְׁלֹשָׁה מִפֹּה--מִדָּה אַחַת, לִשְׁלָשְׁתָּם; וּמִדָּה אַחַת לָאֵילִם, מִפֹּה וּמִפּוֹ.    10 And the cells of the gate eastward were three on this side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure; and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.
40.11 יא  וַיָּמָד אֶת-רֹחַב פֶּתַח-הַשַּׁעַר, עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת; אֹרֶךְ הַשַּׁעַר, שְׁלוֹשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה אַמּוֹת.    11 And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits;
40.12 יב  וּגְבוּל לִפְנֵי הַתָּאוֹת, אַמָּה אֶחָת, וְאַמָּה-אַחַת גְּבוּל, מִפֹּה; וְהַתָּא--שֵׁשׁ-אַמּוֹת מִפּוֹ, וְשֵׁשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפּוֹ.    12 and a border before the cells, one cubit [on this side], and a border, one cubit on that side; and the cells, six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.
40.13 יג  וַיָּמָד אֶת-הַשַּׁעַר, מִגַּג הַתָּא לְגַגּוֹ--רֹחַב, עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת:  פֶּתַח, נֶגֶד פָּתַח.    13 And he measured the gate from the roof of the one cell to the roof of the other, a breadth of five and twenty cubits; door against door.
40.14 יד  וַיַּעַשׂ אֶת-אֵילִים, שִׁשִּׁים אַמָּה; וְאֶל-אֵיל, הֶחָצֵר, הַשַּׁעַר, סָבִיב סָבִיב.    14 He made also posts of threescore cubits; even unto the posts of the court in the gates round about.
40.15 טו  וְעַל, פְּנֵי הַשַּׁעַר היאתון (הָאִיתוֹן), עַל-לִפְנֵי, אֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר הַפְּנִימִי--חֲמִשִּׁים, אַמָּה.    15 And from the forefront of the gate of the entrance unto the forefront of the inner porch of the gate were fifty cubits.
40.16 טז  וְחַלּוֹנוֹת אֲטֻמוֹת אֶל-הַתָּאִים וְאֶל אֵלֵיהֵמָה לִפְנִימָה לַשַּׁעַר, סָבִיב סָבִיב, וְכֵן, לָאֵלַמּוֹת; וְחַלּוֹנוֹת סָבִיב סָבִיב, לִפְנִימָה, וְאֶל-אַיִל, תִּמֹרִים.    16 And there were narrow windows to the cells and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches; and windows were round about inward; and upon each post were palm-trees.
40.17 יז  וַיְבִיאֵנִי, אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה, וְהִנֵּה לְשָׁכוֹת וְרִצְפָה, עָשׂוּי לֶחָצֵר סָבִיב סָבִיב:  שְׁלֹשִׁים לְשָׁכוֹת, אֶל-הָרִצְפָה.    17 Then brought he me into the outer court, and, lo, there were chambers and a pavement, made for the court round about; thirty chambers were upon the pavement.
40.18 יח  וְהָרִצְפָה אֶל-כֶּתֶף הַשְּׁעָרִים, לְעֻמַּת אֹרֶךְ הַשְּׁעָרִים--הָרִצְפָה, הַתַּחְתּוֹנָה.    18 And the pavement was by the side of the gates, corresponding unto the length of the gates, even the lower pavement.
40.19 יט  וַיָּמָד רֹחַב מִלִּפְנֵי הַשַּׁעַר הַתַּחְתּוֹנָה לִפְנֵי הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי, מִחוּץ--מֵאָה אַמָּה:  הַקָּדִים, וְהַצָּפוֹן.    19 Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of the inner court without, a hundred cubits, eastward as also northward.
40.20 כ  וְהַשַּׁעַר, אֲשֶׁר פָּנָיו דֶּרֶךְ הַצָּפוֹן, לֶחָצֵר, הַחִיצוֹנָה--מָדַד אָרְכּוֹ, וְרָחְבּוֹ.    20 And the gate of the outer court that looked toward the north, he measured the length thereof and the breadth thereof.
40.21 כא  וְתָאָו, שְׁלוֹשָׁה מִפּוֹ וּשְׁלֹשָׁה מִפּוֹ, וְאֵילָו וְאֵלַמָּו הָיָה, כְּמִדַּת הַשַּׁעַר הָרִאשׁוֹן:  חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה, אָרְכּוֹ, וְרֹחַב, חָמֵשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים בָּאַמָּה.    21 And the cells thereof were three on this side and three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first gate; the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
40.22 כב  וְחַלּוֹנָו וְאֵילַמָּו, וְתִימֹרָו, כְּמִדַּת הַשַּׁעַר, אֲשֶׁר פָּנָיו דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים; וּבְמַעֲלוֹת שֶׁבַע יַעֲלוּ-בוֹ, וְאֵילַמָּו לִפְנֵיהֶם.    22 And the windows thereof, and the arches thereof, and the palm-trees thereof, were after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and it was ascended by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before them.
40.23 כג  וְשַׁעַר, לֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי, נֶגֶד הַשַּׁעַר, לַצָּפוֹן וְלַקָּדִים; וַיָּמָד מִשַּׁעַר אֶל-שַׁעַר, מֵאָה אַמָּה.    23 And there was a gate to the inner court over against the other gate, northward as also eastward; and he measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.
40.24 כד  וַיּוֹלִכֵנִי דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם, וְהִנֵּה-שַׁעַר דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם; וּמָדַד אֵילָו וְאֵילַמָּו, כַּמִּדּוֹת הָאֵלֶּה.    24 And he led me toward the south, and behold a gate toward the south; and he measured the posts thereof, and the arches thereof according to these measures.
40.25 כה  וְחַלּוֹנִים לוֹ וּלְאֵילַמָּו סָבִיב סָבִיב, כְּהַחַלֹּנוֹת הָאֵלֶּה:  חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה, אֹרֶךְ, וְרֹחַב, חָמֵשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה.    25 And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about, like those windows; the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
40.26 כו  וּמַעֲלוֹת שִׁבְעָה עֹלוֹתָו, וְאֵלַמָּו לִפְנֵיהֶם; וְתִמֹרִים לוֹ, אֶחָד מִפּוֹ וְאֶחָד מִפּוֹ--אֶל-אֵילָו.    26 And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches thereof were before them; and it had palm-trees, one on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts thereof.
40.27 כז  וְשַׁעַר לֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי, דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם; וַיָּמָד מִשַּׁעַר אֶל-הַשַּׁעַר דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם, מֵאָה אַמּוֹת.    27 And there was a gate to the inner court toward the south; and he measured from gate to gate toward the south a hundred cubits.
40.28 כח  וַיְבִיאֵנִי אֶל-חָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי, בְּשַׁעַר הַדָּרוֹם; וַיָּמָד אֶת-הַשַּׁעַר הַדָּרוֹם, כַּמִּדּוֹת הָאֵלֶּה.    28 Then he brought me to the inner court by the south gate; and he measured the south gate according to these measures;
40.29 כט  וְתָאָו וְאֵילָו וְאֵלַמָּו, כַּמִּדּוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, וְחַלּוֹנוֹת לוֹ וּלְאֵלַמָּו, סָבִיב סָבִיב--חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה, אֹרֶךְ, וְרֹחַב, עֶשְׂרִים וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת.    29 and the cells thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures; and there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about; it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.
40.30 ל  וְאֵלַמּוֹת, סָבִיב סָבִיב--אֹרֶךְ, חָמֵשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת.    30 And there were arches round about, five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.
40.31 לא  וְאֵלַמָּו, אֶל-חָצֵר הַחִצוֹנָה, וְתִמֹרִים, אֶל-אֵילָו; וּמַעֲלוֹת שְׁמוֹנֶה, מַעֲלָו.    31 And the arches thereof were toward the outer court; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof; and the going up to it had eight steps.
40.32 לב  וַיְבִיאֵנִי אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי, דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים; וַיָּמָד אֶת-הַשַּׁעַר, כַּמִּדּוֹת הָאֵלֶּה.    32 And he brought me into the inner court toward the east; and he measured the gate according to these measures;
40.33 לג  וְתָאָו וְאֵלָו וְאֵלַמָּו, כַּמִּדּוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, וְחַלּוֹנוֹת לוֹ וּלְאֵלַמָּו, סָבִיב סָבִיב:  אֹרֶךְ, חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב, חָמֵשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה.    33 and the cells thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures; and there were windows therein and in the arches thereof round about; it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.
40.34 לד  וְאֵלַמָּו, לֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה, וְתִמֹרִים אֶל-אֵלָו, מִפּוֹ וּמִפּוֹ; וּשְׁמֹנֶה מַעֲלוֹת, מַעֲלָו.    34 And the arches thereof were toward the outer court; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side; and the going up to it had eight steps.
40.35 לה  וַיְבִיאֵנִי, אֶל-שַׁעַר הַצָּפוֹן; וּמָדַד, כַּמִּדּוֹת הָאֵלֶּה.    35 And he brought me to the north gate; and he measured it according to these measures;
40.36 לו  תָּאָו אֵלָו וְאֵלַמָּו, וְחַלּוֹנוֹת לוֹ סָבִיב סָבִיב:  אֹרֶךְ, חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב, חָמֵשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה.    36 the cells thereof, the posts thereof, and the arches thereof; and there were windows therein round about; the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
40.37 לז  וְאֵילָו, לֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה, וְתִמֹרִים אֶל-אֵילָו, מִפּוֹ וּמִפּוֹ; וּשְׁמֹנֶה מַעֲלוֹת, מַעֲלָו.    37 And the posts thereof were toward the outer court; and palm-trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side; and the going up to it had eight steps.
40.38 לח  וְלִשְׁכָּה וּפִתְחָהּ, בְּאֵילִים הַשְּׁעָרִים; שָׁם, יָדִיחוּ אֶת-הָעֹלָה.    38 And a chamber with the entry thereof was by the posts at the gates; there was the burnt-offering to be washed.
40.39 לט  וּבְאֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר, שְׁנַיִם שֻׁלְחָנוֹת מִפּוֹ, וּשְׁנַיִם שֻׁלְחָנוֹת, מִפֹּה--לִשְׁחוֹט אֲלֵיהֶם הָעוֹלָה, וְהַחַטָּאת וְהָאָשָׁם.    39 And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt-offering and the sin-offering and the guilt-offering.
40.40 מ  וְאֶל-הַכָּתֵף מִחוּצָה, לָעוֹלֶה לְפֶתַח הַשַּׁעַר הַצָּפוֹנָה, שְׁנַיִם, שֻׁלְחָנוֹת; וְאֶל-הַכָּתֵף הָאַחֶרֶת, אֲשֶׁר לְאֻלָם הַשַּׁעַר, שְׁנַיִם, שֻׁלְחָנוֹת.    40 And on the one side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the gate toward the north, were two tables; and on the other side of the porch of the gate were two tables.
40.41 מא  אַרְבָּעָה שֻׁלְחָנוֹת מִפֹּה, וְאַרְבָּעָה שֻׁלְחָנוֹת מִפֹּה--לְכֶתֶף הַשָּׁעַר:  שְׁמוֹנָה שֻׁלְחָנוֹת, אֲלֵיהֶם יִשְׁחָטוּ.    41 Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon to slay the sacrifices.
40.42 מב  וְאַרְבָּעָה שֻׁלְחָנוֹת לָעוֹלָה אַבְנֵי גָזִית, אֹרֶךְ אַמָּה אַחַת וָחֵצִי וְרֹחַב אַמָּה אַחַת וָחֵצִי, וְגֹבַהּ, אַמָּה אֶחָת; אֲלֵיהֶם, וְיַנִּיחוּ אֶת-הַכֵּלִים אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁחֲטוּ אֶת-הָעוֹלָה בָּם--וְהַזָּבַח.    42 Moreover there were four tables for the burnt-offering, of hewn stone, a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and a half broad, and one cubit high, whereupon to lay the instruments wherewith the burnt-offering and the sacrifice are slain.
40.43 מג  וְהַשְׁפַתַּיִם, טֹפַח אֶחָד מוּכָנִים בַּבַּיִת--סָבִיב סָבִיב; וְאֶל-הַשֻּׁלְחָנוֹת, בְּשַׂר הַקָּרְבָן.    43 And the slabs, a handbreadth long, were fastened within round about; and upon the tables was to be the flesh of the offering.
40.44 מד  וּמִחוּצָה לַשַּׁעַר הַפְּנִימִי לִשְׁכוֹת שָׁרִים, בֶּחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי אֲשֶׁר אֶל-כֶּתֶף שַׁעַר הַצָּפוֹן, וּפְנֵיהֶם, דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם; אֶחָד, אֶל-כֶּתֶף שַׁעַר הַקָּדִים, פְּנֵי, דֶּרֶךְ הַצָּפֹן.    44 And without the inner gate were chambers for the guard in the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate, and their prospect was toward the south; one at the side of the east gate having the prospect toward the north.
40.45 מה  וַיְדַבֵּר, אֵלָי:  זֹה הַלִּשְׁכָּה, אֲשֶׁר פָּנֶיהָ דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם, לַכֹּהֲנִים, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַבָּיִת.    45 And he said unto me: 'This chamber, whose prospect is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.
40.46 מו  וְהַלִּשְׁכָּה, אֲשֶׁר פָּנֶיהָ דֶּרֶךְ הַצָּפוֹן, לַכֹּהֲנִים, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  הֵמָּה בְנֵי-צָדוֹק, הַקְּרֵבִים מִבְּנֵי-לֵוִי אֶל-יְהוָה--לְשָׁרְתוֹ.    46 And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar; these are the sons of Zadok, who from among the sons of Levi come near to the LORD to minister unto Him.'
40.47 מז  וַיָּמָד אֶת-הֶחָצֵר אֹרֶךְ מֵאָה אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב מֵאָה אַמָּה--מְרֻבָּעַת; וְהַמִּזְבֵּחַ, לִפְנֵי הַבָּיִת.    47 And he measured the court, a hundred cubits long, and a hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar was before the house.
40.48 מח  וַיְבִאֵנִי, אֶל-אֻלָם הַבַּיִת, וַיָּמָד אֵל אֻלָם, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפֹּה וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפֹּה; וְרֹחַב הַשַּׁעַר--שָׁלֹשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפּוֹ, וְשָׁלֹשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפּוֹ.    48 Then he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side; and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.
40.49 מט  אֹרֶךְ הָאֻלָם עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב עַשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה, וּבַמַּעֲלוֹת, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲלוּ אֵלָיו; וְעַמֻּדִים, אֶל-הָאֵילִים, אֶחָד מִפֹּה, וְאֶחָד מִפֹּה.    49 The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; and it was by steps that it was ascended; and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.
41.1 א  וַיְבִיאֵנִי, אֶל-הַהֵיכָל; וַיָּמָד אֶת-הָאֵילִים, שֵׁשׁ-אַמּוֹת רֹחַב מִפּוֹ וְשֵׁשׁ-אַמּוֹת-רֹחַב מִפּוֹ--רֹחַב הָאֹהֶל.    1 And he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tent.
41.2 ב  וְרֹחַב הַפֶּתַח, עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת, וְכִתְפוֹת הַפֶּתַח, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפּוֹ וְחָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת מִפּוֹ; וַיָּמָד אָרְכּוֹ אַרְבָּעִים אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה.    2 And the breadth of the entrance was ten cubits; and the sides of the entrance were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side; and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits.
41.3 ג  וּבָא לִפְנִימָה, וַיָּמָד אֵיל-הַפֶּתַח שְׁתַּיִם אַמּוֹת; וְהַפֶּתַח שֵׁשׁ אַמּוֹת, וְרֹחַב הַפֶּתַח שֶׁבַע אַמּוֹת.    3 Then went he inward, and measured each post of the entrance, two cubits; and the entrance, six cubits; and the breadth of the entrance, seven cubits.
41.4 ד  וַיָּמָד אֶת-אָרְכּוֹ עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה, וְרֹחַב עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה--אֶל-פְּנֵי הַהֵיכָל; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, זֶה קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים.    4 And he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple; and he said unto me: 'This is the most holy place.'
41.5 ה  וַיָּמָד קִיר-הַבַּיִת, שֵׁשׁ אַמּוֹת; וְרֹחַב הַצֵּלָע אַרְבַּע אַמּוֹת סָבִיב סָבִיב, לַבַּיִת--סָבִיב.    5 Then he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the breadth of every side-chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side.
41.6 ו  וְהַצְּלָעוֹת צֵלָע אֶל-צֵלָע שָׁלוֹשׁ וּשְׁלֹשִׁים פְּעָמִים, וּבָאוֹת בַּקִּיר אֲשֶׁר-לַבַּיִת לַצְּלָעוֹת סָבִיב סָבִיב--לִהְיוֹת אֲחוּזִים; וְלֹא-יִהְיוּ אֲחוּזִים, בְּקִיר הַבָּיִת.    6 And the side-chambers were one over another, three and thirty times; and there were cornices in the wall which belonged to the house for the side-chambers round about, that they might have hold therein, and not have hold in the wall of the house.
41.7 ז  וְרָחֲבָה וְנָסְבָה לְמַעְלָה לְמַעְלָה לַצְּלָעוֹת, כִּי מוּסַב-הַבַּיִת לְמַעְלָה לְמַעְלָה סָבִיב סָבִיב לַבַּיִת--עַל-כֵּן רֹחַב-לַבַּיִת, לְמָעְלָה; וְכֵן הַתַּחְתּוֹנָה יַעֲלֶה עַל-הָעֶלְיוֹנָה, לַתִּיכוֹנָה.    7 And the side-chambers were broader as they wound about higher and higher; for the winding about of the house went higher and higher round about the house; therefore the breadth of the house continued upward; and so one went up from the lowest row to the highest by the middle.
41.8 ח  וְרָאִיתִי לַבַּיִת גֹּבַהּ, סָבִיב סָבִיב; מיסדות (מוּסְדוֹת) הַצְּלָעוֹת מְלוֹ הַקָּנֶה, שֵׁשׁ אַמּוֹת אַצִּילָה.    8 I saw also that the house had a raised basement round about; the foundations of the side-chambers were a full reed of six cubits to the joining.
41.9 ט  רֹחַב הַקִּיר אֲשֶׁר-לַצֵּלָע אֶל-הַחוּץ, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת; וַאֲשֶׁר מֻנָּח, בֵּית צְלָעוֹת אֲשֶׁר לַבָּיִת.    9 The breadth of the outer wall which belonged to the side-chambers was five cubits; and so that which was left by the structure of the side-chambers that belonged to the house.
41.10 י  וּבֵין הַלְּשָׁכוֹת רֹחַב עֶשְׂרִים אַמָּה, סָבִיב לַבַּיִת--סָבִיב סָבִיב.    10 And between the chambers was a breadth of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.
41.11 יא  וּפֶתַח הַצֵּלָע, לַמֻּנָּח--פֶּתַח אֶחָד דֶּרֶךְ הַצָּפוֹן, וּפֶתַח אֶחָד לַדָּרוֹם; וְרֹחַב מְקוֹם הַמֻּנָּח, חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת סָבִיב סָבִיב.    11 And the doors of the side-chambers were toward the place that was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south; and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.
41.12 יב  וְהַבִּנְיָן אֲשֶׁר אֶל-פְּנֵי הַגִּזְרָה פְּאַת דֶּרֶךְ-הַיָּם, רֹחַב שִׁבְעִים אַמָּה, וְקִיר הַבִּנְיָן חָמֵשׁ-אַמּוֹת רֹחַב, סָבִיב סָבִיב; וְאָרְכּוֹ, תִּשְׁעִים אַמָּה.    12 And the building that was before the separate place at the side toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety cubits.
41.13 יג  וּמָדַד אֶת-הַבַּיִת, אֹרֶךְ מֵאָה אַמָּה; וְהַגִּזְרָה וְהַבִּנְיָה וְקִירוֹתֶיהָ, אֹרֶךְ מֵאָה אַמָּה.    13 And he measured the house, a hundred cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, a hundred cubits long;
41.14 יד  וְרֹחַב פְּנֵי הַבַּיִת וְהַגִּזְרָה לַקָּדִים, מֵאָה אַמָּה.    14 also the breadth of the face of the house and of the separate place toward the east, a hundred cubits.
41.15 טו  וּמָדַד אֹרֶךְ-הַבִּנְיָן אֶל-פְּנֵי הַגִּזְרָה אֲשֶׁר עַל-אַחֲרֶיהָ ואתוקיהא (וְאַתִּיקֶיהָא), מִפּוֹ וּמִפּוֹ--מֵאָה אַמָּה; וְהַהֵיכָל, הַפְּנִימִי, וְאֻלַמֵּי, הֶחָצֵר.    15 And he measured the length of the building before the separate place which was at the back thereof, and the galleries thereof on the one side and on the other side, a hundred cubits. Now the temple, and the inner place, and the porches of the court,
41.16 טז  הַסִּפִּים וְהַחַלּוֹנִים הָאֲטֻמוֹת וְהָאַתִּיקִים סָבִיב, לִשְׁלָשְׁתָּם, נֶגֶד הַסַּף שְׂחִיף עֵץ, סָבִיב סָבִיב; וְהָאָרֶץ, עַד-הַחַלּוֹנוֹת, וְהַחַלֹּנוֹת, מְכֻסּוֹת.    16 the jambs, and the narrow windows, and the galleries, that they three had round about, over against the jambs there was a veneering of wood round about, and from the ground up to the windows; and the windows were covered;
41.17 יז  עַל-מֵעַל הַפֶּתַח וְעַד-הַבַּיִת הַפְּנִימִי וְלַחוּץ וְאֶל-כָּל-הַקִּיר סָבִיב סָבִיב, בַּפְּנִימִי וּבַחִיצוֹן--מִדּוֹת.    17 to the space above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and on all the wall round about within and without, by measure.
41.18 יח  וְעָשׂוּי כְּרוּבִים, וְתִמֹרִים; וְתִמֹרָה בֵּין-כְּרוּב לִכְרוּב, וּשְׁנַיִם פָּנִים לַכְּרוּב.    18 And it was made with cherubim and palm-trees; and a palm-tree was between cherub and cherub, and every cherub had two faces;
41.19 יט  וּפְנֵי אָדָם אֶל-הַתִּמֹרָה מִפּוֹ, וּפְנֵי-כְפִיר אֶל-הַתִּמֹרָה מִפּוֹ, עָשׂוּי אֶל-כָּל-הַבַּיִת, סָבִיב סָבִיב.    19 so that there was the face of a man toward the palm-tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm-tree on the other side; thus was it made through all the house round about.
41.20 כ  מֵהָאָרֶץ עַד-מֵעַל הַפֶּתַח, הַכְּרוּבִים וְהַתִּמֹרִים עֲשׂוּיִם; וְקִיר, הַהֵיכָל.    20 From the ground unto above the door were cherubim and palm-trees made; and so on the wall of the temple.
41.21 כא  הַהֵיכָל, מְזוּזַת רְבֻעָה; וּפְנֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ, הַמַּרְאֶה כַּמַּרְאֶה.    21 As for the temple, the jambs were squared; and the face of the sanctuary had an appearance such as is the appearance.
41.22 כב  הַמִּזְבֵּחַ עֵץ שָׁלוֹשׁ אַמּוֹת גָּבֹהַּ וְאָרְכּוֹ שְׁתַּיִם-אַמּוֹת, וּמִקְצֹעוֹתָיו לוֹ, וְאָרְכּוֹ וְקִירֹתָיו, עֵץ; וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלַי--זֶה הַשֻּׁלְחָן, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    22 The altar, three cubits high, and the length thereof two cubits, was of wood, and so the corners thereof; the length thereof, and the walls thereof, were also of wood; and he said unto me: 'This is the table that is before the LORD.'
41.23 כג  וּשְׁתַּיִם דְּלָתוֹת לַהֵיכָל, וְלַקֹּדֶשׁ.    23 And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.
41.24 כד  וּשְׁתַּיִם דְּלָתוֹת, לַדְּלָתוֹת:  שְׁתַּיִם, מוּסַבּוֹת דְּלָתוֹת--שְׁתַּיִם לְדֶלֶת אֶחָת, וּשְׁתֵּי דְלָתוֹת לָאַחֶרֶת.    24 And the doors had two leaves [apiece], two turning leaves; two leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other.
41.25 כה  וַעֲשׂוּיָה אֲלֵיהֶן אֶל-דַּלְתוֹת הַהֵיכָל, כְּרוּבִים וְתִמֹרִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר עֲשׂוּיִם, לַקִּירוֹת; וְעָב עֵץ אֶל-פְּנֵי הָאוּלָם, מֵהַחוּץ.    25 And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubim and palm-trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there were thick beams of wood upon the face of the porch without.
41.26 כו  וְחַלּוֹנִים אֲטֻמוֹת וְתִמֹרִים מִפּוֹ וּמִפּוֹ, אֶל-כִּתְפוֹת הָאוּלָם; וְצַלְעוֹת הַבַּיִת, וְהָעֻבִּים.    26 And there were narrow windows and palm-trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch; there were also the brackets of the house, and the thick beams.
42.1 א  וַיּוֹצִאֵנִי, אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה--הַדֶּרֶךְ, דֶּרֶךְ הַצָּפוֹן; וַיְבִאֵנִי אֶל-הַלִּשְׁכָּה, אֲשֶׁר נֶגֶד הַגִּזְרָה וַאֲשֶׁר-נֶגֶד הַבִּנְיָן--אֶל-הַצָּפוֹן.    1 Then he brought me forth into the outer court, the way toward the north; and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the separate place, and which was over against the building, toward the north,
42.2 ב  אֶל-פְּנֵי-אֹרֶךְ אַמּוֹת הַמֵּאָה, פֶּתַח הַצָּפוֹן; וְהָרֹחַב, חֲמִשִּׁים אַמּוֹת.    2 even to the front of the length of a hundred cubits, with the door on the north, and the breadth of fifty cubits,
42.3 ג  נֶגֶד הָעֶשְׂרִים, אֲשֶׁר לֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי, וְנֶגֶד רִצְפָה, אֲשֶׁר לֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה--אַתִּיק אֶל-פְּנֵי-אַתִּיק, בַּשְּׁלִשִׁים.    3 over against the twenty cubits which belonged to the inner court, and over against the pavement which belonged to the outer court; with gallery against gallery in three stories.
42.4 ד  וְלִפְנֵי הַלְּשָׁכוֹת מַהֲלַךְ עֶשֶׂר אַמּוֹת רֹחַב, אֶל-הַפְּנִימִית--דֶּרֶךְ, אַמָּה אֶחָת; וּפִתְחֵיהֶם, לַצָּפוֹן.    4 And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors were toward the north.
42.5 ה  וְהַלְּשָׁכוֹת הָעֶלְיוֹנֹת, קְצֻרוֹת:  כִּי-יוֹכְלוּ אַתִּיקִים מֵהֵנָּה, מֵהַתַּחְתֹּנוֹת וּמֵהַתִּכוֹנוֹת--בִּנְיָן.    5 Now the upper chambers were shorter; for the galleries took away from these, more than from the lower and the middlemost, in the building.
42.6 ו  כִּי מְשֻׁלָּשׁוֹת, הֵנָּה, וְאֵין לָהֶן עַמּוּדִים, כְּעַמּוּדֵי הַחֲצֵרוֹת; עַל-כֵּן נֶאֱצַל, מֵהַתַּחְתּוֹנוֹת וּמֵהַתִּיכֹנוֹת--מֵהָאָרֶץ.    6 For they were in three stories, and they had not pillars as the pillars of the courts; therefore room was taken away from the lowest and the middlemost, in comparison with the ground.
42.7 ז  וְגָדֵר אֲשֶׁר-לַחוּץ לְעֻמַּת הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, דֶּרֶךְ הֶחָצֵר הַחִצוֹנָה אֶל-פְּנֵי הַלְּשָׁכוֹת--אָרְכּוֹ, חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה.    7 And the wall that was without by the side of the chambers, toward the outer court in front of the chambers, the length thereof was fifty cubits.
42.8 ח  כִּי-אֹרֶךְ הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, אֲשֶׁר לֶחָצֵר הַחִצוֹנָה--חֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה; וְהִנֵּה עַל-פְּנֵי הַהֵיכָל, מֵאָה אַמָּה.    8 For the length of the chambers that were toward the outer court was fifty cubits; and, lo, before the temple were a hundred cubits.
42.9 ט  ומתחתה, לשכות (וּמִתַּחַת, הַלְּשָׁכוֹת) הָאֵלֶּה--המבוא (הַמֵּבִיא), מֵהַקָּדִים, בְּבֹאוֹ לָהֵנָּה, מֵהֶחָצֵר הַחִצֹנָה.    9 And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the outer court.
42.10 י  בְּרֹחַב גֶּדֶר הֶחָצֵר, דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים אֶל-פְּנֵי הַגִּזְרָה וְאֶל-פְּנֵי הַבִּנְיָן--לְשָׁכוֹת.    10 In the breadth of the wall of the court toward the east, before the separate place, and before the building, there were chambers,
42.11 יא  וְדֶרֶךְ, לִפְנֵיהֶם, כְּמַרְאֵה הַלְּשָׁכוֹת אֲשֶׁר דֶּרֶךְ הַצָּפוֹן, כְּאָרְכָּן כֵּן רָחְבָּן; וְכֹל, מוֹצָאֵיהֶן, וּכְמִשְׁפְּטֵיהֶן, וּכְפִתְחֵיהֶן.    11 with a way before them; like the appearance of the chambers which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they, with all their goings out, and according to their fashions; and as their doors,
42.12 יב  וּכְפִתְחֵי הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, אֲשֶׁר דֶּרֶךְ הַדָּרוֹם, פֶּתַח, בְּרֹאשׁ דָּרֶךְ; דֶּרֶךְ, בִּפְנֵי הַגְּדֶרֶת הֲגִינָה, דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים, בְּבוֹאָן.    12 so were also the doors of the chambers that were toward the south, there was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before the wall, toward the way from the east, as one entereth into them.
42.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, לִשְׁכוֹת הַצָּפוֹן לִשְׁכוֹת הַדָּרוֹם אֲשֶׁר אֶל-פְּנֵי הַגִּזְרָה, הֵנָּה לִשְׁכוֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר יֹאכְלוּ-שָׁם הַכֹּהֲנִים אֲשֶׁר-קְרוֹבִים לַיהוָה, קָדְשֵׁי הַקֳּדָשִׁים:  שָׁם יַנִּיחוּ קָדְשֵׁי הַקֳּדָשִׁים, וְהַמִּנְחָה וְהַחַטָּאת וְהָאָשָׁם--כִּי הַמָּקוֹם, קָדֹשׁ.    13 Then said he unto me: 'The north chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place, they are the holy chambers, where the priests that are near unto the LORD shall eat the most holy things; there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meal-offering, and the sin-offering, and the guilt-offering; for the place is holy.
42.14 יד  בְּבֹאָם הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְלֹא-יֵצְאוּ מֵהַקֹּדֶשׁ אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה, וְשָׁם יַנִּיחוּ בִגְדֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר-יְשָׁרְתוּ בָהֶן, כִּי-קֹדֶשׁ הֵנָּה; ילבשו (וְלָבְשׁוּ) בְּגָדִים אֲחֵרִים, וְקָרְבוּ אֶל-אֲשֶׁר לָעָם.    14 When the priests enter in, then shall they not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but there they shall lay their garments wherein they minister, for they are holy; and they shall put on other garments, and shall approach to that which pertaineth to the people.'
42.15 טו  וְכִלָּה, אֶת-מִדּוֹת הַבַּיִת הַפְּנִימִי, וְהוֹצִיאַנִי דֶּרֶךְ הַשַּׁעַר, אֲשֶׁר פָּנָיו דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים; וּמְדָדוֹ, סָבִיב סָבִיב.    15 Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it round about.
42.16 טז  מָדַד רוּחַ הַקָּדִים, בִּקְנֵה הַמִּדָּה--חֲמֵשׁ-אמות (מֵאוֹת) קָנִים בִּקְנֵה הַמִּדָּה, סָבִיב.    16 He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.
42.17 יז  מָדַד, רוּחַ הַצָּפוֹן--חֲמֵשׁ-מֵאוֹת קָנִים בִּקְנֵה הַמִּדָּה, סָבִיב.    17 He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.
42.18 יח  אֵת רוּחַ הַדָּרוֹם, מָדָד--חֲמֵשׁ-מֵאוֹת קָנִים, בִּקְנֵה הַמִּדָּה.    18 He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.
42.19 יט  סָבַב, אֶל-רוּחַ הַיָּם; מָדַד חֲמֵשׁ-מֵאוֹת קָנִים, בִּקְנֵה הַמִּדָּה.    19 He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
42.20 כ  לְאַרְבַּע רוּחוֹת מְדָדוֹ, חוֹמָה לוֹ סָבִיב סָבִיב--אֹרֶךְ חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת, וְרֹחַב חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת:  לְהַבְדִּיל, בֵּין הַקֹּדֶשׁ לְחֹל.    20 He measured it by the four sides; it had a wall round about, the length five hundred, and the breadth five hundred, to make a separation between that which was holy and that which was common.
43.1 א  וַיּוֹלִכֵנִי, אֶל-הַשָּׁעַר--שַׁעַר, אֲשֶׁר פֹּנֶה דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים.    1 Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh toward the east;
43.2 ב  וְהִנֵּה, כְּבוֹד אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּא, מִדֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים; וְקוֹלוֹ, כְּקוֹל מַיִם רַבִּים, וְהָאָרֶץ, הֵאִירָה מִכְּבֹדוֹ.    2 and, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east; and His voice was like the sound of many waters; and the earth did shine with His glory.
43.3 ג  וּכְמַרְאֵה הַמַּרְאֶה אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי, כַּמַּרְאֶה אֲשֶׁר-רָאִיתִי בְּבֹאִי לְשַׁחֵת אֶת-הָעִיר, וּמַרְאוֹת, כַּמַּרְאֶה אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי אֶל-נְהַר-כְּבָר; וָאֶפֹּל, אֶל-פָּנָי.    3 And the appearance of the vision which I saw was like the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city; and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face.
43.4 ד  וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, בָּא אֶל-הַבָּיִת, דֶּרֶךְ שַׁעַר, אֲשֶׁר פָּנָיו דֶּרֶךְ הַקָּדִים.    4 And the glory of the LORD came into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east.
43.5 ה  וַתִּשָּׂאֵנִי רוּחַ--וַתְּבִאֵנִי, אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִי; וְהִנֵּה מָלֵא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, הַבָּיִת.    5 And a spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house.
43.6 ו  וָאֶשְׁמַע מִדַּבֵּר אֵלַי, מֵהַבָּיִת; וְאִישׁ, הָיָה עֹמֵד אֶצְלִי.    6 And I heard one speaking unto me out of the house; and a man stood by me.
43.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם אֶת-מְקוֹם כִּסְאִי וְאֶת-מְקוֹם כַּפּוֹת רַגְלַי, אֲשֶׁר אֶשְׁכָּן-שָׁם בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְעוֹלָם; וְלֹא יְטַמְּאוּ עוֹד בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי הֵמָּה וּמַלְכֵיהֶם, בִּזְנוּתָם, וּבְפִגְרֵי מַלְכֵיהֶם, בָּמוֹתָם.    7 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, this is the place of My throne, and the place of the soles of My feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever; and the house of Israel shall no more defile My holy name, neither they, nor their kings, by their harlotry, and by the carcasses of their kings in their high places;
43.8 ח  בְּתִתָּם סִפָּם אֶת-סִפִּי, וּמְזוּזָתָם אֵצֶל מְזוּזָתִי, וְהַקִּיר, בֵּינִי וּבֵינֵיהֶם; וְטִמְּאוּ אֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי, בְּתוֹעֲבוֹתָם אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ, וָאֲכַל אֹתָם, בְּאַפִּי.    8 in their setting of their threshold by My threshold, and their door-post beside My door-post, and there was but the wall between Me and them; and they have defiled My holy name by their abominations which they have committed; wherefore I have consumed them in Mine anger.
43.9 ט  עַתָּה יְרַחֲקוּ אֶת-זְנוּתָם, וּפִגְרֵי מַלְכֵיהֶם--מִמֶּנִּי; וְשָׁכַנְתִּי בְתוֹכָם, לְעוֹלָם.  {ס}    9 Now let them put away their harlotry, and the carcasses of their kings, far from Me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever. {S}
43.10 י  אַתָּה בֶן-אָדָם, הַגֵּד אֶת-בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַבַּיִת, וְיִכָּלְמוּ, מֵעֲוֺנוֹתֵיהֶם; וּמָדְדוּ, אֶת-תָּכְנִית.    10 Thou, son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; and let them measure accurately.
43.11 יא  וְאִם-נִכְלְמוּ מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ, צוּרַת הַבַּיִת וּתְכוּנָתוֹ וּמוֹצָאָיו וּמוֹבָאָיו וְכָל-צוּרֹתָו וְאֵת כָּל-חֻקֹּתָיו וְכָל-צוּרֹתָו וְכָל-תּוֹרֹתָו הוֹדַע אוֹתָם, וּכְתֹב, לְעֵינֵיהֶם; וְיִשְׁמְרוּ אֶת-כָּל-צוּרָתוֹ, וְאֶת-כָּל-חֻקֹּתָיו--וְעָשׂוּ אוֹתָם.    11 And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, make known unto them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof, and write it in their sight; that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.
43.12 יב  זֹאת, תּוֹרַת הַבָּיִת:  עַל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר כָּל-גְּבֻלוֹ סָבִיב סָבִיב, קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים--הִנֵּה-זֹאת, תּוֹרַת הַבָּיִת.    12 This is the law of the house: upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.
43.13 יג  וְאֵלֶּה מִדּוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ בָּאַמּוֹת, אַמָּה אַמָּה וָטֹפַח; וְחֵיק הָאַמָּה וְאַמָּה-רֹחַב, וּגְבוּלָהּ אֶל-שְׂפָתָהּ סָבִיב זֶרֶת הָאֶחָד, וְזֶה, גַּב הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    13 And these are the measures of the altar by cubits--the cubit is a cubit and a handbreadth: the bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round about a span; and this shall be the base of the altar.
43.14 יד  וּמֵחֵיק הָאָרֶץ עַד-הָעֲזָרָה הַתַּחְתּוֹנָה, שְׁתַּיִם אַמּוֹת, וְרֹחַב, אַמָּה אֶחָת; וּמֵהָעֲזָרָה הַקְּטַנָּה עַד-הָעֲזָרָה הַגְּדוֹלָה, אַרְבַּע אַמּוֹת, וְרֹחַב, הָאַמָּה.    14 And from the bottom upon the ground to the lower settle shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser settle to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the breadth a cubit.
43.15 טו  וְהַהַרְאֵל, אַרְבַּע אַמּוֹת; וּמֵהָאֲרִאֵיל וּלְמַעְלָה, הַקְּרָנוֹת אַרְבַּע.    15 And the hearth shall be four cubits; and from the hearth and upward there shall be four horns.
43.16 טז  וְהָאֲרִאֵיל, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה אֹרֶךְ, בִּשְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה, רֹחַב:  רָבוּעַ, אֶל אַרְבַּעַת רְבָעָיו.    16 And the hearth shall be twelve cubits long by twelve broad, square in the four sides thereof.
43.17 יז  וְהָעֲזָרָה אַרְבַּע עֶשְׂרֵה אֹרֶךְ, בְּאַרְבַּע עֶשְׂרֵה רֹחַב, אֶל, אַרְבַּעַת רְבָעֶיהָ; וְהַגְּבוּל סָבִיב אוֹתָהּ חֲצִי הָאַמָּה, וְהַחֵיק-לָהּ אַמָּה סָבִיב, וּמַעֲלֹתֵהוּ, פְּנוֹת קָדִים.    17 And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long by fourteen broad in the four sides thereof; and the border about it shall be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and the steps thereof shall look toward the east.'
43.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, בֶּן-אָדָם כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אֵלֶּה חֻקּוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, בְּיוֹם הֵעָשׂוֹתוֹ--לְהַעֲלוֹת עָלָיו עוֹלָה, וְלִזְרֹק עָלָיו דָּם.    18 And He said unto me: 'Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD: These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to offer burnt-offerings thereon, and to dash blood against it.
43.19 יט  וְנָתַתָּה אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם אֲשֶׁר הֵם מִזֶּרַע צָדוֹק הַקְּרֹבִים אֵלַי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--לְשָׁרְתֵנִי:  פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר, לְחַטָּאת.    19 Thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that are of the seed of Zadok, who are near unto Me, to minister unto Me, saith the Lord GOD, a young bullock for a sin-offering.
43.20 כ  וְלָקַחְתָּ מִדָּמוֹ, וְנָתַתָּה עַל-אַרְבַּע קַרְנֹתָיו וְאֶל-אַרְבַּע פִּנּוֹת הָעֲזָרָה, וְאֶל-הַגְּבוּל, סָבִיב; וְחִטֵּאתָ אוֹתוֹ, וְכִפַּרְתָּהוּ.    20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the border round about; thus shalt thou purify it and make atonement for it.
43.21 כא  וְלָקַחְתָּ, אֵת הַפָּר הַחַטָּאת; וּשְׂרָפוֹ בְּמִפְקַד הַבַּיִת, מִחוּץ לַמִּקְדָּשׁ.    21 Thou shalt also take the bullock of the sin-offering, and it shall be burnt in the appointed place of the house, without the sanctuary.
43.22 כב  וּבַיּוֹם, הַשֵּׁנִי, תַּקְרִיב שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים תָּמִים, לְחַטָּאת; וְחִטְּאוּ, אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, כַּאֲשֶׁר חִטְּאוּ, בַּפָּר.    22 And on the second day thou shalt offer a he-goat without blemish for a sin-offering; and they shall purify the altar, as they did purify it with the bullock.
43.23 כג  בְּכַלּוֹתְךָ, מֵחַטֵּא--תַּקְרִיב פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר תָּמִים, וְאַיִל מִן-הַצֹּאן תָּמִים.    23 When thou hast made an end of purifying it, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.
43.24 כד  וְהִקְרַבְתָּם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְהִשְׁלִיכוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים עֲלֵיהֶם מֶלַח, וְהֶעֱלוּ אוֹתָם עֹלָה לַיהוָה.    24 And thou shalt present them before the LORD, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt-offering unto the LORD.
43.25 כה  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, תַּעֲשֶׂה שְׂעִיר-חַטָּאת לַיּוֹם; וּפַר בֶּן-בָּקָר וְאַיִל מִן-הַצֹּאן, תְּמִימִים יַעֲשׂוּ.    25 Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin-offering; they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock, without blemish.
43.26 כו  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, יְכַפְּרוּ אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְטִהֲרוּ, אֹתוֹ; וּמִלְאוּ, יָדָו.    26 Seven days shall they make atonement for the altar and cleanse it; so shall they consecrate it.
43.27 כז  וִיכַלּוּ, אֶת-הַיָּמִים;  {ס}  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי וָהָלְאָה, יַעֲשׂוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֶת-עוֹלוֹתֵיכֶם וְאֶת-שַׁלְמֵיכֶם, וְרָצִאתִי אֶתְכֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {ס}    27 And when they have accomplished the days, {S} it shall be that upon the eighth day, and forward, the priests shall make your burnt-offerings upon the altar, and your peace-offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord GOD.' {S}
44.1 א  וַיָּשֶׁב אֹתִי, דֶּרֶךְ שַׁעַר הַמִּקְדָּשׁ הַחִיצוֹן, הַפֹּנֶה, קָדִים; וְהוּא, סָגוּר.    1 Then he brought me back the way of the outer gate of the sanctuary, which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.
44.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי יְהוָה, הַשַּׁעַר הַזֶּה סָגוּר יִהְיֶה לֹא יִפָּתֵחַ וְאִישׁ לֹא-יָבֹא בוֹ--כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּא בוֹ; וְהָיָה, סָגוּר.    2 And the LORD said unto me: 'This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, neither shall any man enter in by it, for the LORD, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it; therefore it shall be shut.
44.3 ג  אֶת-הַנָּשִׂיא, נָשִׂיא הוּא יֵשֶׁב-בּוֹ לאכול- (לֶאֱכָל-) לֶחֶם--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; מִדֶּרֶךְ אוּלָם הַשַּׁעַר יָבוֹא, וּמִדַּרְכּוֹ יֵצֵא.    3 As for the prince, being a prince, he shall sit therein to eat bread before the LORD; he shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.'
44.4 ד  וַיְבִיאֵנִי דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר הַצָּפוֹן, אֶל-פְּנֵי הַבַּיִת, וָאֵרֶא, וְהִנֵּה מָלֵא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה; וָאֶפֹּל, אֶל-פָּנָי.    4 Then he brought me the way of the north gate before the house; and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD; and I fell upon my face.
44.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי יְהוָה, בֶּן-אָדָם שִׂים לִבְּךָ וּרְאֵה בְעֵינֶיךָ וּבְאָזְנֶיךָ שְּׁמָע אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מְדַבֵּר אֹתָךְ, לְכָל-חֻקּוֹת בֵּית-יְהוָה, וּלְכָל-תּוֹרֹתָו; וְשַׂמְתָּ לִבְּךָ לִמְבוֹא הַבַּיִת, בְּכֹל מוֹצָאֵי הַמִּקְדָּשׁ.    5 And the LORD said unto me: 'Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary.
44.6 ו  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-מֶרִי אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  רַב-לָכֶם מִכָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    6 And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel: Thus saith the Lord GOD: O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations,
44.7 ז  בַּהֲבִיאֲכֶם בְּנֵי-נֵכָר, עַרְלֵי-לֵב וְעַרְלֵי בָשָׂר, לִהְיוֹת בְּמִקְדָּשִׁי, לְחַלְּלוֹ אֶת-בֵּיתִי--בְּהַקְרִיבְכֶם אֶת-לַחְמִי, חֵלֶב וָדָם, וַיָּפֵרוּ אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, אֶל כָּל-תּוֹעֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.    7 in that ye have brought in aliens, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in My sanctuary, to profane it, even My house, when ye offer My bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken My covenant, to add unto all your abominations.
44.8 ח  וְלֹא שְׁמַרְתֶּם, מִשְׁמֶרֶת קָדָשָׁי; וַתְּשִׂימוּן, לְשֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמַרְתִּי בְּמִקְדָּשִׁי--לָכֶם.  {ס}    8 And ye have not kept the charge of My holy things; but ye have set keepers of My charge in My sanctuary to please yourselves. {S}
44.9 ט  כֹּה-אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, כָּל-בֶּן-נֵכָר עֶרֶל לֵב וְעֶרֶל בָּשָׂר, לֹא יָבוֹא אֶל-מִקְדָּשִׁי:  לְכָל-בֶּן-נֵכָר--אֲשֶׁר, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    9 Thus saith the Lord GOD: No alien, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into My sanctuary, even any alien that is among the children of Israel.
44.10 י  כִּי אִם-הַלְוִיִּם, אֲשֶׁר רָחֲקוּ מֵעָלַי, בִּתְעוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר תָּעוּ מֵעָלַי, אַחֲרֵי גִּלּוּלֵיהֶם; וְנָשְׂאוּ, עֲוֺנָם.    10 But the Levites, that went far from Me, when Israel went astray, that went astray from Me after their idols, they shall bear their iniquity;
44.11 יא  וְהָיוּ בְמִקְדָּשִׁי, מְשָׁרְתִים, פְּקֻדּוֹת אֶל-שַׁעֲרֵי הַבַּיִת, וּמְשָׁרְתִים אֶת-הַבָּיִת; הֵמָּה יִשְׁחֲטוּ אֶת-הָעוֹלָה וְאֶת-הַזֶּבַח, לָעָם, וְהֵמָּה יַעַמְדוּ לִפְנֵיהֶם, לְשָׁרְתָם.    11 and they shall be ministers in My sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering in the house: they shall slay the burnt-offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them.
44.12 יב  יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר יְשָׁרְתוּ אוֹתָם לִפְנֵי גִלּוּלֵיהֶם, וְהָיוּ לְבֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמִכְשׁוֹל עָוֺן; עַל-כֵּן נָשָׂאתִי יָדִי עֲלֵיהֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, וְנָשְׂאוּ, עֲוֺנָם.    12 Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and became a stumblingblock of iniquity unto the house of Israel; therefore have I lifted up My hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their iniquity.
44.13 יג  וְלֹא-יִגְּשׁוּ אֵלַי, לְכַהֵן לִי, וְלָגֶשֶׁת עַל-כָּל-קָדָשַׁי, אֶל-קָדְשֵׁי הַקֳּדָשִׁים; וְנָשְׂאוּ, כְּלִמָּתָם, וְתוֹעֲבוֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ.    13 And they shall not come near unto Me, to minister unto Me in the priest's office, nor to come near to any of My holy things, unto the things that are most holy; but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.
44.14 יד  וְנָתַתִּי אוֹתָם, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַבָּיִת--לְכֹל, עֲבֹדָתוֹ, וּלְכֹל אֲשֶׁר יֵעָשֶׂה, בּוֹ.  {פ}    14 And I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein. {P}
44.15 טו  וְהַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם בְּנֵי צָדוֹק, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמְרוּ אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת מִקְדָּשִׁי בִּתְעוֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵעָלַי--הֵמָּה יִקְרְבוּ אֵלַי, לְשָׁרְתֵנִי; וְעָמְדוּ לְפָנַי, לְהַקְרִיב לִי חֵלֶב וָדָם--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    15 But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of My sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from Me, they shall come near to Me to minister unto Me; and they shall stand before Me to offer unto Me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord GOD;
44.16 טז  הֵמָּה יָבֹאוּ אֶל-מִקְדָּשִׁי, וְהֵמָּה יִקְרְבוּ אֶל-שֻׁלְחָנִי--לְשָׁרְתֵנִי; וְשָׁמְרוּ, אֶת-מִשְׁמַרְתִּי.    16 they shall enter into My sanctuary, and they shall come near to My table, to minister unto Me, and they shall keep My charge.
44.17 יז  וְהָיָה, בְּבוֹאָם אֶל-שַׁעֲרֵי הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית, בִּגְדֵי פִשְׁתִּים, יִלְבָּשׁוּ; וְלֹא-יַעֲלֶה עֲלֵיהֶם, צֶמֶר, בְּשָׁרְתָם בְּשַׁעֲרֵי הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית, וָבָיְתָה.    17 And it shall be that when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, while they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within.
44.18 יח  פַּאֲרֵי פִשְׁתִּים, יִהְיוּ עַל-רֹאשָׁם, וּמִכְנְסֵי פִשְׁתִּים, יִהְיוּ עַל-מָתְנֵיהֶם:  לֹא יַחְגְּרוּ, בַּיָּזַע.    18 They shall have linen tires upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat.
44.19 יט  וּבְצֵאתָם אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה, אֶל-הָעָם, יִפְשְׁטוּ אֶת-בִּגְדֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה מְשָׁרְתִם בָּם, וְהִנִּיחוּ אוֹתָם בְּלִשְׁכֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וְלָבְשׁוּ בְּגָדִים אֲחֵרִים, וְלֹא-יְקַדְּשׁוּ אֶת-הָעָם בְּבִגְדֵיהֶם.    19 And when they go forth into the outer court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they minister, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on other garments, that they sanctify not the people with their garments.
44.20 כ  וְרֹאשָׁם לֹא יְגַלֵּחוּ, וּפֶרַע לֹא יְשַׁלֵּחוּ; כָּסוֹם יִכְסְמוּ, אֶת-רָאשֵׁיהֶם.    20 Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only poll their heads.
44.21 כא  וְיַיִן לֹא-יִשְׁתּוּ, כָּל-כֹּהֵן, בְּבוֹאָם, אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית.    21 Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court.
44.22 כב  וְאַלְמָנָה, וּגְרוּשָׁה, לֹא-יִקְחוּ לָהֶם, לְנָשִׁים:  כִּי אִם-בְּתוּלֹת, מִזֶּרַע בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהָאַלְמָנָה אֲשֶׁר תִּהְיֶה אַלְמָנָה, מִכֹּהֵן יִקָּחוּ.    22 Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away; but they shall take virgins of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that is the widow of a priest.
44.23 כג  וְאֶת-עַמִּי יוֹרוּ, בֵּין קֹדֶשׁ לְחֹל; וּבֵין-טָמֵא לְטָהוֹר, יוֹדִעֻם.    23 And they shall teach My people the difference between the holy and the common, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.
44.24 כד  וְעַל-רִיב, הֵמָּה יַעַמְדוּ לשפט (לְמִשְׁפָּט)--בְּמִשְׁפָּטַי, ושפטהו (יִשְׁפְּטֻהוּ); וְאֶת-תּוֹרֹתַי וְאֶת-חֻקֹּתַי, בְּכָל-מוֹעֲדַי יִשְׁמֹרוּ, וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, יְקַדֵּשׁוּ.    24 And in a controversy they shall stand to judge; according to Mine ordinances shall they judge it; and they shall keep My laws and My statutes in all My appointed seasons, and they shall hallow My sabbaths.
44.25 כה  וְאֶל-מֵת אָדָם, לֹא יָבוֹא לְטָמְאָה:  כִּי אִם-לְאָב וּלְאֵם וּלְבֵן וּלְבַת לְאָח, וּלְאָחוֹת אֲשֶׁר-לֹא-הָיְתָה לְאִישׁ--יִטַּמָּאוּ.    25 And they shall come near no dead person to defile themselves; but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.
44.26 כו  וְאַחֲרֵי, טָהֳרָתוֹ--שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, יִסְפְּרוּ-לוֹ.    26 And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.
44.27 כז  וּבְיוֹם בֹּאוֹ אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית, לְשָׁרֵת בַּקֹּדֶשׁ, יַקְרִיב, חַטָּאתוֹ--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    27 And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin-offering, saith the Lord GOD.
44.28 כח  וְהָיְתָה לָהֶם לְנַחֲלָה, אֲנִי נַחֲלָתָם; וַאֲחֻזָּה, לֹא-תִתְּנוּ לָהֶם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--אֲנִי, אֲחֻזָּתָם.    28 And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their inheritance; and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I am their possession.
44.29 כט  הַמִּנְחָה וְהַחַטָּאת וְהָאָשָׁם, הֵמָּה יֹאכְלוּם; וְכָל-חֵרֶם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, לָהֶם יִהְיֶה.    29 The meal-offering, and the sin-offering, and the guilt-offering, they, even they, shall eat; and every devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs.
44.30 ל  וְרֵאשִׁית כָּל-בִּכּוּרֵי כֹל וְכָל-תְּרוּמַת כֹּל, מִכֹּל תְּרוּמוֹתֵיכֶם--לַכֹּהֲנִים, יִהְיֶה; וְרֵאשִׁית עֲרִסוֹתֵיכֶם תִּתְּנוּ לַכֹּהֵן, לְהָנִיחַ בְּרָכָה אֶל-בֵּיתֶךָ.    30 And the first of all the first-fruits of every thing, and every heave-offering of every thing, of all your offerings, shall be for the priests; ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough, to cause a blessing to rest on thy house.
44.31 לא  כָּל-נְבֵלָה וּטְרֵפָה, מִן-הָעוֹף וּמִן-הַבְּהֵמָה--לֹא יֹאכְלוּ, הַכֹּהֲנִים.  {פ}    31 The priests shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself, or is torn, whether it be fowl or beast. {P}
45.1 א  וּבְהַפִּילְכֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ בְּנַחֲלָה, תָּרִימוּ תְרוּמָה לַיהוָה קֹדֶשׁ מִן-הָאָרֶץ--אֹרֶךְ חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף אֹרֶךְ, וְרֹחַב עֲשָׂרָה אָלֶף:  קֹדֶשׁ-הוּא בְכָל-גְּבוּלָהּ, סָבִיב.    1 Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall set apart an offering unto the LORD, a holy portion of the land; the length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and the breadth shall be ten thousand; it shall be holy in all the border thereof round about.
45.2 ב  יִהְיֶה מִזֶּה אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת בַּחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת מְרֻבָּע סָבִיב; וַחֲמִשִּׁים אַמָּה, מִגְרָשׁ לוֹ סָבִיב.    2 Of this there shall be for the holy place five hundred in length by five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits for the open land round about it.
45.3 ג  וּמִן-הַמִּדָּה הַזֹּאת, תָּמוֹד, אֹרֶךְ חמש (חֲמִשָּׁה) וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וְרֹחַב עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים; וּבוֹ-יִהְיֶה הַמִּקְדָּשׁ, קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים.    3 And of this measure shalt thou measure a length of five and twenty thousand, and a breadth of ten thousand; and in it shall be the sanctuary, which is most holy.
45.4 ד  קֹדֶשׁ מִן-הָאָרֶץ הוּא, לַכֹּהֲנִים מְשָׁרְתֵי הַמִּקְדָּשׁ יִהְיֶה, הַקְּרֵבִים, לְשָׁרֵת אֶת-יְהוָה; וְהָיָה לָהֶם מָקוֹם לְבָתִּים, וּמִקְדָּשׁ לַמִּקְדָּשׁ.    4 It is a holy portion of the land; it shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, that come near to minister unto the LORD; and it shall be a place for their houses, and a place consecrated for the sanctuary.
45.5 ה  וַחֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף אֹרֶךְ, וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים רֹחַב; יהיה (וְהָיָה) לַלְוִיִּם מְשָׁרְתֵי הַבַּיִת לָהֶם, לַאֲחֻזָּה--עֶשְׂרִים לְשָׁכֹת.    5 And five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth, which shall be unto the Levites, the ministers of the house, for a possession unto themselves, for twenty chambers.
45.6 ו  וַאֲחֻזַּת הָעִיר תִּתְּנוּ, חֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים רֹחַב, וְאֹרֶךְ חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, לְעֻמַּת תְּרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ--לְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, יִהְיֶה.    6 And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, side by side with the offering of the holy portion; it shall be for the whole house of Israel.
45.7 ז  וְלַנָּשִׂיא מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה לִתְרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְלַאֲחֻזַּת הָעִיר, אֶל-פְּנֵי תְרוּמַת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְאֶל-פְּנֵי אֲחֻזַּת הָעִיר, מִפְּאַת-יָם יָמָּה, וּמִפְּאַת-קֵדְמָה קָדִימָה; וְאֹרֶךְ, לְעֻמּוֹת אַחַד הַחֲלָקִים, מִגְּבוּל יָם, אֶל-גְּבוּל קָדִימָה.    7 And for the prince, on the one side and on the other side of the holy offering and of the possession of the city, in front of the holy offering and in front of the possession of the city, on the west side westward, and on the east side eastward; and in length answerable unto one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border
45.8 ח  לָאָרֶץ יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ לַאֲחֻזָּה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא-יוֹנוּ עוֹד נְשִׂיאַי אֶת-עַמִּי, וְהָאָרֶץ יִתְּנוּ לְבֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְשִׁבְטֵיהֶם.  {פ}    8 of the land; it shall be to him for a possession in Israel, and My princes shall no more wrong My people; but they shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes. {P}
45.9 ט  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, רַב-לָכֶם נְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--חָמָס וָשֹׁד הָסִירוּ, וּמִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה עֲשׂוּ; הָרִימוּ גְרֻשֹׁתֵיכֶם מֵעַל עַמִּי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.    9 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel; remove violence and spoil, and execute justice and righteousness; take away your exactions from My people, saith the Lord GOD.
45.10 י  מֹאזְנֵי-צֶדֶק וְאֵיפַת-צֶדֶק וּבַת-צֶדֶק, יְהִי לָכֶם.    10 Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.
45.11 יא  הָאֵיפָה וְהַבַּת, תֹּכֶן אֶחָד יִהְיֶה--לָשֵׂאת, מַעְשַׂר הַחֹמֶר הַבָּת; וַעֲשִׂירִת הַחֹמֶר הָאֵיפָה, אֶל-הַחֹמֶר יִהְיֶה מַתְכֻּנְתּוֹ.    11 The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the ephah the tenth part of a homer; the measure thereof shall be after the homer.
45.12 יב  וְהַשֶּׁקֶל, עֶשְׂרִים גֵּרָה; עֶשְׂרִים שְׁקָלִים חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים שְׁקָלִים, עֲשָׂרָה וַחֲמִשָּׁה שֶׁקֶל--הַמָּנֶה, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם.    12 And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs; twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, ten, and five shekels, shall be your maneh.
45.13 יג  זֹאת הַתְּרוּמָה, אֲשֶׁר תָּרִימוּ:  שִׁשִּׁית הָאֵיפָה, מֵחֹמֶר הַחִטִּים, וְשִׁשִּׁיתֶם הָאֵיפָה, מֵחֹמֶר הַשְּׂעֹרִים.    13 This is the offering that ye shall set apart: the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah out of a homer of barley;
45.14 יד  וְחֹק הַשֶּׁמֶן הַבַּת הַשֶּׁמֶן, מַעְשַׂר הַבַּת מִן-הַכֹּר--עֲשֶׂרֶת הַבַּתִּים, חֹמֶר:  כִּי-עֲשֶׂרֶת הַבַּתִּים, חֹמֶר.    14 and the set portion of oil, the bath of oil, shall be the tithe of the bath out of the cor, which is ten baths, even a homer; for ten baths are a homer;
45.15 טו  וְשֶׂה-אַחַת מִן-הַצֹּאן מִן-הַמָּאתַיִם מִמַּשְׁקֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמִנְחָה וּלְעוֹלָה וְלִשְׁלָמִים--לְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיהֶם, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    15 and one lamb of the flock, out of two hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel; for a meal-offering, and for a burnt-offering, and for peace-offerings, to make atonement for them, saith the Lord GOD. {P}
45.16 טז  כֹּל הָעָם הָאָרֶץ, יִהְיוּ אֶל-הַתְּרוּמָה הַזֹּאת, לַנָּשִׂיא, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.    16 All the people of the land shall give this offering for the prince in Israel.
45.17 יז  וְעַל-הַנָּשִׂיא יִהְיֶה, הָעוֹלוֹת וְהַמִּנְחָה וְהַנֵּסֶךְ, בַּחַגִּים וּבֶחֳדָשִׁים וּבַשַּׁבָּתוֹת, בְּכָל-מוֹעֲדֵי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הוּא-יַעֲשֶׂה אֶת-הַחַטָּאת וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וְאֶת-הָעוֹלָה וְאֶת-הַשְּׁלָמִים, לְכַפֵּר, בְּעַד בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    17 And it shall be the prince's part to give the burnt-offerings, and the meal-offerings, and the drink-offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all the appointed seasons of the house of Israel; he shall prepare the sin-offering, and the meal-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel. {S}
45.18 יח  כֹּה-אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בָּרִאשׁוֹן בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ, תִּקַּח פַּר-בֶּן-בָּקָר תָּמִים; וְחִטֵּאתָ, אֶת-הַמִּקְדָּשׁ.    18 Thus saith the Lord GOD: In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish; and thou shalt purify the sanctuary.
45.19 יט  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מִדַּם הַחַטָּאת, וְנָתַן אֶל-מְזוּזַת הַבַּיִת, וְאֶל-אַרְבַּע פִּנּוֹת הָעֲזָרָה, לַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְעַל-מְזוּזַת--שַׁעַר, הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית.    19 And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering, and put it upon the door-posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.
45.20 כ  וְכֵן תַּעֲשֶׂה בְּשִׁבְעָה בַחֹדֶשׁ, מֵאִישׁ שֹׁגֶה וּמִפֶּתִי; וְכִפַּרְתֶּם, אֶת-הַבָּיִת.    20 And so thou shalt do on the seventh day of the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is simple; so shall ye make atonement for the house.
45.21 כא  בָּרִאשׁוֹן בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם, לַחֹדֶשׁ, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, הַפָּסַח; חָג--שְׁבֻעוֹת יָמִים, מַצּוֹת יֵאָכֵל.    21 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover; a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten.
45.22 כב  וְעָשָׂה הַנָּשִׂיא, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, בַּעֲדוֹ, וּבְעַד כָּל-עַם הָאָרֶץ--פַּר, חַטָּאת.    22 And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin-offering.
45.23 כג  וְשִׁבְעַת יְמֵי-הֶחָג יַעֲשֶׂה עוֹלָה לַיהוָה, שִׁבְעַת פָּרִים וְשִׁבְעַת אֵילִים תְּמִימִם לַיּוֹם, שִׁבְעַת, הַיָּמִים; וְחַטָּאת, שְׂעִיר עִזִּים לַיּוֹם.    23 And the seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt-offering to the LORD, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a he-goat daily for a sin-offering.
45.24 כד  וּמִנְחָה, אֵיפָה לַפָּר וְאֵיפָה לָאַיִל--יַעֲשֶׂה; וְשֶׁמֶן, הִין לָאֵיפָה.    24 And he shall prepare a meal-offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
45.25 כה  בַּשְּׁבִיעִי בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ, בֶּחָג, יַעֲשֶׂה כָאֵלֶּה, שִׁבְעַת הַיָּמִים:  כַּחַטָּאת, כָּעֹלָה, וְכַמִּנְחָה, וְכַשָּׁמֶן.  {ס}    25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, shall he do the like the seven days; to the sin-offering as well as the burnt-offering, and the meal-offering as well as the oil. {S}
46.1 א  כֹּה-אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר הַפְּנִימִית הַפֹּנֶה קָדִים, יִהְיֶה סָגוּר שֵׁשֶׁת יְמֵי הַמַּעֲשֶׂה; וּבְיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת יִפָּתֵחַ, וּבְיוֹם הַחֹדֶשׁ יִפָּתֵחַ.    1 Thus saith the Lord GOD: The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath day it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.
46.2 ב  וּבָא הַנָּשִׂיא דֶּרֶךְ אוּלָם הַשַּׁעַר מִחוּץ, וְעָמַד עַל-מְזוּזַת הַשַּׁעַר, וְעָשׂוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים אֶת-עוֹלָתוֹ וְאֶת-שְׁלָמָיו, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוָה עַל-מִפְתַּן הַשַּׁעַר וְיָצָא; וְהַשַּׁעַר לֹא-יִסָּגֵר, עַד-הָעָרֶב.    2 And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate; then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.
46.3 ג  וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ עַם-הָאָרֶץ, פֶּתַח הַשַּׁעַר הַהוּא, בַּשַּׁבָּתוֹת, וּבֶחֳדָשִׁים--לִפְנֵי, יְהוָה.    3 Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of that gate before the LORD in the sabbaths and in the new moons.
46.4 ד  וְהָעֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר-יַקְרִב הַנָּשִׂיא לַיהוָה:  בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, שִׁשָּׁה כְבָשִׂים תְּמִימִם--וְאַיִל תָּמִים.    4 And the burnt-offering that the prince shall offer unto the LORD shall be in the sabbath day six lambs without blemish and a ram without blemish;
46.5 ה  וּמִנְחָה אֵיפָה לָאַיִל, וְלַכְּבָשִׂים מִנְחָה מַתַּת יָדוֹ; וְשֶׁמֶן, הִין לָאֵיפָה.  {ס}    5 and the meal-offering shall be an ephah for the ram, and the meal-offering for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah. {S}
46.6 ו  וּבְיוֹם הַחֹדֶשׁ, פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר תְּמִימִם; וְשֵׁשֶׁת כְּבָשִׂים וָאַיִל, תְּמִימִם יִהְיוּ.    6 And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without blemish; and six lambs, and a ram; they shall be without blemish;
46.7 ז  וְאֵיפָה לַפָּר וְאֵיפָה לָאַיִל, יַעֲשֶׂה מִנְחָה, וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, כַּאֲשֶׁר תַּשִּׂיג יָדוֹ; וְשֶׁמֶן, הִין לָאֵיפָה.    7 and he shall prepare a meal-offering, an ephah for the bullock, and an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs according as his means suffice, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
46.8 ח  וּבְבוֹא, הַנָּשִׂיא--דֶּרֶךְ אוּלָם הַשַּׁעַר יָבוֹא, וּבְדַרְכּוֹ יֵצֵא.    8 And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.
46.9 ט  וּבְבוֹא עַם-הָאָרֶץ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בַּמּוֹעֲדִים, הַבָּא דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר צָפוֹן לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת יֵצֵא דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר נֶגֶב, וְהַבָּא דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר נֶגֶב יֵצֵא דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר צָפוֹנָה:  לֹא יָשׁוּב, דֶּרֶךְ הַשַּׁעַר אֲשֶׁר-בָּא בוֹ--כִּי נִכְחוֹ, יצאו (יֵצֵא).    9 But when the people of the land shall come before the LORD in the appointed seasons, he that entereth by the way of the north gate to worship shall go forth by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate; he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth straight before him.
46.10 י  וְהַנָּשִׂיא--בְּתוֹכָם בְּבוֹאָם יָבוֹא, וּבְצֵאתָם יֵצֵאוּ.    10 And the prince, when they go in, shall go in in the midst of them; and when they go forth, they shall go forth together.
46.11 יא  וּבַחַגִּים וּבַמּוֹעֲדִים, תִּהְיֶה הַמִּנְחָה אֵיפָה לַפָּר וְאֵיפָה לָאַיִל, וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, מַתַּת יָדוֹ; וְשֶׁמֶן, הִין לָאֵיפָה.  {פ}    11 And in the feasts and in the appointed seasons the meal-offering shall be an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah. {P}
46.12 יב  וְכִי-יַעֲשֶׂה הַנָּשִׂיא נְדָבָה עוֹלָה אוֹ-שְׁלָמִים, נְדָבָה לַיהוָה, וּפָתַח לוֹ אֶת-הַשַּׁעַר הַפֹּנֶה קָדִים, וְעָשָׂה אֶת-עֹלָתוֹ וְאֶת-שְׁלָמָיו כַּאֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת; וְיָצָא וְסָגַר אֶת-הַשַּׁעַר, אַחֲרֵי צֵאתוֹ.    12 And when the prince shall prepare a freewill-offering, a burnt-offering or peace-offerings as a freewill-offering unto the LORD, one shall open for him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, as he doth on the sabbath day; then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.
46.13 יג  וְכֶבֶשׂ בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ תָּמִים, תַּעֲשֶׂה עוֹלָה לַיּוֹם--לַיהוָה:  בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתוֹ.    13 And thou shalt prepare a lamb of the first year without blemish for a burnt-offering unto the LORD daily; morning by morning shalt thou prepare it.
46.14 יד  וּמִנְחָה תַעֲשֶׂה עָלָיו בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר, שִׁשִּׁית הָאֵיפָה, וְשֶׁמֶן שְׁלִישִׁית הַהִין, לָרֹס אֶת-הַסֹּלֶת:  מִנְחָה, לַיהוָה--חֻקּוֹת עוֹלָם, תָּמִיד.    14 And thou shalt prepare a meal-offering with it morning by morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of a hin of oil, to moisten the fine flour: a meal-offering unto the LORD continually by a perpetual ordinance.
46.15 טו  ועשו (יַעֲשׂוּ) אֶת-הַכֶּבֶשׂ וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה וְאֶת-הַשֶּׁמֶן, בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר:  עוֹלַת, תָּמִיד.  {ס}    15 Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meal-offering, and the oil, morning by morning, for a continual burnt-offering. {S}
46.16 טז  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, כִּי-יִתֵּן הַנָּשִׂיא מַתָּנָה לְאִישׁ מִבָּנָיו--נַחֲלָתוֹ הִיא, לְבָנָיו תִּהְיֶה:  אֲחֻזָּתָם הִיא, בְּנַחֲלָה.  {ס}    16 Thus saith the Lord GOD: If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, it is his inheritance, it shall belong to his sons; it is their possession by inheritance. {S}
46.17 יז  וְכִי-יִתֵּן מַתָּנָה מִנַּחֲלָתוֹ, לְאַחַד מֵעֲבָדָיו--וְהָיְתָה לּוֹ עַד-שְׁנַת הַדְּרוֹר, וְשָׁבַת לַנָּשִׂיא; אַךְ, נַחֲלָתוֹ--בָּנָיו, לָהֶם תִּהְיֶה.    17 But if he give of his inheritance a gift to one of his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty; then it shall return to the prince; but as for his inheritance, it shall be for his sons.
46.18 יח  וְלֹא-יִקַּח הַנָּשִׂיא מִנַּחֲלַת הָעָם, לְהוֹנֹתָם מֵאֲחֻזָּתָם--מֵאֲחֻזָּתוֹ, יַנְחִל אֶת-בָּנָיו:  לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָפֻצוּ עַמִּי, אִישׁ מֵאֲחֻזָּתוֹ.    18 Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance, to thrust them wrongfully out of their possession; he shall give inheritance to his sons out of his own possession; that My people be not scattered every man from his possession.'
46.19 יט  וַיְבִיאֵנִי בַמָּבוֹא, אֲשֶׁר עַל-כֶּתֶף הַשַּׁעַר, אֶל-הַלִּשְׁכוֹת הַקֹּדֶשׁ אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים, הַפֹּנוֹת צָפוֹנָה; וְהִנֵּה-שָׁם מָקוֹם, בירכתם (בַּיַּרְכָתַיִם) יָמָּה.    19 Then he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers for the priests, which looked toward the north; and, behold, there was a place on the hinder part westward.
46.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי--זֶה הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יְבַשְּׁלוּ-שָׁם הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶת-הָאָשָׁם וְאֶת-הַחַטָּאת:  אֲשֶׁר יֹאפוּ אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, לְבִלְתִּי הוֹצִיא אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה לְקַדֵּשׁ אֶת-הָעָם.    20 And he said unto me: 'This is the place where the priests shall boil the guilt-offering and the sin-offering, where they shall bake the meal-offering; that they bring them not forth into the outer court, to sanctify the people.'
46.21 כא  וַיּוֹצִיאֵנִי, אֶל-הֶחָצֵר הַחִיצוֹנָה, וַיַּעֲבִרֵנִי, אֶל-אַרְבַּעַת מִקְצוֹעֵי הֶחָצֵר; וְהִנֵּה חָצֵר בְּמִקְצֹעַ הֶחָצֵר, חָצֵר בְּמִקְצֹעַ הֶחָצֵר.    21 Then he brought me forth into the outer court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.
46.22 כב  בְּאַרְבַּעַת מִקְצֹעוֹת הֶחָצֵר, חֲצֵרוֹת קְטֻרוֹת--אַרְבָּעִים אֹרֶךְ, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים רֹחַב:  מִדָּה אַחַת, לְאַרְבַּעְתָּם מְהֻקְצָעוֹת.    22 In the four corners of the court there were courts inclosed, forty cubits long and thirty broad; these four in the corners were of one measure.
46.23 כג  וְטוּר סָבִיב בָּהֶם סָבִיב, לְאַרְבַּעְתָּם; וּמְבַשְּׁלוֹת עָשׂוּי, מִתַּחַת הַטִּירוֹת סָבִיב.    23 And there was a row of masonry round about in them, round about the four, and it was made with boiling-places under the rows round about.
46.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵלָי:  אֵלֶּה בֵּית הַמְבַשְּׁלִים, אֲשֶׁר יְבַשְּׁלוּ-שָׁם מְשָׁרְתֵי הַבַּיִת אֶת-זֶבַח הָעָם.    24 Then said he unto me: 'These are the boiling-places, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifices of the people.'
47.1 א  וַיְשִׁבֵנִי, אֶל-פֶּתַח הַבַּיִת, וְהִנֵּה-מַיִם יֹצְאִים מִתַּחַת מִפְתַּן הַבַּיִת קָדִימָה, כִּי-פְנֵי הַבַּיִת קָדִים; וְהַמַּיִם יֹרְדִים, מִתַּחַת מִכֶּתֶף הַבַּיִת הַיְמָנִית, מִנֶּגֶב, לַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    1 And he brought me back unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward, for the forefront of the house looked toward the east; and the waters came down from under, from the right side of the house, on the south of the altar.
47.2 ב  וַיּוֹצִאֵנִי, דֶּרֶךְ-שַׁעַר צָפוֹנָה, וַיְסִבֵּנִי דֶּרֶךְ חוּץ, אֶל-שַׁעַר הַחוּץ דֶּרֶךְ הַפּוֹנֶה קָדִים; וְהִנֵּה-מַיִם מְפַכִּים, מִן-הַכָּתֵף הַיְמָנִית.    2 Then brought he me out by the way of the gate northward, and led me round by the way without unto the outer gate, by the way of the gate that looketh toward the east; and, behold, there trickled forth waters on the right side.
47.3 ג  בְּצֵאת-הָאִישׁ קָדִים, וְקָו בְּיָדוֹ; וַיָּמָד אֶלֶף בָּאַמָּה, וַיַּעֲבִרֵנִי בַמַּיִם מֵי אָפְסָיִם.    3 When the man went forth eastward with the line in his hand, he measured a thousand cubits, and he caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the ankles.
47.4 ד  וַיָּמָד אֶלֶף, וַיַּעֲבִרֵנִי בַמַּיִם מַיִם בִּרְכָּיִם; וַיָּמָד אֶלֶף, וַיַּעֲבִרֵנִי מֵי מָתְנָיִם.    4 Again he measured a thousand, and caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and caused me to pass through waters that were to the loins.
47.5 ה  וַיָּמָד אֶלֶף--נַחַל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-אוּכַל לַעֲבֹר:  כִּי-גָאוּ הַמַּיִם מֵי שָׂחוּ, נַחַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֵעָבֵר.    5 Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass through; for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.
47.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הֲרָאִיתָ בֶן-אָדָם; וַיּוֹלִכֵנִי וַיְשִׁבֵנִי, שְׂפַת הַנָּחַל.    6 And he said unto me: 'Hast thou seen this, O son of man?' Then he led me, and caused me to return to the bank of the river.
47.7 ז  בְּשׁוּבֵנִי--וְהִנֵּה אֶל-שְׂפַת הַנַּחַל, עֵץ רַב מְאֹד:  מִזֶּה, וּמִזֶּה.    7 Now when I had been brought back, behold, upon the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.
47.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי, הַמַּיִם הָאֵלֶּה יוֹצְאִים אֶל-הַגְּלִילָה הַקַּדְמוֹנָה, וְיָרְדוּ, עַל-הָעֲרָבָה; וּבָאוּ הַיָּמָּה, אֶל-הַיָּמָּה הַמּוּצָאִים וְנִרְפּאוּ הַמָּיִם.    8 Then said he unto me: 'These waters issue forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into the Arabah; and when they shall enter into the sea, into the sea of the putrid waters, the waters shall be healed.
47.9 ט  וְהָיָה כָל-נֶפֶשׁ חַיָּה אֲשֶׁר-יִשְׁרֹץ אֶל כָּל-אֲשֶׁר יָבוֹא שָׁם נַחֲלַיִם, יִחְיֶה, וְהָיָה הַדָּגָה, רַבָּה מְאֹד:  כִּי בָאוּ שָׁמָּה הַמַּיִם הָאֵלֶּה, וְיֵרָפְאוּ וָחָי--כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יָבוֹא שָׁמָּה, הַנָּחַל.    9 And it shall come to pass, that every living creature wherewith it swarmeth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live; and there shall be a very great multitude of fish; for these waters are come thither, that all things be healed and may live whithersoever the river cometh.
47.10 י  וְהָיָה יעמדו (עָמְדוּ) עָלָיו דַּוָּגִים, מֵעֵין גֶּדִי וְעַד-עֵין עֶגְלַיִם--מִשְׁטוֹחַ לַחֲרָמִים, יִהְיוּ; לְמִינָה תִּהְיֶה דְגָתָם, כִּדְגַת הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל רַבָּה מְאֹד.    10 And it shall come to pass, that fishers shall stand by it from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; there shall be a place for the spreading of nets; their fish shall be after their kinds, as the fish of the Great Sea, exceeding many.
47.11 יא  בִּצֹּאתָו וּגְבָאָיו וְלֹא יֵרָפְאוּ, לְמֶלַח נִתָּנוּ.    11 But the miry places thereof, and the marshes thereof, shall not be healed; they shall be given for salt.
47.12 יב  וְעַל-הַנַּחַל יַעֲלֶה עַל-שְׂפָתוֹ מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה כָּל-עֵץ-מַאֲכָל לֹא-יִבּוֹל עָלֵהוּ וְלֹא-יִתֹּם פִּרְיוֹ, לָחֳדָשָׁיו יְבַכֵּר--כִּי מֵימָיו, מִן-הַמִּקְדָּשׁ הֵמָּה יוֹצְאִים; והיו (וְהָיָה) פִרְיוֹ לְמַאֲכָל, וְעָלֵהוּ לִתְרוּפָה.  {פ}    12 And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow every tree for food, whose leaf shall not wither, neither shall the fruit thereof fail; it shall bring forth new fruit every month, because the waters thereof issue out of the sanctuary; and the fruit thereof shall be for food, and the leaf thereof for healing.' {P}
47.13 יג  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, גֵּה גְבוּל אֲשֶׁר תִּתְנַחֲלוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, לִשְׁנֵי עָשָׂר שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--יוֹסֵף, חֲבָלִים.    13 Thus saith the Lord GOD: 'This shall be the border, whereby ye shall divide the land for inheritance according to the twelve tribes of Israel, Joseph receiving two portions.
47.14 יד  וּנְחַלְתֶּם אוֹתָהּ, אִישׁ כְּאָחִיו, אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי, לְתִתָּהּ לַאֲבֹתֵיכֶם; וְנָפְלָה הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לָכֶם--בְּנַחֲלָה.    14 And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another, concerning which I lifted up My hand to give it unto your fathers; and this land shall fall unto you for inheritance.
47.15 טו  וְזֶה, גְּבוּל הָאָרֶץ:  לִפְאַת צָפוֹנָה מִן-הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל, הַדֶּרֶךְ חֶתְלֹן--לְבוֹא צְדָדָה.    15 And this shall be the border of the land: on the north side, from the Great Sea, by the way of Hethlon, unto the entrance of Zedad;
47.16 טז  חֲמָת בֵּרוֹתָה, סִבְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר בֵּין-גְּבוּל דַּמֶּשֶׂק, וּבֵין גְּבוּל חֲמָת; חָצֵר, הַתִּיכוֹן, אֲשֶׁר, אֶל-גְּבוּל חַוְרָן.    16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazer-hatticon, which is by the border of Hauran.
47.17 יז  וְהָיָה גְבוּל מִן-הַיָּם, חֲצַר עֵינוֹן גְּבוּל דַּמֶּשֶׂק, וְצָפוֹן צָפוֹנָה, וּגְבוּל חֲמָת; וְאֵת, פְּאַת צָפוֹן.    17 And the border from the sea shall be Hazar-enon at the border of Damascus, and on the north northward is the border of Hamath. This is the north side.
47.18 יח  וּפְאַת קָדִים מִבֵּין חַוְרָן וּמִבֵּין-דַּמֶּשֶׂק וּמִבֵּין הַגִּלְעָד וּמִבֵּין אֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַיַּרְדֵּן--מִגְּבוּל עַל-הַיָּם הַקַּדְמוֹנִי, תָּמֹדּוּ; וְאֵת, פְּאַת קָדִימָה.    18 And the east side, between Hauran and Damascus and Gilead, and the land of Israel, by the Jordan, from the border unto the east sea shall ye measure. This is the east side.
47.19 יט  וּפְאַת, נֶגֶב תֵּימָנָה, מִתָּמָר עַד-מֵי מְרִיבוֹת קָדֵשׁ, נַחֲלָה אֶל-הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל; וְאֵת פְּאַת-תֵּימָנָה, נֶגְבָּה.    19 And the south side southward shall be from Tamar as far as the waters of Meriboth-kadesh, to the Brook, unto the Great Sea. This is the south side southward.
47.20 כ  וּפְאַת-יָם, הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל, מִגְּבוּל, עַד-נֹכַח לְבוֹא חֲמָת; זֹאת, פְּאַת-יָם.    20 And the west side shall be the Great Sea, from the border as far as over against the entrance of Hamath. This is the west side.
47.21 כא  וְחִלַּקְתֶּם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לָכֶם--לְשִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    21 So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of Israel.
47.22 כב  וְהָיָה, תַּפִּלוּ אוֹתָהּ בְּנַחֲלָה, לָכֶם וּלְהַגֵּרִים הַגָּרִים בְּתוֹכְכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-הוֹלִדוּ בָנִים בְּתוֹכְכֶם; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם, כְּאֶזְרָח בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אִתְּכֶם יִפְּלוּ בְנַחֲלָה, בְּתוֹךְ שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    22 And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you and to the strangers that sojourn among you, who shall beget children among you; and they shall be unto you as the home-born among the children of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.
47.23 כג  וְהָיָה בַשֵּׁבֶט, אֲשֶׁר-גָּר הַגֵּר אִתּוֹ--שָׁם תִּתְּנוּ נַחֲלָתוֹ, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {פ}    23 And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord GOD. {P}
48.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת הַשְּׁבָטִים:  מִקְצֵה צָפוֹנָה אֶל-יַד דֶּרֶךְ-חֶתְלֹן לְבוֹא-חֲמָת חֲצַר עֵינָן גְּבוּל דַּמֶּשֶׂק צָפוֹנָה, אֶל-יַד חֲמָת, וְהָיוּ-לוֹ פְאַת-קָדִים הַיָּם, דָּן אֶחָד.    1 Now these are the names of the tribes: from the north end, beside the way of Hethlon to the entrance of Hamath, Hazar-enan, at the border of Damascus, northward, beside Hamath; and they shall have their sides east and west: Dan, one portion.
48.2 ב  וְעַל גְּבוּל דָּן, מִפְּאַת קָדִים עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--אָשֵׁר אֶחָד.    2 And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side: Asher, one portion.
48.3 ג  וְעַל גְּבוּל אָשֵׁר, מִפְּאַת קָדִימָה וְעַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--נַפְתָּלִי אֶחָד.    3 And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west side: Naphtali, one portion.
48.4 ד  וְעַל גְּבוּל נַפְתָּלִי, מִפְּאַת קָדִמָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--מְנַשֶּׁה אֶחָד.    4 And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side: Manasseh, one portion.
48.5 ה  וְעַל גְּבוּל מְנַשֶּׁה, מִפְּאַת קָדִמָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--אֶפְרַיִם אֶחָד.    5 And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side: Ephraim, one portion.
48.6 ו  וְעַל גְּבוּל אֶפְרַיִם, מִפְּאַת קָדִים וְעַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--רְאוּבֵן אֶחָד.    6 And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west side: Reuben, one portion.
48.7 ז  וְעַל גְּבוּל רְאוּבֵן, מִפְּאַת קָדִים עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--יְהוּדָה אֶחָד.    7 And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side: Judah, one portion.
48.8 ח  וְעַל גְּבוּל יְהוּדָה, מִפְּאַת קָדִים עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--תִּהְיֶה הַתְּרוּמָה אֲשֶׁר-תָּרִימוּ חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף רֹחַב, וְאֹרֶךְ כְּאַחַד הַחֲלָקִים מִפְּאַת קָדִימָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה, וְהָיָה הַמִּקְדָּשׁ, בְּתוֹכוֹ.    8 And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side, shall be the offering which ye shall set aside, five and twenty thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the portions, from the east side unto the west side; and the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.
48.9 ט  הַתְּרוּמָה, אֲשֶׁר תָּרִימוּ לַיהוָה--אֹרֶךְ, חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וְרֹחַב, עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים.    9 The offering that ye shall set apart unto the LORD shall be five and twenty thousand reeds in length, and ten thousand in breadth.
48.10 י  וּלְאֵלֶּה תִּהְיֶה תְרוּמַת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, לַכֹּהֲנִים--צָפוֹנָה חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף וְיָמָּה רֹחַב עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים, וְקָדִימָה רֹחַב עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים וְנֶגְבָּה אֹרֶךְ חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף; וְהָיָה מִקְדַּשׁ-יְהוָה, בְּתוֹכוֹ.    10 And for these, even for the priests, shall be the holy offering; toward the north five and twenty thousand [in length], and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length; and the sanctuary of the LORD shall be in the midst thereof.
48.11 יא  לַכֹּהֲנִים הַמְקֻדָּשׁ מִבְּנֵי צָדוֹק, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמְרוּ מִשְׁמַרְתִּי--אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תָעוּ, בִּתְעוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר תָּעוּ, הַלְוִיִּם.    11 The sanctified portion shall be for the priests of the sons of Zadok, that have kept My charge, that went not astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.
48.12 יב  וְהָיְתָה לָהֶם תְּרוּמִיָּה מִתְּרוּמַת הָאָרֶץ, קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים--אֶל-גְּבוּל, הַלְוִיִּם.    12 And it shall be unto them a portion set apart from the offering of the land, a thing most holy, by the border of the Levites.
48.13 יג  וְהַלְוִיִּם, לְעֻמַּת גְּבוּל הַכֹּהֲנִים, חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף אֹרֶךְ, וְרֹחַב עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים; כָּל-אֹרֶךְ, חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וְרֹחַב, עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים.    13 And answerable unto the border of the priests, the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth; all the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.
48.14 יד  וְלֹא-יִמְכְּרוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, וְלֹא יָמֵר וְלֹא יעבור (יַעֲבִיר)--רֵאשִׁית הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי-קֹדֶשׁ, לַיהוָה.    14 And they shall not sell of it, nor exchange, nor alienate the first portion of the land; for it is holy unto the LORD.
48.15 טו  וַחֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים הַנּוֹתָר בָּרֹחַב, עַל-פְּנֵי חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף--חֹל-הוּא לָעִיר, לְמוֹשָׁב וּלְמִגְרָשׁ; וְהָיְתָה הָעִיר, בְּתוֹכֹה.    15 And the five thousand that are left in the breadth, in front of the five and twenty thousand, shall be for common use, for the city, for dwelling and for open land; and the city shall be in the midst thereof.
48.16 טז  וְאֵלֶּה, מִדּוֹתֶיהָ--פְּאַת צָפוֹן חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, וּפְאַת-נֶגֶב חֲמֵשׁ חמש (  ) מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים; וּמִפְּאַת קָדִים, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, וּפְאַת-יָמָּה, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים.    16 And these shall be the measures thereof: the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.
48.17 יז  וְהָיָה מִגְרָשׁ, לָעִיר--צָפוֹנָה חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתַיִם, וְנֶגְבָּה חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתָיִם; וְקָדִימָה חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתַיִם, וְיָמָּה חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתָיִם.    17 And the city shall have open land: toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty.
48.18 יח  וְהַנּוֹתָר בָּאֹרֶךְ לְעֻמַּת תְּרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ, עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים קָדִימָה וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים יָמָּה, וְהָיָה, לְעֻמַּת תְּרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וְהָיְתָה תְבוּאָתֹה לְלֶחֶם, לְעֹבְדֵי הָעִיר.    18 And the residue in the length, answerable unto the holy offering, shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward; and it shall be answerable unto the holy offering; and the increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city.
48.19 יט  וְהָעֹבֵד, הָעִיר--יַעַבְדוּהוּ, מִכֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    19 And they that serve the city, out of all the tribes of Israel, shall till it.
48.20 כ  כָּל-הַתְּרוּמָה, חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, בַּחֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים, אָלֶף:  רְבִיעִית, תָּרִימוּ אֶת-תְּרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ, אֶל-אֲחֻזַּת, הָעִיר.    20 All the offering shall be five and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand; ye shall set apart the holy offering foursquare, with the possession of the city.
48.21 כא  וְהַנּוֹתָר לַנָּשִׂיא מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה לִתְרוּמַת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְלַאֲחֻזַּת הָעִיר אֶל-פְּנֵי חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף תְּרוּמָה, עַד-גְּבוּל קָדִימָה, וְיָמָּה עַל-פְּנֵי חֲמִשָּׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף עַל-גְּבוּל יָמָּה, לְעֻמַּת חֲלָקִים לַנָּשִׂיא; וְהָיְתָה תְּרוּמַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וּמִקְדַּשׁ הַבַּיִת בְּתוֹכֹה.    21 And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy offering and of the possession of the city, in front of the five and twenty thousand of the offering toward the east border, and westward in front of the five and twenty thousand toward the west border, answerable unto the portions, it shall be for the prince; and the holy offering and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst thereof.
48.22 כב  וּמֵאֲחֻזַּת הַלְוִיִּם וּמֵאֲחֻזַּת הָעִיר, בְּתוֹךְ אֲשֶׁר לַנָּשִׂיא יִהְיֶה:  בֵּין גְּבוּל יְהוּדָה, וּבֵין גְּבוּל בִּנְיָמִן--לַנָּשִׂיא, יִהְיֶה.    22 Thus the possession of the Levites, and the possession of the city, shall be in the midst of that which is the prince's; between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin shall be the prince's.
48.23 כג  וְיֶתֶר, הַשְּׁבָטִים:  מִפְּאַת קָדִימָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה, בִּנְיָמִן אֶחָד.    23 And as for the rest of the tribes: from the east side unto the west side: Benjamin, one portion.
48.24 כד  וְעַל גְּבוּל בִּנְיָמִן, מִפְּאַת קָדִימָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--שִׁמְעוֹן אֶחָד.    24 And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west side: Simeon, one portion.
48.25 כה  וְעַל גְּבוּל שִׁמְעוֹן, מִפְּאַת קָדִימָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--יִשָּׂשכָר אֶחָד.    25 And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side: Issachar, one portion.
48.26 כו  וְעַל גְּבוּל יִשָּׂשכָר, מִפְּאַת קָדִימָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--זְבוּלֻן אֶחָד.    26 And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west side: Zebulun, one portion.
48.27 כז  וְעַל גְּבוּל זְבוּלֻן, מִפְּאַת קָדִמָה עַד-פְּאַת-יָמָּה--גָּד אֶחָד.    27 And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side: Gad, one portion.
48.28 כח  וְעַל גְּבוּל גָּד, אֶל-פְּאַת נֶגֶב תֵּימָנָה:  וְהָיָה גְבוּל מִתָּמָר, מֵי מְרִיבַת קָדֵשׁ, נַחֲלָה, עַל-הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל.    28 And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the Brook, unto the Great Sea.
48.29 כט  זֹאת הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-תַּפִּילוּ מִנַּחֲלָה, לְשִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאֵלֶּה, מַחְלְקוֹתָם--נְאֻם, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.  {ס}    29 This is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord GOD. {S}
48.30 ל  וְאֵלֶּה, תּוֹצְאֹת הָעִיר:  מִפְּאַת צָפוֹן, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים מִדָּה.    30 And these are the goings out of the city: on the north side four thousand and five hundred reeds by measure;
48.31 לא  וְשַׁעֲרֵי הָעִיר, עַל-שְׁמוֹת שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁעָרִים שְׁלוֹשָׁה, צָפוֹנָה--שַׁעַר רְאוּבֵן אֶחָד, שַׁעַר יְהוּדָה אֶחָד, שַׁעַר לֵוִי, אֶחָד.    31 and the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes of Israel; three gates northward: the gate of Reuben, one; the gate of Judah, one; the gate of Levi, one;
48.32 לב  וְאֶל-פְּאַת קָדִימָה, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, וּשְׁעָרִים, שְׁלֹשָׁה--וְשַׁעַר יוֹסֵף אֶחָד, שַׁעַר בִּנְיָמִן אֶחָד, שַׁעַר דָּן, אֶחָד.    32 and at the east side four thousand and five hundred reeds; and three gates: even the gate of Joseph, one; the gate of Benjamin, one; the gate of Dan, one;
48.33 לג  וּפְאַת-נֶגְבָּה, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים מִדָּה, וּשְׁעָרִים, שְׁלֹשָׁה--שַׁעַר שִׁמְעוֹן אֶחָד, שַׁעַר יִשָּׂשכָר אֶחָד, שַׁעַר זְבוּלֻן, אֶחָד.    33 and at the south side four thousand and five hundred reeds by measure; and three gates: the gate of Simeon, one; the gate of Issachar, one; the gate of Zebulun, one;
48.34 לד  פְּאַת-יָמָּה, חֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים, שַׁעֲרֵיהֶם, שְׁלֹשָׁה--שַׁעַר גָּד אֶחָד, שַׁעַר אָשֵׁר אֶחָד, שַׁעַר נַפְתָּלִי, אֶחָד.    34 at the west side four thousand and five hundred reeds, with their three gates: the gate of Gad, one; the gate of Asher, one; the gate of Naphtali, one.
48.35 לה  סָבִיב, שְׁמֹנָה עָשָׂר אָלֶף; וְשֵׁם-הָעִיר מִיּוֹם, יְהוָה שָׁמָּה.  {ש}    35 It shall be eighteen thousand reeds round about. And the name of the city from that day shall be, The LORD is there.' {P}
