1.1 א  וּבִשְׁנַת אַחַת, לְכוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ פָּרַס, לִכְלוֹת דְּבַר-יְהוָה, מִפִּי יִרְמְיָה:  הֵעִיר יְהוָה, אֶת-רוּחַ כֹּרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ-פָּרַס, וַיַּעֲבֶר-קוֹל בְּכָל-מַלְכוּתוֹ, וְגַם-בְּמִכְתָּב לֵאמֹר.    1 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying:
1.2 ב  כֹּה אָמַר, כֹּרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ פָּרַס--כֹּל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, נָתַן לִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְהוּא-פָקַד עָלַי לִבְנוֹת-לוֹ בַיִת, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר בִּיהוּדָה.    2 'Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia: All the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD, the God of heaven, given me; and He hath charged me to build Him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
1.3 ג  מִי-בָכֶם מִכָּל-עַמּוֹ, יְהִי אֱלֹהָיו עִמּוֹ, וְיַעַל, לִירוּשָׁלִַם אֲשֶׁר בִּיהוּדָה; וְיִבֶן, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    3 Whosoever there is among you of all His people--his God be with him--let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the LORD, the God of Israel, He is the God who is in Jerusalem.
1.4 ד  וְכָל-הַנִּשְׁאָר, מִכָּל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר הוּא גָר-שָׁם--יְנַשְּׂאוּהוּ אַנְשֵׁי מְקֹמוֹ, בְּכֶסֶף וּבְזָהָב וּבִרְכוּשׁ וּבִבְהֵמָה; עִם-הַנְּדָבָה--לְבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    4 And whosoever is left, in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, beside the freewill-offering for the house of God which is in Jerusalem.'
1.5 ה  וַיָּקוּמוּ רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לִיהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, וְהַלְוִיִּם; לְכֹל הֵעִיר הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶת-רוּחוֹ, לַעֲלוֹת לִבְנוֹת, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    5 Then rose up the heads of fathers' houses of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, even all whose spirit God had stirred to go up to build the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem.
1.6 ו  וְכָל-סְבִיבֹתֵיהֶם חִזְּקוּ בִידֵיהֶם, בִּכְלֵי-כֶסֶף בַּזָּהָב בָּרְכוּשׁ וּבַבְּהֵמָה וּבַמִּגְדָּנוֹת--לְבַד, עַל-כָּל-הִתְנַדֵּב.  {ס}    6 And all they that were round about them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, beside all that was willingly offered. {S}
1.7 ז  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ כּוֹרֶשׁ, הוֹצִיא אֶת-כְּלֵי בֵית-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצִיא נְבוּכַדְנֶצַּר מִירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּבֵית אֱלֹהָיו.    7 Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the LORD, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his gods;
1.8 ח  וַיּוֹצִיאֵם, כּוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ פָּרַס, עַל-יַד, מִתְרְדָת הַגִּזְבָּר; וַיִּסְפְּרֵם, לְשֵׁשְׁבַּצַּר, הַנָּשִׂיא, לִיהוּדָה.    8 even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah.
1.9 ט  וְאֵלֶּה, מִסְפָּרָם:  אֲגַרְטְלֵי זָהָב שְׁלֹשִׁים, אֲגַרְטְלֵי-כֶסֶף אָלֶף, מַחֲלָפִים, תִּשְׁעָה וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    9 And this is the number of them: thirty basins of gold, a thousand basins of silver, nine and twenty knives; {S}
1.10 י  כְּפוֹרֵי זָהָב, שְׁלֹשִׁים--  {ס}  כְּפוֹרֵי כֶסֶף מִשְׁנִים, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת וַעֲשָׂרָה; כֵּלִים אֲחֵרִים, אָלֶף.  {ס}    10 thirty bowls of gold, {S} silver bowls of a second sort four hundred and ten, and other vessels a thousand. {S}
1.11 יא  כָּל-כֵּלִים לַזָּהָב וְלַכֶּסֶף, חֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת; הַכֹּל הֶעֱלָה שֵׁשְׁבַּצַּר, עִם הֵעָלוֹת הַגּוֹלָה--מִבָּבֶל, לִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}    11 All the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four hundred. All these did Sheshbazzar bring up, when they of the captivity were brought up from Babylon unto Jerusalem. {P}
2.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה בְּנֵי הַמְּדִינָה, הָעֹלִים מִשְּׁבִי הַגּוֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶגְלָה נבוכדנצור (נְבוּכַדְנֶצַּר) מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, לְבָבֶל; וַיָּשׁוּבוּ לִירוּשָׁלִַם וִיהוּדָה, אִישׁ לְעִירוֹ.    1 Now these are the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and that returned unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city;
2.2 ב  אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ עִם-זְרֻבָּבֶל, יֵשׁוּעַ נְחֶמְיָה שְׂרָיָה רְעֵלָיָה מָרְדֳּכַי בִּלְשָׁן מִסְפָּר בִּגְוַי--רְחוּם בַּעֲנָה:  מִסְפַּר, אַנְשֵׁי עַם יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    2 who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel: {S}
2.3 ג  בְּנֵי פַרְעֹשׁ--אַלְפַּיִם, מֵאָה שִׁבְעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    3 The children of Parosh, two thousand a hundred seventy and two. {S}
2.4 ד  בְּנֵי שְׁפַטְיָה, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת שִׁבְעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    4 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two. {S}
2.5 ה  בְּנֵי אָרַח, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת חֲמִשָּׁה וְשִׁבְעִים.  {ס}    5 The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five. {S}
2.6 ו  בְּנֵי-פַחַת מוֹאָב לִבְנֵי יֵשׁוּעַ, יוֹאָב--אַלְפַּיִם, שְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    6 The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve. {S}
2.7 ז  בְּנֵי עֵילָם--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם חֲמִשִּׁים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    7 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. {S}
2.8 ח  בְּנֵי זַתּוּא, תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    8 The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty and five. {S}
2.9 ט  בְּנֵי זַכָּי, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים.  {ס}    9 The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore. {S}
2.10 י  בְּנֵי בָנִי, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    10 The children of Bani, six hundred forty and two. {S}
2.11 יא  בְּנֵי בֵבָי, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    11 The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three. {S}
2.12 יב  בְּנֵי עַזְגָּד--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    12 The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two. {S}
2.13 יג  בְּנֵי, אֲדֹנִיקָם--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, שִׁשִּׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה.  {ס}    13 The children of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six. {S}
2.14 יד  בְּנֵי בִגְוָי, אַלְפַּיִם חֲמִשִּׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה.  {ס}    14 The children of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six. {S}
2.15 טו  בְּנֵי עָדִין, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת חֲמִשִּׁים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    15 The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and four. {S}
2.16 טז  בְּנֵי-אָטֵר לִיחִזְקִיָּה, תִּשְׁעִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    16 The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety and eight. {S}
2.17 יז  בְּנֵי בֵצָי, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    17 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and three. {S}
2.18 יח  בְּנֵי יוֹרָה, מֵאָה וּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    18 The children of Jorah, a hundred and twelve. {S}
2.19 יט  בְּנֵי חָשֻׁם, מָאתַיִם עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    19 The children of Hashum, two hundred twenty and three. {S}
2.20 כ  בְּנֵי גִבָּר, תִּשְׁעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    20 The children of Gibbar, ninety and five. {S}
2.21 כא  בְּנֵי בֵית-לָחֶם, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    21 The children of Beth-lehem, a hundred twenty and three. {S}
2.22 כב  אַנְשֵׁי נְטֹפָה, חֲמִשִּׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה.    22 The men of Netophah, fifty and six.
2.23 כג  אַנְשֵׁי עֲנָתוֹת, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    23 The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty and eight. {S}
2.24 כד  בְּנֵי עַזְמָוֶת, אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    24 The children of Azmaveth, forty and two. {S}
2.25 כה  בְּנֵי קִרְיַת עָרִים כְּפִירָה וּבְאֵרוֹת, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְאַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    25 The children of Kiriath-arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty and three. {S}
2.26 כו  בְּנֵי הָרָמָה וָגָבַע, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וְאֶחָד.  {ס}    26 The children of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty and one. {S}
2.27 כז  אַנְשֵׁי מִכְמָס, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    27 The men of Michmas, a hundred twenty and two. {S}
2.28 כח  אַנְשֵׁי בֵית-אֵל וְהָעָי, מָאתַיִם עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    28 The men of Beth-el and Ai, two hundred twenty and three. {S}
2.29 כט  בְּנֵי נְבוֹ, חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    29 The children of Nebo, fifty and two. {S}
2.30 ל  בְּנֵי מַגְבִּישׁ, מֵאָה חֲמִשִּׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה.  {ס}    30 The children of Magbish, a hundred fifty and six. {S}
2.31 לא  בְּנֵי, עֵילָם אַחֵר--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם חֲמִשִּׁים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    31 The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. {S}
2.32 לב  בְּנֵי חָרִם, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    32 The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty. {S}
2.33 לג  בְּנֵי-לֹד חָדִיד וְאוֹנוֹ, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    33 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and five. {S}
2.34 לד  בְּנֵי יְרֵחוֹ, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    34 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five. {S}
2.35 לה  בְּנֵי סְנָאָה--שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת וּשְׁלֹשִׁים.  {ס}    35 The children of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty. {S}
2.36 לו  הַכֹּהֲנִים:  בְּנֵי יְדַעְיָה לְבֵית יֵשׁוּעַ, תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת שִׁבְעִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    36 The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three. {S}
2.37 לז  בְּנֵי אִמֵּר, אֶלֶף חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    37 The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two. {S}
2.38 לח  בְּנֵי פַשְׁחוּר--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם אַרְבָּעִים וְשִׁבְעָה.  {ס}    38 The children of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven. {S}
2.39 לט  בְּנֵי חָרִם, אֶלֶף וְשִׁבְעָה עָשָׂר.  {ס}    39 The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen. {S}
2.40 מ  הַלְוִיִּם:  בְּנֵי-יֵשׁוּעַ וְקַדְמִיאֵל לִבְנֵי הוֹדַוְיָה, שִׁבְעִים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    40 The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children of Hodaviah, seventy and four. {S}
2.41 מא  הַמְשֹׁרְרִים--בְּנֵי אָסָף, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {פ}    41 The singers: the children of Asaph, a hundred twenty and eight. {P}
2.42 מב  בְּנֵי הַשֹּׁעֲרִים, בְּנֵי-שַׁלּוּם בְּנֵי-אָטֵר בְּנֵי-טַלְמֹן בְּנֵי-עַקּוּב, בְּנֵי חֲטִיטָא, בְּנֵי שֹׁבָי--הַכֹּל, מֵאָה שְׁלֹשִׁים וְתִשְׁעָה.  {פ}    42 The children of the porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all a hundred thirty and nine. {P}
2.43 מג  הַנְּתִינִים:  {ס}  בְּנֵי-צִיחָא  {ס}  בְנֵי-חֲשׂוּפָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  טַבָּעוֹת.  {ס}    43 The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth;
2.44 מד  בְּנֵי-קֵרֹס  {ס}  בְּנֵי-סִיעֲהָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  פָדוֹן.  {ס}    44 the children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon;
2.45 מה  בְּנֵי-לְבָנָה  {ס}  בְנֵי-חֲגָבָה,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  עַקּוּב.  {ס}    45 the children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub;
2.46 מו  בְּנֵי-חָגָב  {ס}  בְּנֵי-שמלי (שַׁלְמַי),  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  חָנָן.  {ס}    46 the children of Hagab, the children of Salmai, the children of Hanan;
2.47 מז  בְּנֵי-גִדֵּל  {ס}  בְּנֵי-גַחַר,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  רְאָיָה.  {ס}    47 the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaiah;
2.48 מח  בְּנֵי-רְצִין  {ס}  בְּנֵי-נְקוֹדָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  גַזָּם.  {ס}    48 the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of Gazzam;
2.49 מט  בְּנֵי-עֻזָּא  {ס}  בְנֵי-פָסֵחַ,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  בֵסָי.  {ס}    49 the children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai;
2.50 נ  בְּנֵי-אַסְנָה  {ס}  בְנֵי-מְעוּנִים,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  נפיסים (נְפוּסִים).  {ס}    50 the children of Asnah, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephusim;
2.51 נא  בְּנֵי-בַקְבּוּק  {ס}  בְּנֵי-חֲקוּפָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  חַרְחוּר.  {ס}    51 the children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur;
2.52 נב  בְּנֵי-בַצְלוּת  {ס}  בְּנֵי-מְחִידָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  חַרְשָׁא.  {ס}    52 the children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha;
2.53 נג  בְּנֵי-בַרְקוֹס  {ס}  בְּנֵי-סִיסְרָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי-  {ר}  תָמַח.  {ס}    53 the children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Temah;
2.54 נד  בְּנֵי נְצִיחַ,  {ס}  בְּנֵי חֲטִיפָא.  {ס}    54 the children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.
2.55 נה  בְּנֵי,  {ר}  עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה:  {ס}  בְּנֵי-סֹטַי  {ס}  בְּנֵי-הַסֹּפֶרֶת,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  פְרוּדָא.  {ס}    55 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Hassophereth, the children of Peruda;
2.56 נו  בְּנֵי-יַעְלָה  {ס}  בְנֵי-דַרְקוֹן,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  גִדֵּל.  {ס}    56 the children of Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel;
2.57 נז  בְּנֵי שְׁפַטְיָה  {ס}  בְנֵי-חַטִּיל,  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  פֹּכֶרֶת הַצְּבָיִים--  {ס}  בְּנֵי אָמִי.    57 the children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of Ami.
2.58 נח  כָּל-הַנְּתִינִים--וּבְנֵי, עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה:  שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת, תִּשְׁעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    58 All the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety and two. {S}
2.59 נט  וְאֵלֶּה, הָעֹלִים מִתֵּל מֶלַח תֵּל חַרְשָׁא, כְּרוּב אַדָּן, אִמֵּר; וְלֹא יָכְלוּ, לְהַגִּיד בֵּית-אֲבוֹתָם וְזַרְעָם--אִם מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, הֵם.    59 And these were they that went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan, and Immer; but they could not tell their fathers' houses, and their seed, whether they were of Israel:
2.60 ס  בְּנֵי-דְלָיָה בְנֵי-טוֹבִיָּה, בְּנֵי נְקוֹדָא--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    60 the children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two. {S}
2.61 סא  וּמִבְּנֵי, הַכֹּהֲנִים--בְּנֵי חֳבַיָּה, בְּנֵי הַקּוֹץ:  בְּנֵי בַרְזִלַּי, אֲשֶׁר לָקַח מִבְּנוֹת בַּרְזִלַּי הַגִּלְעָדִי אִשָּׁה, וַיִּקָּרֵא, עַל-שְׁמָם.    61 And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name.
2.62 סב  אֵלֶּה, בִּקְשׁוּ כְתָבָם הַמִּתְיַחְשִׂים--וְלֹא נִמְצָאוּ; וַיְגֹאֲלוּ, מִן-הַכְּהֻנָּה.    62 These sought their register, that is, the genealogy, but it was not found; therefore were they deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.
2.63 סג  וַיֹּאמֶר הַתִּרְשָׁתָא לָהֶם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֹאכְלוּ מִקֹּדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים--עַד עֲמֹד כֹּהֵן, לְאוּרִים וּלְתֻמִּים.    63 And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim.
2.64 סד  כָּל-הַקָּהָל, כְּאֶחָד--אַרְבַּע רִבּוֹא, אַלְפַּיִם שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת שִׁשִּׁים.    64 The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,
2.65 סה  מִלְּבַד עַבְדֵיהֶם וְאַמְהֹתֵיהֶם, אֵלֶּה--שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁבְעָה; וְלָהֶם מְשֹׁרְרִים וּמְשֹׁרְרוֹת, מָאתָיִם.    65 beside their men-servants and their maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven; and they had two hundred singing men and singing women.
2.66 סו  סוּסֵיהֶם, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה; פִּרְדֵיהֶם, מָאתַיִם אַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.    66 Their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five;
2.67 סז  גְּמַלֵּיהֶם--אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וַחֲמִשָּׁה; חֲמֹרִים--שֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {פ}    67 their camels, four hundred thirty and five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty. {P}
2.68 סח  וּמֵרָאשֵׁי, הָאָבוֹת, בְּבוֹאָם, לְבֵית יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם--הִתְנַדְּבוּ לְבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים, לְהַעֲמִידוֹ עַל-מְכוֹנוֹ.    68 And some of the heads of fathers' houses, when they came to the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem, offered willingly for the house of God to set it up in its place;
2.69 סט  כְּכֹחָם, נָתְנוּ לְאוֹצַר הַמְּלָאכָה, זָהָב דַּרְכְּמוֹנִים שֵׁשׁ-רִבֹּאות וָאֶלֶף,  {ס}  וְכֶסֶף מָנִים חֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים; וְכָתְנֹת כֹּהֲנִים, מֵאָה.  {ס}    69 they gave after their ability into the treasury of the work threescore and one thousand darics of gold, {S} and five thousand pounds of silver, and one hundred priests' tunics. {S}
2.70 ע  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וּמִן-הָעָם וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים וְהַשּׁוֹעֲרִים, וְהַנְּתִינִים--בְּעָרֵיהֶם; וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּעָרֵיהֶם.  {ס}    70 So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinim, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities. {S}
3.1 א  וַיִּגַּע הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בֶּעָרִים;  {ס}  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ הָעָם כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד, אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    1 And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel were in the cities, {S} the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem. {S}
3.2 ב  וַיָּקָם יֵשׁוּעַ בֶּן-יוֹצָדָק וְאֶחָיו הַכֹּהֲנִים, וּזְרֻבָּבֶל בֶּן-שְׁאַלְתִּיאֵל וְאֶחָיו, וַיִּבְנוּ, אֶת-מִזְבַּח אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְהַעֲלוֹת עָלָיו, עֹלוֹת, כַּכָּתוּב, בְּתוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים.    2 Then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt-offerings thereon, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man of God.
3.3 ג  וַיָּכִינוּ הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, עַל-מְכוֹנֹתָיו, כִּי בְּאֵימָה עֲלֵיהֶם, מֵעַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת; ויעל (וַיַּעֲלוּ) עָלָיו עֹלוֹת לַיהוָה, עֹלוֹת לַבֹּקֶר וְלָעָרֶב.    3 And they set the altar upon its bases; for fear was upon them because of the people of the countries, and they offered burnt-offerings thereon unto the LORD, even burnt-offerings morning and evening.
3.4 ד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-חַג הַסֻּכּוֹת, כַּכָּתוּב; וְעֹלַת יוֹם בְּיוֹם בְּמִסְפָּר, כְּמִשְׁפַּט דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ.    4 And they kept the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and offered the daily burnt-offerings by number, according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required;
3.5 ה  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן עֹלַת תָּמִיד, וְלֶחֳדָשִׁים, וּלְכָל-מוֹעֲדֵי יְהוָה, הַמְקֻדָּשִׁים; וּלְכֹל מִתְנַדֵּב נְדָבָה, לַיהוָה.    5 and afterward the continual burnt-offering, and the offerings of the new moons, and of all the appointed seasons of the LORD that were hallowed, and of every one that willingly offered a freewill-offering unto the LORD.
3.6 ו  מִיּוֹם אֶחָד, לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, הֵחֵלּוּ, לְהַעֲלוֹת עֹלוֹת לַיהוָה; וְהֵיכַל יְהוָה, לֹא יֻסָּד.    6 From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD; but the foundation of the temple of the LORD was not yet laid.
3.7 ז  וַיִּתְּנוּ-כֶסֶף--לַחֹצְבִים, וְלֶחָרָשִׁים; וּמַאֲכָל וּמִשְׁתֶּה וָשֶׁמֶן, לַצִּדֹנִים וְלַצֹּרִים, לְהָבִיא עֲצֵי אֲרָזִים מִן-הַלְּבָנוֹן אֶל-יָם יָפוֹא, כְּרִשְׁיוֹן כּוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ-פָּרַס עֲלֵיהֶם.  {פ}    7 They gave money also unto the hewers, and to the carpenters; and food, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar-trees from Lebanon to the sea, unto Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia. {P}
3.8 ח  וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית, לְבוֹאָם אֶל-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים לִירוּשָׁלִַם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ, הַשֵּׁנִי--הֵחֵלּוּ זְרֻבָּבֶל בֶּן-שְׁאַלְתִּיאֵל וְיֵשׁוּעַ בֶּן-יוֹצָדָק וּשְׁאָר אֲחֵיהֶם הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, וְכָל-הַבָּאִים מֵהַשְּׁבִי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּעֲמִידוּ אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, לְנַצֵּחַ עַל-מְלֶאכֶת בֵּית-יְהוָה.  {פ}    8 Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the rest of their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all they that were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to have the oversight of the work of the house of the LORD. {P}
3.9 ט  וַיַּעֲמֹד יֵשׁוּעַ בָּנָיו וְאֶחָיו קַדְמִיאֵל וּבָנָיו בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה, כְּאֶחָד, לְנַצֵּחַ עַל-עֹשֵׂה הַמְּלָאכָה, בְּבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים:  {ס}  בְּנֵי, חֵנָדָד, בְּנֵיהֶם וַאֲחֵיהֶם, הַלְוִיִּם.    9 Then stood Jeshua with his sons and his brethren, and Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, together, to have the oversight of the workmen in the house of God; {S} the sons of Henadad also, with their sons and their brethren the Levites.
3.10 י  וְיִסְּדוּ הַבֹּנִים, אֶת-הֵיכַל יְהוָה; וַיַּעֲמִידוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים מְלֻבָּשִׁים בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת, וְהַלְוִיִּם בְּנֵי-אָסָף בַּמְצִלְתַּיִם--לְהַלֵּל אֶת-יְהוָה, עַל-יְדֵי דָּוִיד מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    10 And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the LORD, according to the direction of David king of Israel.
3.11 יא  וַיַּעֲנוּ בְּהַלֵּל וּבְהוֹדֹת לַיהוָה, כִּי טוֹב--כִּי-לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכָל-הָעָם הֵרִיעוּ תְרוּעָה גְדוֹלָה בְהַלֵּל, לַיהוָה, עַל, הוּסַד בֵּית-יְהוָה.  {ס}    11 And they sang one to another in praising and giving thanks unto the LORD: 'for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever toward Israel.' And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the LORD, because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. {S}
3.12 יב  וְרַבִּים מֵהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר רָאוּ אֶת-הַבַּיִת הָרִאשׁוֹן בְּיָסְדוֹ--זֶה הַבַּיִת בְּעֵינֵיהֶם, בֹּכִים בְּקוֹל גָּדוֹל; וְרַבִּים בִּתְרוּעָה בְשִׂמְחָה, לְהָרִים קוֹל.    12 But many of the priests and Levites and heads of fathers' houses, the old men that had seen the first house standing on its foundation, wept with a loud voice, when this house was before their eyes; and many shouted aloud for joy;
3.13 יג  וְאֵין הָעָם, מַכִּירִים קוֹל תְּרוּעַת הַשִּׂמְחָה, לְקוֹל, בְּכִי הָעָם:  כִּי הָעָם, מְרִיעִים תְּרוּעָה גְדוֹלָה, וְהַקּוֹל נִשְׁמַע, עַד-לְמֵרָחוֹק.  {פ}    13 so that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people; for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was heard afar off. {P}
4.1 א  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, צָרֵי יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן:  כִּי-בְנֵי הַגּוֹלָה בּוֹנִים הֵיכָל, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity were building a temple unto the LORD, the God of Israel;
4.2 ב  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ אֶל-זְרֻבָּבֶל וְאֶל-רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָהֶם נִבְנֶה עִמָּכֶם--כִּי כָכֶם, נִדְרוֹשׁ לֵאלֹהֵיכֶם; ולא (וְלוֹ) אֲנַחְנוּ זֹבְחִים, מִימֵי אֵסַר חַדֹּן מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, הַמַּעֲלֶה אֹתָנוּ, פֹּה.    2 then they drew near to Zerubbabel, and to the heads of fathers' houses, and said unto them: 'Let us build with you; for we seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto Him since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assyria, who brought us up hither.'
4.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם זְרֻבָּבֶל וְיֵשׁוּעַ, וּשְׁאָר רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְיִשְׂרָאֵל--לֹא-לָכֶם וָלָנוּ, לִבְנוֹת בַּיִת לֵאלֹהֵינוּ:  כִּי אֲנַחְנוּ יַחַד נִבְנֶה, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּנוּ, הַמֶּלֶךְ כּוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ-פָּרָס.    3 But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the heads of fathers' houses of Israel, said unto them: 'Ye have nothing to do with us to build a house unto our God; but we ourselves together will build unto the LORD, the God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath commanded us.'
4.4 ד  וַיְהִי, עַם-הָאָרֶץ--מְרַפִּים, יְדֵי עַם-יְהוּדָה; ומבלהים (וּמְבַהֲלִים) אוֹתָם, לִבְנוֹת.    4 Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and harried them while they were building,
4.5 ה  וְסֹכְרִים עֲלֵיהֶם יוֹעֲצִים, לְהָפֵר עֲצָתָם--כָּל-יְמֵי, כּוֹרֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ פָּרַס, וְעַד-מַלְכוּת, דָּרְיָוֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ-פָּרָס.    5 and hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.
4.6 ו  וּבְמַלְכוּת, אֲחַשְׁוֵרוֹשׁ, בִּתְחִלַּת, מַלְכוּתוֹ--כָּתְבוּ שִׂטְנָה, עַל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    6 And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote they an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. {S}
4.7 ז  וּבִימֵי אַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׂתָּא, כָּתַב בִּשְׁלָם מִתְרְדָת טָבְאֵל וּשְׁאָר כְּנָוֺתָו, עַל-אַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׂתְּא, מֶלֶךְ פָּרָס; וּכְתָב, הַנִּשְׁתְּוָן, כָּתוּב אֲרָמִית, וּמְתֻרְגָּם אֲרָמִית.  {פ}    7 And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of his companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the letter was written in the Aramaic character, and set forth in the Aramaic tongue. {P}
4.8 ח  רְחוּם בְּעֵל-טְעֵם, וְשִׁמְשַׁי סָפְרָא, כְּתַבוּ אִגְּרָה חֲדָה, עַל-יְרוּשְׁלֶם--לְאַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׂתְּא מַלְכָּא, כְּנֵמָא.    8 Rehum the commander and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort--
4.9 ט  אֱדַיִן רְחוּם בְּעֵל-טְעֵם, וְשִׁמְשַׁי סָפְרָא, וּשְׁאָר, כְּנָוָתְהוֹן--דִּינָיֵא וַאֲפַרְסַתְכָיֵא טַרְפְּלָיֵא אֲפָרְסָיֵא, ארכוי (אַרְכְּוָיֵא) בָבְלָיֵא שׁוּשַׁנְכָיֵא, דהוא (דֶּהָיֵא), עֵלְמָיֵא.    9 then wrote Rehum the commander, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinites, and the Apharesattechites, the Tarpelites, the Apharesites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the Dehites, the Elamites,
4.10 י  וּשְׁאָר אֻמַּיָּא, דִּי הַגְלִי אָסְנַפַּר רַבָּא וְיַקִּירָא, וְהוֹתֵב הִמּוֹ, בְּקִרְיָה דִּי שָׁמְרָיִן--וּשְׁאָר עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה, וּכְעֶנֶת.    10 and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asenappar brought over, and set in the city of Samaria, and the rest that are in the country beyond the River:--'And now--
4.11 יא  דְּנָה, פַּרְשֶׁגֶן אִגַּרְתָּא, דִּי שְׁלַחוּ עֲלוֹהִי, עַל-אַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׂתְּא מַלְכָּא--עבדיך (עַבְדָךְ) אֱנָשׁ עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה, וּכְעֶנֶת.  {פ}    11 this is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto Artaxerxes the king--thy servants the men beyond the River--and now {P}
4.12 יב  יְדִיעַ, לֶהֱוֵא לְמַלְכָּא, דִּי יְהוּדָיֵא דִּי סְלִקוּ מִן-לְוָתָךְ, עֲלֶינָא אֲתוֹ לִירוּשְׁלֶם; קִרְיְתָא מָרָדְתָּא וּבִאישְׁתָּא, בָּנַיִן, ושורי אשכללו (וְשׁוּרַיָּא שַׁכְלִלוּ), וְאֻשַּׁיָּא יַחִיטוּ.    12 be it known unto the king, that the Jews that came up from thee are come to us unto Jerusalem; they are building the rebellious and the bad city, and have finished the walls, and are digging out the foundations.
4.13 יג  כְּעַן, יְדִיעַ לֶהֱוֵא לְמַלְכָּא, דִּי הֵן קִרְיְתָא דָךְ תִּתְבְּנֵא, וְשׁוּרַיָּא יִשְׁתַּכְלְלוּן--מִנְדָּה-בְלוֹ וַהֲלָךְ לָא יִנְתְּנוּן, וְאַפְּתֹם מַלְכִים תְּהַנְזִק.    13 Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the walls finished, they will not pay tribute, impost, or toll, and so thou wilt endamage the revenue of the kings.
4.14 יד  כְּעַן, כָּל-קֳבֵל דִּי-מְלַח הֵיכְלָא מְלַחְנָא, וְעַרְוַת מַלְכָּא, לָא אֲרִיךְ-לַנָא לְמֶחֱזֵא; עַל-דְּנָה--שְׁלַחְנָא, וְהוֹדַעְנָא לְמַלְכָּא.    14 Now because we eat the salt of the palace, and it is not meet for us to see the king's dishonour, therefore have we sent and announced to the king,
4.15 טו  דִּי יְבַקַּר בִּסְפַר-דָּכְרָנַיָּא דִּי אֲבָהָתָךְ, וּתְהַשְׁכַּח בִּסְפַר דָּכְרָנַיָּא וְתִנְדַּע, דִּי קִרְיְתָא דָךְ קִרְיָא מָרָדָא וּמְהַנְזְקַת מַלְכִין וּמְדִנָן, וְאֶשְׁתַּדּוּר עָבְדִין בְּגַוַּהּ מִן-יוֹמָת עָלְמָא; עַל-דְּנָה--קִרְיְתָא דָךְ, הָחָרְבַת.    15 that search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers; so shalt thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the same of old time; for which cause was this city laid waste.
4.16 טז  מְהוֹדְעִין אֲנַחְנָה, לְמַלְכָּא, דִּי הֵן קִרְיְתָא דָךְ תִּתְבְּנֵא, וְשׁוּרַיָּה יִשְׁתַּכְלְלוּן:  לָקֳבֵל דְּנָה--חֲלָק בַּעֲבַר נַהֲרָא, לָא אִיתַי לָךְ.  {פ}    16 We announce to the king that, if this city be builded, and the walls finished, by this means thou shalt have no portion beyond the River.' {P}
4.17 יז  פִּתְגָמָא שְׁלַח מַלְכָּא, עַל-רְחוּם בְּעֵל-טְעֵם וְשִׁמְשַׁי סָפְרָא, וּשְׁאָר כְּנָוָתְהוֹן, דִּי יָתְבִין בְּשָׁמְרָיִן--וּשְׁאָר עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה שְׁלָם, וּכְעֶת.  {ס}    17 Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the commander, and to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that dwell in Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the River: 'Peace, and now {S}
4.18 יח  נִשְׁתְּוָנָא, דִּי שְׁלַחְתּוּן עֲלֶינָא--מְפָרַשׁ קֱרִי, קָדָמָי.    18 the letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before me.
4.19 יט  וּמִנִּי, שִׂים טְעֵם, וּבַקַּרוּ וְהַשְׁכַּחוּ, דִּי קִרְיְתָא דָךְ מִן-יוֹמָת עָלְמָא עַל-מַלְכִין מִתְנַשְּׂאָה; וּמְרַד וְאֶשְׁתַּדּוּר, מִתְעֲבֶד-בַּהּ.    19 And I decreed, and search hath been made, and it is found that this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made therein.
4.20 כ  וּמַלְכִין תַּקִּיפִין, הֲווֹ עַל-יְרוּשְׁלֶם, וְשַׁלִּיטִין, בְּכֹל עֲבַר נַהֲרָה; וּמִדָּה בְלוֹ וַהֲלָךְ, מִתְיְהֵב לְהוֹן.    20 There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, who have ruled over all the country beyond the River; and tribute, impost, and toll, was paid unto them.
4.21 כא  כְּעַן שִׂימוּ טְּעֵם, לְבַטָּלָא גֻּבְרַיָּא אִלֵּךְ; וְקִרְיְתָא דָךְ לָא תִתְבְּנֵא, עַד-מִנִּי טַעְמָא יִתְּשָׂם.    21 Make ye now a decree to cause these men to cease, and that this city be not builded, until a decree shall be made by me.
4.22 כב  וּזְהִירִין הֱווֹ שָׁלוּ, לְמֶעְבַּד עַל-דְּנָה; לְמָה יִשְׂגֵּא חֲבָלָא, לְהַנְזָקַת מַלְכִין.  {ס}    22 And take heed that ye be not slack herein; why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings?' {S}
4.23 כג  אֱדַיִן, מִן-דִּי פַּרְשֶׁגֶן נִשְׁתְּוָנָא דִּי אַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׂתְּא מַלְכָּא, קֱרִי קֳדָם-רְחוּם וְשִׁמְשַׁי סָפְרָא, וּכְנָוָתְהוֹן; אֲזַלוּ בִבְהִילוּ לִירוּשְׁלֶם עַל-יְהוּדָיֵא, וּבַטִּלוּ הִמּוֹ בְּאֶדְרָע וְחָיִל.  {ס}    23 Then when the copy of king Artaxerxes' letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power. {S}
4.24 כד  בֵּאדַיִן, בְּטֵלַת עֲבִידַת בֵּית-אֱלָהָא, דִּי, בִּירוּשְׁלֶם; וַהֲוָת, בָּטְלָא, עַד שְׁנַת תַּרְתֵּין, לְמַלְכוּת דָּרְיָוֶשׁ מֶלֶךְ-פָּרָס.  {פ}    24 Then ceased the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem; and it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia. {P}
5.1 א  וְהִתְנַבִּי חַגַּי נְבִיָּאה, וּזְכַרְיָה בַר-עִדּוֹא נְבִיַּאיָּא, עַל-יְהוּדָיֵא, דִּי בִיהוּד וּבִירוּשְׁלֶם--בְּשֻׁם אֱלָהּ יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲלֵיהוֹן.  {ס}    1 Now the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem; in the name of the God of Israel prophesied they unto them. {S}
5.2 ב  בֵּאדַיִן קָמוּ זְרֻבָּבֶל בַּר-שְׁאַלְתִּיאֵל, וְיֵשׁוּעַ בַּר-יוֹצָדָק, וְשָׁרִיו לְמִבְנֵא, בֵּית אֱלָהָא דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם; וְעִמְּהוֹן נְבִיַּאיָּא דִי-אֱלָהָא, מְסָעֲדִין לְהוֹן.  {פ}    2 Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem; and with them were the prophets of God, helping them. {P}
5.3 ג  בֵּהּ-זִמְנָא אֲתָה עֲלֵיהוֹן תַּתְּנַי פַּחַת עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה, וּשְׁתַר בּוֹזְנַי--וּכְנָוָתְהוֹן; וְכֵן, אָמְרִין לְהֹם--מַן-שָׂם לְכֹם טְעֵם בַּיְתָא דְנָה לִבְּנֵא, וְאֻשַּׁרְנָא דְנָה לְשַׁכְלָלָה.  {ס}    3 At the same time came to them Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, and Shethar-bozenai, and their companions, and said thus unto them: 'Who gave you a decree to build this house, and to finish this structure?' {S}
5.4 ד  אֱדַיִן כְּנֵמָא, אֲמַרְנָא לְּהֹם:  מַן-אִנּוּן שְׁמָהָת גֻּבְרַיָּא, דִּי-דְנָה בִנְיָנָא בָּנַיִן.    4 'Then spoke we unto them after this manner [, wrote they]: What are the names of the men that build this building?'
5.5 ה  וְעֵין אֱלָהֲהֹם, הֲוָת עַל-שָׂבֵי יְהוּדָיֵא, וְלָא-בַטִּלוּ הִמּוֹ, עַד-טַעְמָא לְדָרְיָוֶשׁ יְהָךְ; וֶאֱדַיִן יְתִיבוּן נִשְׁתְּוָנָא, עַל-דְּנָה.  {פ}    5 But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, and they did not make them cease, till the matter should come to Darius, and then answer should be returned by letter concerning it. {P}
5.6 ו  פַּרְשֶׁגֶן אִגַּרְתָּא דִּי-שְׁלַח תַּתְּנַי פַּחַת עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה, וּשְׁתַר בּוֹזְנַי וּכְנָוָתֵהּ, אֲפַרְסְכָיֵא, דִּי בַּעֲבַר נַהֲרָה--עַל-דָּרְיָוֶשׁ, מַלְכָּא.    6 The copy of the letter that Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, and Shethar-bozenai, and his companions the Apharesachites, who were beyond the River, sent unto Darius the king;
5.7 ז  פִּתְגָמָא, שְׁלַחוּ עֲלוֹהִי; וְכִדְנָה כְּתִיב בְּגַוֵּהּ, לְדָרְיָוֶשׁ מַלְכָּא שְׁלָמָא כֹלָּא.  {ס}    7 they sent a letter unto him, wherein was written thus: 'Unto Darius the king, all peace. {S}
5.8 ח  יְדִיעַ לֶהֱוֵא לְמַלְכָּא, דִּי-אֲזַלְנָא לִיהוּד מְדִינְתָּא לְבֵית אֱלָהָא רַבָּא, וְהוּא מִתְבְּנֵא אֶבֶן גְּלָל, וְאָע מִתְּשָׂם בְּכֻתְלַיָּא; וַעֲבִידְתָּא דָךְ אָסְפַּרְנָא מִתְעַבְדָא, וּמַצְלַח בְּיֶדְהֹם.  {ס}    8 Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of Judah, to the house of the great God, which is builded with great stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth on with diligence and prospereth in their hands. {S}
5.9 ט  אֱדַיִן, שְׁאֵלְנָא לְשָׂבַיָּא אִלֵּךְ, כְּנֵמָא, אֲמַרְנָא לְּהֹם:  מַן-שָׂם לְכֹם טְעֵם, בַּיְתָא דְנָה לְמִבְנְיָה, וְאֻשַּׁרְנָא דְנָה, לְשַׁכְלָלָה.    9 Then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus: Who gave you a decree to build this house, and to finish this wall?
5.10 י  וְאַף שְׁמָהָתְהֹם שְׁאֵלְנָא לְהֹם, לְהוֹדָעוּתָךְ--דִּי נִכְתֻּב שֻׁם-גֻּבְרַיָּא, דִּי בְרָאשֵׁיהֹם.  {ס}    10 We asked them their names also, to announce to thee, that we might write the names of the men that were at the head of them. {S}
5.11 יא  וּכְנֵמָא פִתְגָמָא, הֲתִיבוּנָא לְמֵמַר:  אֲנַחְנָא הִמּוֹ עַבְדוֹהִי דִי-אֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא וְאַרְעָא, וּבָנַיִן בַּיְתָא דִּי-הֲוָא בְנֵה מִקַּדְמַת דְּנָה שְׁנִין שַׂגִּיאָן, וּמֶלֶךְ לְיִשְׂרָאֵל רַב, בְּנָהִי וְשַׁכְלְלֵהּ.    11 And thus they returned us answer, saying: We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded these many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded and finished.
5.12 יב  לָהֵן, מִן-דִּי הַרְגִּזוּ אֲבָהָתַנָא לֶאֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא--יְהַב הִמּוֹ, בְּיַד נְבוּכַדְנֶצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל כסדיא (כַּסְדָּאָה); וּבַיְתָה דְנָה סַתְרֵהּ, וְעַמָּה הַגְלִי לְבָבֶל.  {ס}    12 But because that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven, He gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the people away into Babylon. {S}
5.13 יג  בְּרַם בִּשְׁנַת חֲדָה, לְכוֹרֶשׁ מַלְכָּא דִּי בָבֶל--כּוֹרֶשׁ מַלְכָּא שָׂם טְעֵם, בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דְנָה לִבְּנֵא.    13 But in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king made a decree to build this house of God.
5.14 יד  וְאַף מָאנַיָּא דִי-בֵית-אֱלָהָא, דִּי דַהֲבָה וְכַסְפָּא, דִּי נְבוּכַדְנֶצַּר הַנְפֵּק מִן-הֵיכְלָא דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם, וְהֵיבֵל הִמּוֹ לְהֵיכְלָא דִּי בָבֶל--הַנְפֵּק הִמּוֹ כּוֹרֶשׁ מַלְכָּא, מִן-הֵיכְלָא דִּי בָבֶל, וִיהִיבוּ לְשֵׁשְׁבַּצַּר שְׁמֵהּ, דִּי פֶחָה שָׂמֵהּ.    14 And the gold and silver vessels also of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem, and brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto one whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor;
5.15 טו  וַאֲמַר-לֵהּ--אלה (אֵל) מָאנַיָּא, שֵׂא אֵזֶל-אֲחֵת הִמּוֹ בְּהֵיכְלָא דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם; וּבֵית אֱלָהָא, יִתְבְּנֵא עַל-אַתְרֵהּ.  {ס}    15 and he said unto him: Take these vessels, go, put them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in its place. {S}
5.16 טז  אֱדַיִן, שֵׁשְׁבַּצַּר דֵּךְ, אֲתָא יְהַב אֻשַּׁיָּא דִּי-בֵית אֱלָהָא, דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם; וּמִן-אֱדַיִן וְעַד-כְּעַן מִתְבְּנֵא, וְלָא שְׁלִם.    16 Then came the same Sheshbazzar, and laid the foundations of the house of God which is in Jerusalem; and since that time even until now hath it been in building, and yet it is not completed.
5.17 יז  וּכְעַן הֵן עַל-מַלְכָּא טָב, יִתְבַּקַּר בְּבֵית גִּנְזַיָּא דִּי-מַלְכָּא תַמָּה דִּי בְּבָבֶל, הֵן אִיתַי דִּי-מִן-כּוֹרֶשׁ מַלְכָּא שִׂים טְעֵם, לְמִבְנֵא בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דֵךְ בִּירוּשְׁלֶם; וּרְעוּת מַלְכָּא עַל-דְּנָה, יִשְׁלַח עֲלֶינָא.  {ס}    17 Now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let search be made in the king's treasure-house there, which is at Babylon, whether it be so, that a decree was made of Cyrus the king to build this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.' {S}
6.1 א  בֵּאדַיִן דָּרְיָוֶשׁ מַלְכָּא, שָׂם טְעֵם; וּבַקַּרוּ בְּבֵית סִפְרַיָּא, דִּי גִנְזַיָּא מְהַחֲתִין תַּמָּה--בְּבָבֶל.    1 Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the archives, where the treasures were laid up, in Babylon.
6.2 ב  וְהִשְׁתְּכַח בְּאַחְמְתָא, בְּבִירְתָא דִּי בְּמָדַי מְדִינְתָּא--מְגִלָּה חֲדָה; וְכֵן-כְּתִיב בְּגַוַּהּ, דִּכְרוֹנָה.  {פ}    2 And there was found at Ahmetha, in the palace that is in the province of Media, a roll, and therein was thus written: 'A record. {P}
6.3 ג  בִּשְׁנַת חֲדָה לְכוֹרֶשׁ מַלְכָּא, כּוֹרֶשׁ מַלְכָּא שָׂם טְעֵם--בֵּית-אֱלָהָא בִירוּשְׁלֶם בַּיְתָא יִתְבְּנֵא, אֲתַר דִּי-דָבְחִין דִּבְחִין וְאֻשּׁוֹהִי מְסוֹבְלִין; רוּמֵהּ אַמִּין שִׁתִּין, פְּתָיֵהּ אַמִּין שִׁתִּין.    3 In the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made a decree: Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the house be builded, the place where they offer sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits;
6.4 ד  נִדְבָּכִין דִּי-אֶבֶן גְּלָל, תְּלָתָא, וְנִדְבָּךְ, דִּי-אָע חֲדַת; וְנִפְקְתָא--מִן-בֵּית מַלְכָּא, תִּתְיְהִב.    4 with three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber, and let the expenses be given out of the king's house;
6.5 ה  וְאַף מָאנֵי בֵית-אֱלָהָא, דִּי דַהֲבָה וְכַסְפָּא, דִּי נְבוּכַדְנֶצַּר הַנְפֵּק מִן-הֵיכְלָא דִי-בִירוּשְׁלֶם, וְהֵיבֵל לְבָבֶל--יַהֲתִיבוּן, וִיהָךְ לְהֵיכְלָא דִי-בִירוּשְׁלֶם לְאַתְרֵהּ, וְתַחֵת, בְּבֵית אֱלָהָא.  {ס}    5 and also let the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which is at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be restored, and brought back unto the temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to its place, and thou shalt put them in the house of God.' {S}
6.6 ו  כְּעַן תַּתְּנַי פַּחַת עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה שְׁתַר בּוֹזְנַי, וּכְנָוָתְהוֹן, אֲפַרְסְכָיֵא, דִּי בַּעֲבַר נַהֲרָה--רַחִיקִין הֲווֹ, מִן-תַּמָּה.    6 'Now therefore, Tattenai, governor beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and your companions the Apharesachites, who are beyond the River, be ye far from thence;
6.7 ז  שְׁבֻקוּ, לַעֲבִידַת בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דֵךְ; פַּחַת יְהוּדָיֵא וּלְשָׂבֵי יְהוּדָיֵא, בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דֵךְ יִבְנוֹן עַל-אַתְרֵהּ.    7 let the work of this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in its place.
6.8 ח  וּמִנִּי, שִׂים טְעֵם--לְמָא דִי-תַעַבְדוּן עִם-שָׂבֵי יְהוּדָיֵא אִלֵּךְ, לְמִבְנֵא בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דֵךְ; וּמִנִּכְסֵי מַלְכָּא, דִּי מִדַּת עֲבַר נַהֲרָה, אָסְפַּרְנָא נִפְקְתָא תֶּהֱוֵא מִתְיַהֲבָא לְגֻבְרַיָּא אִלֵּךְ, דִּי-לָא לְבַטָּלָא.    8 Moreover I make a decree concerning what ye shall do to these elders of the Jews for the building of this house of God; that of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the River, expenses be given with all diligence unto these men, that they be not hindered.
6.9 ט  וּמָה חַשְׁחָן וּבְנֵי תוֹרִין וְדִכְרִין וְאִמְּרִין לַעֲלָוָן לֶאֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא חִנְטִין מְלַח חֲמַר וּמְשַׁח, כְּמֵאמַר כָּהֲנַיָּא דִי-בִירוּשְׁלֶם לֶהֱוֵא מִתְיְהֵב לְהֹם יוֹם בְּיוֹם--דִּי-לָא שָׁלוּ.    9 And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for burnt-offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the word of the priests that are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail;
6.10 י  דִּי-לֶהֱוֺן מְהַקְרְבִין נִיחוֹחִין, לֶאֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא; וּמְצַלַּיִן, לְחַיֵּי מַלְכָּא וּבְנוֹהִי.    10 that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savour unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.
6.11 יא  וּמִנִּי, שִׂים טְעֵם--דִּי כָל-אֱנָשׁ דִּי יְהַשְׁנֵא פִּתְגָמָא דְנָה, יִתְנְסַח אָע מִן-בַּיְתֵהּ וּזְקִיף יִתְמְחֵא עֲלֹהִי; וּבַיְתֵהּ נְוָלוּ יִתְעֲבֵד, עַל-דְּנָה.    11 Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let a beam be pulled out from his house, and let him be lifted up and fastened thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this;
6.12 יב  וֵאלָהָא דִּי שַׁכִּן שְׁמֵהּ תַּמָּה, יְמַגַּר כָּל-מֶלֶךְ וְעַם דִּי יִשְׁלַח יְדֵהּ לְהַשְׁנָיָה לְחַבָּלָה בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דֵךְ--דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם; אֲנָה דָרְיָוֶשׁ שָׂמֶת טְעֵם, אָסְפַּרְנָא יִתְעֲבִד.  {פ}    12 and may the God that hath caused His name to dwell there overthrow all kings and peoples, that shall put forth their hand to alter the same, to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree; let it be done with all diligence.' {P}
6.13 יג  אֱדַיִן תַּתְּנַי פַּחַת עֲבַר-נַהֲרָה, שְׁתַר בּוֹזְנַי--וּכְנָוָתְהוֹן:  לָקֳבֵל, דִּי-שְׁלַח דָּרְיָוֶשׁ מַלְכָּא כְּנֵמָא--אָסְפַּרְנָא עֲבַדוּ.    13 Then Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and their companions, because that Darius the king had thus sent, acted with all diligence.
6.14 יד  וְשָׂבֵי יְהוּדָיֵא בָּנַיִן וּמַצְלְחִין, בִּנְבוּאַת חַגַּי נְבִיָּאה וּזְכַרְיָה בַּר-עִדּוֹא; וּבְנוֹ וְשַׁכְלִלוּ, מִן-טַעַם אֱלָהּ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִטְּעֵם כּוֹרֶשׁ וְדָרְיָוֶשׁ, וְאַרְתַּחְשַׁשְׂתְּא מֶלֶךְ פָּרָס.    14 And the elders of the Jews builded and prospered, through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they builded and finished it, according to the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.
6.15 טו  וְשֵׁיצִיא בַּיְתָה דְנָה, עַד יוֹם תְּלָתָה לִירַח אֲדָר--דִּי-הִיא שְׁנַת-שֵׁת, לְמַלְכוּת דָּרְיָוֶשׁ מַלְכָּא.  {פ}    15 And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king. {P}
6.16 טז  וַעֲבַדוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל כָּהֲנַיָּא וְלֵוָיֵא וּשְׁאָר בְּנֵי-גָלוּתָא, חֲנֻכַּת בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דְנָה--בְּחֶדְוָה.    16 And the children of Israel, the priests and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God with joy.
6.17 יז  וְהַקְרִבוּ, לַחֲנֻכַּת בֵּית-אֱלָהָא דְנָה, תּוֹרִין מְאָה, דִּכְרִין מָאתַיִן אִמְּרִין אַרְבַּע מְאָה; וּצְפִירֵי עִזִּין לחטיא (לְחַטָּאָה) עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, תְּרֵי-עֲשַׂר--לְמִנְיָן, שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    17 And they offered at the dedication of this house of God a hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin-offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.
6.18 יח  וַהֲקִימוּ כָהֲנַיָּא בִּפְלֻגָּתְהוֹן, וְלֵוָיֵא בְּמַחְלְקָתְהוֹן, עַל-עֲבִידַת אֱלָהָא, דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם:  כִּכְתָב, סְפַר מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}    18 And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem; as it is written in the book of Moses. {P}
6.19 יט  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-הַגּוֹלָה, אֶת-הַפָּסַח--בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן.    19 And the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the fourteenth day of the first month.
6.20 כ  כִּי הִטַּהֲרוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, כְּאֶחָד--כֻּלָּם טְהוֹרִים; וַיִּשְׁחֲטוּ הַפֶּסַח לְכָל-בְּנֵי הַגּוֹלָה, וְלַאֲחֵיהֶם הַכֹּהֲנִים וְלָהֶם.    20 For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves together; all of them were pure; and they killed the passover lamb for all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.
6.21 כא  וַיֹּאכְלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַשָּׁבִים מֵהַגּוֹלָה, וְכֹל הַנִּבְדָּל מִטֻּמְאַת גּוֹיֵ-הָאָרֶץ, אֲלֵהֶם--לִדְרֹשׁ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    21 And the children of Israel, that were come back out of the captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness of the nations of the land, to seek the LORD, the God of Israel, did eat,
6.22 כב  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ חַג-מַצּוֹת שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, בְּשִׂמְחָה:  כִּי שִׂמְּחָם יְהוָה, וְהֵסֵב לֵב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר עֲלֵיהֶם--לְחַזֵּק יְדֵיהֶם, בִּמְלֶאכֶת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    22 and kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy; for the LORD had made them joyful, and had turned the heart of the king of Assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel. {P}
7.1 א  וְאַחַר הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּמַלְכוּת אַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא מֶלֶךְ-פָּרָס--עֶזְרָא, בֶּן-שְׂרָיָה, בֶּן-עֲזַרְיָה, בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּה.    1 Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,
7.2 ב  בֶּן-שַׁלּוּם בֶּן-צָדוֹק, בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב.    2 the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,
7.3 ג  בֶּן-אֲמַרְיָה בֶן-עֲזַרְיָה, בֶּן-מְרָיוֹת.    3 the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,
7.4 ד  בֶּן-זְרַחְיָה בֶן-עֻזִּי, בֶּן-בֻּקִּי.    4 the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,
7.5 ה  בֶּן-אֲבִישׁוּעַ, בֶּן-פִּינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר, בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, הָרֹאשׁ.    5 the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest--
7.6 ו  הוּא עֶזְרָא, עָלָה מִבָּבֶל, וְהוּא-סֹפֵר מָהִיר בְּתוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ הַמֶּלֶךְ, כְּיַד-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו עָלָיו--כֹּל, בַּקָּשָׁתוֹ.  {פ}    6 this Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in the Law of Moses, which the LORD, the God of Israel, had given; and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the LORD his God upon him. {P}
7.7 ז  וַיַּעֲלוּ מִבְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּמִן-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים וְהַשֹּׁעֲרִים, וְהַנְּתִינִים--אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  בִּשְׁנַת-שֶׁבַע, לְאַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא הַמֶּלֶךְ.    7 And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinim, unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.
7.8 ח  וַיָּבֹא יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי:  הִיא שְׁנַת הַשְּׁבִיעִית, לַמֶּלֶךְ.    8 And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the king.
7.9 ט  כִּי, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן--הוּא יְסֻד, הַמַּעֲלָה מִבָּבֶל; וּבְאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי, בָּא אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, כְּיַד-אֱלֹהָיו, הַטּוֹבָה עָלָיו.    9 For upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him.
7.10 י  כִּי עֶזְרָא הֵכִין לְבָבוֹ, לִדְרֹשׁ אֶת-תּוֹרַת יְהוָה וְלַעֲשֹׂת, וּלְלַמֵּד בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, חֹק וּמִשְׁפָּט.  {ס}    10 For Ezra had set his heart to seek the law of the LORD, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and ordinances. {S}
7.11 יא  וְזֶה פַּרְשֶׁגֶן הַנִּשְׁתְּוָן, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן הַמֶּלֶךְ אַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא, לְעֶזְרָא הַכֹּהֵן, הַסֹּפֵר:  סֹפֵר דִּבְרֵי מִצְוֺת-יְהוָה, וְחֻקָּיו--עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    11 Now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, even the scribe of the words of the commandments of the LORD, and of His statutes to Israel: {P}
7.12 יב  אַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא--מֶלֶךְ, מַלְכַיָּא:  לְעֶזְרָא כָהֲנָא סָפַר דָּתָא דִּי-אֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא, גְּמִיר--וּכְעֶנֶת.    12 'Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, and so forth. And now
7.13 יג  מִנִּי, שִׂים טְעֵם--דִּי כָל-מִתְנַדַּב בְּמַלְכוּתִי מִן-עַמָּא יִשְׂרָאֵל וְכָהֲנוֹהִי וְלֵוָיֵא לִמְהָךְ לִירוּשְׁלֶם עִמָּךְ, יְהָךְ.    13 I make a decree, that all they of the people of Israel, and their priests and the Levites, in my realm, that are minded of their own free will to go with thee to Jerusalem, go.
7.14 יד  כָּל-קֳבֵל, דִּי מִן-קֳדָם מַלְכָּא וְשִׁבְעַת יָעֲטֹהִי שְׁלִיחַ, לְבַקָּרָה עַל-יְהוּד, וְלִירוּשְׁלֶם--בְּדָת אֱלָהָךְ, דִּי בִידָךְ.    14 Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king and his seven counsellors, to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God which is in thy hand;
7.15 טו  וּלְהֵיבָלָה, כְּסַף וּדְהַב--דִּי-מַלְכָּא וְיָעֲטוֹהִי, הִתְנַדַּבוּ לֶאֱלָהּ יִשְׂרָאֵל, דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם, מִשְׁכְּנֵהּ.    15 and to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem,
7.16 טז  וְכֹל, כְּסַף וּדְהַב, דִּי תְהַשְׁכַּח, בְּכֹל מְדִינַת בָּבֶל--עִם הִתְנַדָּבוּת עַמָּא וְכָהֲנַיָּא מִתְנַדְּבִין, לְבֵית אֱלָהֲהֹם דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם.    16 and all the silver and gold that thou shalt find in all the province of Babylon, with the freewill-offering of the people, and of the priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which is in Jerusalem;
7.17 יז  כָּל-קֳבֵל דְּנָה אָסְפַּרְנָא תִקְנֵא בְּכַסְפָּא דְנָה, תּוֹרִין דִּכְרִין אִמְּרִין, וּמִנְחָתְהוֹן, וְנִסְכֵּיהוֹן; וּתְקָרֵב הִמּוֹ--עַל-מַדְבְּחָה, דִּי בֵּית אֱלָהֲכֹם דִּי בִירוּשְׁלֶם.    17 therefore thou shalt with all diligence buy with this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meal-offerings and their drink-offerings, and shalt offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem.
7.18 יח  וּמָה דִי עליך (עֲלָךְ) וְעַל-אחיך (אֶחָךְ) יֵיטַב, בִּשְׁאָר כַּסְפָּא וְדַהֲבָה--לְמֶעְבַּד:  כִּרְעוּת אֱלָהֲכֹם, תַּעַבְדוּן.    18 And whatsoever shall seem good to thee and to thy brethren to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do ye after the will of your God.
7.19 יט  וּמָאנַיָּא דִּי-מִתְיַהֲבִין לָךְ, לְפָלְחָן בֵּית אֱלָהָךְ--הַשְׁלֵם, קֳדָם אֱלָהּ יְרוּשְׁלֶם.    19 And the vessels that are given thee for the service of the house of thy God, deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.
7.20 כ  וּשְׁאָר, חַשְׁחוּת בֵּית אֱלָהָךְ, דִּי יִפֶּל-לָךְ, לְמִנְתַּן--תִּנְתֵּן, מִן-בֵּית גִּנְזֵי מַלְכָּא.    20 And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's treasure-house.
7.21 כא  וּמִנִּי אֲנָה אַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא מַלְכָּא, שִׂים טְעֵם--לְכֹל גִּזַּבְרַיָּא, דִּי בַּעֲבַר נַהֲרָה:  דִּי כָל-דִּי יִשְׁאֲלֶנְכוֹן עֶזְרָא כָהֲנָא סָפַר דָּתָא, דִּי-אֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא--אָסְפַּרְנָא, יִתְעֲבִד.    21 And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the treasurers that are beyond the River, that whatsoever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, shall require of you, it be done with all diligence,
7.22 כב  עַד-כְּסַף, כַּכְּרִין מְאָה, וְעַד-חִנְטִין כּוֹרִין מְאָה, וְעַד-חֲמַר בַּתִּין מְאָה וְעַד-בַּתִּין מְשַׁח מְאָה; וּמְלַח, דִּי-לָא כְתָב.    22 unto a hundred talents of silver, and to a hundred measures of wheat, and to a hundred baths of wine, and to a hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.
7.23 כג  כָּל-דִּי, מִן-טַעַם אֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא, יִתְעֲבֵד אַדְרַזְדָּא, לְבֵית אֱלָהּ שְׁמַיָּא:  דִּי-לְמָה לֶהֱוֵא קְצַף, עַל-מַלְכוּת מַלְכָּא וּבְנוֹהִי.    23 Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done exactly for the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?
7.24 כד  וּלְכֹם מְהוֹדְעִין, דִּי כָל-כָּהֲנַיָּא וְלֵוָיֵא זַמָּרַיָּא תָרָעַיָּא נְתִינַיָּא, וּפָלְחֵי, בֵּית אֱלָהָא דְנָה--מִנְדָּה בְלוֹ וַהֲלָךְ, לָא שַׁלִּיט לְמִרְמֵא עֲלֵיהֹם.    24 Also we announce to you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, the singers, porters, Nethinim, or servants of this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose tribute, impost, or toll, upon them.
7.25 כה  וְאַנְתְּ עֶזְרָא, כְּחָכְמַת אֱלָהָךְ דִּי-בִידָךְ מֶנִּי שָׁפְטִין וְדַיָּנִין דִּי-לֶהֱוֺן דאנין (דָּיְנִין) לְכָל-עַמָּא דִּי בַּעֲבַר נַהֲרָה, לְכָל-יָדְעֵי, דָּתֵי אֱלָהָךְ; וְדִי לָא יָדַע, תְּהוֹדְעוּן.    25 And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God that is in thy hand, appoint magistrates and judges, who may judge all the people that are beyond the River, all such as know the laws of thy God; and teach ye him that knoweth them not.
7.26 כו  וְכָל-דִּי-לָא לֶהֱוֵא עָבֵד דָּתָא דִי-אֱלָהָךְ, וְדָתָא דִּי מַלְכָּא--אָסְפַּרְנָא, דִּינָה לֶהֱוֵא מִתְעֲבֵד מִנֵּהּ:  הֵן לְמוֹת הֵן לשרשו (לִשְׁרֹשִׁי), הֵן-לַעֲנָשׁ נִכְסִין וְלֶאֱסוּרִין.  {פ}    26 And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed upon him with all diligence, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.' {P}
7.27 כז  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵינוּ--אֲשֶׁר נָתַן כָּזֹאת, בְּלֵב הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְפָאֵר, אֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    27 Blessed be the LORD, the God of our fathers, who hath put such a thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem;
7.28 כח  וְעָלַי הִטָּה-חֶסֶד, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ וְיוֹעֲצָיו, וּלְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, הַגִּבֹּרִים; וַאֲנִי הִתְחַזַּקְתִּי, כְּיַד-יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי עָלַי, וָאֶקְבְּצָה מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל רָאשִׁים, לַעֲלוֹת עִמִּי.  {פ}    28 and hath extended mercy unto me before the king, and his counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes. And I was strengthened according to the hand of the LORD my God upon me, and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me. {P}
8.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי אֲבֹתֵיהֶם, וְהִתְיַחְשָׂם:  הָעֹלִים עִמִּי, בְּמַלְכוּת אַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא הַמֶּלֶךְ--מִבָּבֶל.  {ס}    1 Now these are the heads of their fathers' houses, and this is the genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king.
8.2 ב  מִבְּנֵי פִינְחָס גֵּרְשֹׁם,  {ס}  מִבְּנֵי אִיתָמָר דָּנִיֵּאל;  {ס}  מִבְּנֵי דָוִיד, חַטּוּשׁ.  {ס}    2 Of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hattush.
8.3 ג  מִבְּנֵי שְׁכַנְיָה,  {ס}  מִבְּנֵי פַרְעֹשׁ זְכַרְיָה; וְעִמּוֹ הִתְיַחֵשׂ לִזְכָרִים, מֵאָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים.  {ס}    3 Of the sons of Shecaniah: of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah; and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males a hundred and fifty.
8.4 ד  מִבְּנֵי פַּחַת מוֹאָב, אֶלְיְהוֹעֵינַי בֶּן-זְרַחְיָה; וְעִמּוֹ, מָאתַיִם הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    4 Of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai the son of Zerahiah; and with him two hundred males.
8.5 ה  מִבְּנֵי שְׁכַנְיָה, בֶּן-יַחֲזִיאֵל; וְעִמּוֹ, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    5 Of the sons of Shechaniah, the son of Jahaziel; and with him three hundred males.
8.6 ו  וּמִבְּנֵי עָדִין, עֶבֶד בֶּן-יוֹנָתָן; וְעִמּוֹ, חֲמִשִּׁים הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    6 And of the sons of Adin, Ebed the son of Jonathan; and with him fifty males.
8.7 ז  וּמִבְּנֵי עֵילָם, יְשַׁעְיָה בֶּן-עֲתַלְיָה; וְעִמּוֹ, שִׁבְעִים הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    7 And of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah; and with him seventy males.
8.8 ח  וּמִבְּנֵי שְׁפַטְיָה, זְבַדְיָה בֶּן-מִיכָאֵל; וְעִמּוֹ, שְׁמֹנִים הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    8 And of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah the son of Michael; and with him fourscore males.
8.9 ט  מִבְּנֵי יוֹאָב, עֹבַדְיָה בֶּן-יְחִיאֵל; וְעִמּוֹ, מָאתַיִם וּשְׁמֹנָה עָשָׂר הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    9 Of the sons of Joab, Obadiah the son of Jehiel; and with him two hundred and eighteen males.
8.10 י  וּמִבְּנֵי שְׁלוֹמִית, בֶּן-יוֹסִפְיָה; וְעִמּוֹ, מֵאָה וְשִׁשִּׁים הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    10 And of the sons of Shelomith, the son of Josiphiah; and with him a hundred and threescore males.
8.11 יא  וּמִבְּנֵי בֵבַי, זְכַרְיָה בֶּן-בֵּבָי; וְעִמּוֹ, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    11 And of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah the son of Bebai; and with him twenty and eight males.
8.12 יב  וּמִבְּנֵי עַזְגָּד, יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-הַקָּטָן; וְעִמּוֹ, מֵאָה וַעֲשָׂרָה הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    12 And of the sons of Azgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan; and with him a hundred and ten males.
8.13 יג  וּמִבְּנֵי אֲדֹנִיקָם, אַחֲרֹנִים--וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹתָם, אֱלִיפֶלֶט יְעִיאֵל וּשְׁמַעְיָה; וְעִמָּהֶם, שִׁשִּׁים הַזְּכָרִים.  {ס}    13 And of the sons of Adonikam, that were the last; and these are their names, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah; and with them threescore males.
8.14 יד  וּמִבְּנֵי בִגְוַי, עוּתַי וזבוד (וְזַכּוּר); וְעִמּוֹ, שִׁבְעִים הַזְּכָרִים.  {פ}    14 And of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zaccur; and with him seventy males. {P}
8.15 טו  וָאֶקְבְּצֵם, אֶל-הַנָּהָר הַבָּא אֶל-אַהֲוָא, וַנַּחֲנֶה שָׁם, יָמִים שְׁלֹשָׁה; וָאָבִינָה בָעָם וּבַכֹּהֲנִים, וּמִבְּנֵי לֵוִי לֹא-מָצָאתִי שָׁם.    15 And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava; and there we encamped three days; and I viewed the people, and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.
8.16 טז  וָאֶשְׁלְחָה לֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר לַאֲרִיאֵל לִשְׁמַעְיָה וּלְאֶלְנָתָן וּלְיָרִיב וּלְאֶלְנָתָן וּלְנָתָן, וְלִזְכַרְיָה וְלִמְשֻׁלָּם--רָאשִׁים; וּלְיוֹיָרִיב וּלְאֶלְנָתָן, מְבִינִים.    16 Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, teachers.
8.17 יז  ואוצאה (וָאֲצַוֶּה) אוֹתָם עַל-אִדּוֹ הָרֹאשׁ, בְּכָסִפְיָא הַמָּקוֹם; וָאָשִׂימָה בְּפִיהֶם דְּבָרִים לְדַבֵּר אֶל-אִדּוֹ אָחִיו הנתונים (הַנְּתִינִים), בְּכָסִפְיָא הַמָּקוֹם--לְהָבִיא-לָנוּ מְשָׁרְתִים, לְבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ.    17 And I gave them commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia; and I told them what they should say unto Iddo [and] his brother, who were set over the place Casiphia, that they should bring unto us ministers for the house of our God.
8.18 יח  וַיָּבִיאּוּ לָנוּ כְּיַד-אֱלֹהֵינוּ הַטּוֹבָה עָלֵינוּ, אִישׁ שֶׂכֶל--מִבְּנֵי מַחְלִי, בֶּן-לֵוִי בֶּן-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְשֵׁרֵבְיָה וּבָנָיו וְאֶחָיו, שְׁמֹנָה עָשָׂר.    18 And according to the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of discretion, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen;
8.19 יט  וְאֶת-חֲשַׁבְיָה--וְאִתּוֹ יְשַׁעְיָה, מִבְּנֵי מְרָרִי:  אֶחָיו וּבְנֵיהֶם, עֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    19 and Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brethren and their sons, twenty; {S}
8.20 כ  וּמִן-הַנְּתִינִים, שֶׁנָּתַן דָּוִיד וְהַשָּׂרִים לַעֲבֹדַת הַלְוִיִּם--נְתִינִים, מָאתַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים:  כֻּלָּם, נִקְּבוּ בְשֵׁמוֹת.    20 and of the Nethinim, whom David and the princes had given for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinim; all of them were mentioned by name.
8.21 כא  וָאֶקְרָא שָׁם צוֹם עַל-הַנָּהָר אַהֲוָא, לְהִתְעַנּוֹת לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ--לְבַקֵּשׁ מִמֶּנּוּ דֶּרֶךְ יְשָׁרָה, לָנוּ וּלְטַפֵּנוּ וּלְכָל-רְכוּשֵׁנוּ.    21 Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might humble ourselves before our God, to seek of Him a straight way, for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.
8.22 כב  כִּי בֹשְׁתִּי, לִשְׁאוֹל מִן-הַמֶּלֶךְ חַיִל וּפָרָשִׁים--לְעָזְרֵנוּ מֵאוֹיֵב, בַּדָּרֶךְ:  כִּי-אָמַרְנוּ לַמֶּלֶךְ לֵאמֹר, יַד-אֱלֹהֵינוּ עַל-כָּל-מְבַקְשָׁיו לְטוֹבָה, וְעֻזּוֹ וְאַפּוֹ, עַל כָּל-עֹזְבָיו.    22 For I was ashamed to ask of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way; because we had spoken unto the king, saying: 'The hand of our God is upon all them that seek Him, for good; but His power and His wrath is against all them that forsake Him.'
8.23 כג  וַנָּצוּמָה וַנְּבַקְשָׁה מֵאֱלֹהֵינוּ, עַל-זֹאת; וַיֵּעָתֵר, לָנוּ.    23 So we fasted and besought our God for this; and He was entreated of us.
8.24 כד  וָאַבְדִּילָה מִשָּׂרֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר--לְשֵׁרֵבְיָה חֲשַׁבְיָה, וְעִמָּהֶם מֵאֲחֵיהֶם עֲשָׂרָה.    24 Then I separated twelve of the chiefs of the priests, besides Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them,
8.25 כה  ואשקולה (וָאֶשְׁקֳלָה) לָהֶם, אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב וְאֶת-הַכֵּלִים--תְּרוּמַת בֵּית-אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הַהֵרִימוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ וְיֹעֲצָיו וְשָׂרָיו, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַנִּמְצָאִים.    25 and weighed unto them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offering for the house of our God, which the king, and his counsellors, and his princes, and all Israel there present, had offered;
8.26 כו  וָאֶשְׁקְלָה עַל-יָדָם כֶּסֶף, כִּכָּרִים שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים, וּכְלֵי-כֶסֶף מֵאָה, לְכִכָּרִים; זָהָב, מֵאָה כִכָּר.    26 I even weighed into their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels a hundred talents; of gold a hundred talents;
8.27 כז  וּכְפֹרֵי זָהָב עֶשְׂרִים, לַאֲדַרְכֹנִים אָלֶף; וּכְלֵי נְחֹשֶׁת מֻצְהָב טוֹבָה, שְׁנַיִם--חֲמוּדֹת, כַּזָּהָב.    27 and twenty bowels of gold, of a thousand darics; and two vessels of fine bright brass, precious as gold.
8.28 כח  וָאֹמְרָה אֲלֵהֶם, אַתֶּם קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה, וְהַכֵּלִים, קֹדֶשׁ; וְהַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב נְדָבָה, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵיכֶם.    28 And I said unto them: 'Ye are holy unto the LORD, and the vessels are holy; and the silver and the gold are a freewill-offering unto the LORD, the God of your fathers.
8.29 כט  שִׁקְדוּ וְשִׁמְרוּ, עַד-תִּשְׁקְלוּ לִפְנֵי שָׂרֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וְשָׂרֵי-הָאָבוֹת לְיִשְׂרָאֵל--בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  הַלִּשְׁכוֹת, בֵּית יְהוָה.    29 Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites, and the princes of the fathers' houses of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the LORD.'
8.30 ל  וְקִבְּלוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, מִשְׁקַל הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב וְהַכֵּלִים--לְהָבִיא לִירוּשָׁלִַם, לְבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {פ}    30 So the priests and the Levites received the weight of the silver and the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem unto the house of our God. {P}
8.31 לא  וַנִּסְּעָה מִנְּהַר אַהֲוָא, בִּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן--לָלֶכֶת, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְיַד-אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הָיְתָה עָלֵינוּ, וַיַּצִּילֵנוּ, מִכַּף אוֹיֵב וְאוֹרֵב עַל-הַדָּרֶךְ.    31 Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go unto Jerusalem; and the hand of our God was upon us, and He delivered us from the hand of the enemy and lier-in-wait by the way.
8.32 לב  וַנָּבוֹא, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַנֵּשֶׁב שָׁם, יָמִים שְׁלֹשָׁה.    32 And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days.
8.33 לג  וּבַיּוֹם הָרְבִיעִי נִשְׁקַל הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב וְהַכֵּלִים בְּבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ, עַל יַד-מְרֵמוֹת בֶּן-אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן, וְעִמּוֹ, אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-פִּינְחָס; וְעִמָּהֶם יוֹזָבָד בֶּן-יֵשׁוּעַ, וְנוֹעַדְיָה בֶן-בִּנּוּי--הַלְוִיִּם.    33 And on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels weighed in the house of our God into the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui, the Levites;
8.34 לד  בְּמִסְפָּר בְּמִשְׁקָל, לַכֹּל; וַיִּכָּתֵב כָּל-הַמִּשְׁקָל, בָּעֵת הַהִיא.  {פ}    34 the whole by number and by weight; and all the weight was written at that time. {P}
8.35 לה  הַבָּאִים מֵהַשְּׁבִי בְנֵי-הַגּוֹלָה הִקְרִיבוּ עֹלוֹת לֵאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, פָּרִים שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֵילִים תִּשְׁעִים וְשִׁשָּׁה כְּבָשִׂים שִׁבְעִים וְשִׁבְעָה, צְפִירֵי חַטָּאת, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר:  הַכֹּל, עוֹלָה לַיהוָה.  {פ}    35 The children of the captivity, that were come out of exile, offered burnt-offerings unto the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy and seven lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin-offering; all this was a burnt-offering unto the LORD. {P}
8.36 לו  וַיִּתְּנוּ אֶת-דָּתֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לַאֲחַשְׁדַּרְפְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּפַחֲווֹת, עֵבֶר הַנָּהָר; וְנִשְּׂאוּ אֶת-הָעָם, וְאֶת-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.  {ס}    36 And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's satraps, and to the governors beyond the River; and they furthered the people and the house of God. {S}
9.1 א  וּכְכַלּוֹת אֵלֶּה, נִגְּשׁוּ אֵלַי הַשָּׂרִים לֵאמֹר--לֹא-נִבְדְּלוּ הָעָם יִשְׂרָאֵל וְהַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, מֵעַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת:  כְּתֹעֲבֹתֵיהֶם לַכְּנַעֲנִי הַחִתִּי הַפְּרִזִּי הַיְבוּסִי, הָעַמֹּנִי הַמֹּאָבִי, הַמִּצְרִי, וְהָאֱמֹרִי.    1 Now when these things were done, the princes drew near unto me, saying: 'The people of Israel, and the priests and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands, doing according to their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.
9.2 ב  כִּי-נָשְׂאוּ מִבְּנֹתֵיהֶם, לָהֶם וְלִבְנֵיהֶם, וְהִתְעָרְבוּ זֶרַע הַקֹּדֶשׁ, בְּעַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת; וְיַד הַשָּׂרִים וְהַסְּגָנִים, הָיְתָה בַּמַּעַל הַזֶּה--רִאשׁוֹנָה.  {ס}    2 For they have taken of their daughters for themselves and for their sons; so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the peoples of the lands; yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath been first in this faithlessness.' {S}
9.3 ג  וּכְשָׁמְעִי אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, קָרַעְתִּי אֶת-בִּגְדִי וּמְעִילִי; וָאֶמְרְטָה מִשְּׂעַר רֹאשִׁי, וּזְקָנִי, וָאֵשְׁבָה, מְשׁוֹמֵם.    3 And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down appalled.
9.4 ד  וְאֵלַי יֵאָסְפוּ, כֹּל חָרֵד בְּדִבְרֵי אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל--עַל, מַעַל הַגּוֹלָה; וַאֲנִי יֹשֵׁב מְשׁוֹמֵם, עַד לְמִנְחַת הָעָרֶב.    4 Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the faithlessness of them of the captivity; and I sat appalled until the evening offering.
9.5 ה  וּבְמִנְחַת הָעֶרֶב, קַמְתִּי מִתַּעֲנִיתִי, וּבְקָרְעִי בִגְדִי, וּמְעִילִי; וָאֶכְרְעָה, עַל-בִּרְכַּי, וָאֶפְרְשָׂה כַפַּי, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי.    5 And at the evening offering I arose up from my fasting, even with my garment and my mantle rent; and I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto the LORD my God;
9.6 ו  וָאֹמְרָה, אֱלֹהַי בֹּשְׁתִּי וְנִכְלַמְתִּי--לְהָרִים אֱלֹהַי פָּנַי, אֵלֶיךָ:  כִּי עֲוֺנֹתֵינוּ רָבוּ לְמַעְלָה רֹּאשׁ, וְאַשְׁמָתֵנוּ גָדְלָה עַד לַשָּׁמָיִם.    6 and I said: 'O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to Thee, my God; for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our guiltiness is grown up unto the heavens.
9.7 ז  מִימֵי אֲבֹתֵינוּ, אֲנַחְנוּ בְּאַשְׁמָה גְדֹלָה--עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וּבַעֲוֺנֹתֵינוּ נִתַּנּוּ אֲנַחְנוּ מְלָכֵינוּ כֹהֲנֵינוּ בְּיַד מַלְכֵי הָאֲרָצוֹת, בַּחֶרֶב בַּשְּׁבִי וּבַבִּזָּה וּבְבֹשֶׁת פָּנִים--כְּהַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    7 Since the days of our fathers we have been exceeding guilty unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to spoiling, and to confusion of face, as it is this day.
9.8 ח  וְעַתָּה כִּמְעַט-רֶגַע הָיְתָה תְחִנָּה מֵאֵת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, לְהַשְׁאִיר לָנוּ פְּלֵיטָה, וְלָתֶת-לָנוּ יָתֵד, בִּמְקוֹם קָדְשׁוֹ--לְהָאִיר עֵינֵינוּ אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וּלְתִתֵּנוּ מִחְיָה מְעַט בְּעַבְדֻתֵנוּ.    8 And now for a little moment grace hath been shown from the LORD our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in His holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage.
9.9 ט  כִּי-עֲבָדִים אֲנַחְנוּ--וּבְעַבְדֻתֵנוּ, לֹא עֲזָבָנוּ אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וַיַּט-עָלֵינוּ חֶסֶד לִפְנֵי מַלְכֵי פָרַס לָתֶת-לָנוּ מִחְיָה, לְרוֹמֵם אֶת-בֵּית אֱלֹהֵינוּ וּלְהַעֲמִיד אֶת-חָרְבֹתָיו, וְלָתֶת-לָנוּ גָדֵר, בִּיהוּדָה וּבִירוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    9 For we are bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to repair the ruins thereof, and to give us a fence in Judah and in Jerusalem. {S}
9.10 י  וְעַתָּה מַה-נֹּאמַר אֱלֹהֵינוּ, אַחֲרֵי-זֹאת:  כִּי עָזַבְנוּ, מִצְוֺתֶיךָ.    10 And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken Thy commandments,
9.11 יא  אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתָ, בְּיַד עֲבָדֶיךָ הַנְּבִיאִים לֵאמֹר--הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם בָּאִים לְרִשְׁתָּהּ, אֶרֶץ נִדָּה הִיא בְּנִדַּת עַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת:  בְּתוֹעֲבֹתֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר מִלְאוּהָ מִפֶּה אֶל-פֶּה--בְּטֻמְאָתָם.    11 which Thou hast commanded by Thy servants the prophets, saying: The land, unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land through the uncleanness of the peoples of the lands, through their abominations, wherewith they have filled it from one end to another with their filthiness.
9.12 יב  וְעַתָּה בְּנוֹתֵיכֶם אַל-תִּתְּנוּ לִבְנֵיהֶם, וּבְנֹתֵיהֶם אַל-תִּשְׂאוּ לִבְנֵיכֶם, וְלֹא-תִדְרְשׁוּ שְׁלֹמָם וְטוֹבָתָם, עַד-עוֹלָם--לְמַעַן תֶּחֶזְקוּ, וַאֲכַלְתֶּם אֶת-טוּב הָאָרֶץ, וְהוֹרַשְׁתֶּם לִבְנֵיכֶם, עַד-עוֹלָם.    12 Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither take their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their prosperity for ever; that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever.
9.13 יג  וְאַחֲרֵי, כָּל-הַבָּא עָלֵינוּ, בְּמַעֲשֵׂינוּ הָרָעִים, וּבְאַשְׁמָתֵנוּ הַגְּדֹלָה:  כִּי אַתָּה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, חָשַׂכְתָּ לְמַטָּה מֵעֲוֺנֵנוּ, וְנָתַתָּה לָּנוּ פְּלֵיטָה, כָּזֹאת.    13 And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great guilt, seeing that Thou our God hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such a remnant,
9.14 יד  הֲנָשׁוּב, לְהָפֵר מִצְוֺתֶיךָ, וּלְהִתְחַתֵּן, בְּעַמֵּי הַתֹּעֵבוֹת הָאֵלֶּה:  הֲלוֹא תֶאֱנַף-בָּנוּ עַד-כַּלֵּה, לְאֵין שְׁאֵרִית וּפְלֵיטָה.  {פ}    14 shall we again break Thy commandments, and make marriages with the peoples that do these abominations? wouldest not Thou be angry with us till Thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor any to escape? {P}
9.15 טו  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, צַדִּיק אַתָּה--כִּי-נִשְׁאַרְנוּ פְלֵיטָה, כְּהַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; הִנְנוּ לְפָנֶיךָ בְּאַשְׁמָתֵינוּ, כִּי אֵין לַעֲמוֹד לְפָנֶיךָ עַל-זֹאת.  {פ}    15 O LORD, the God of Israel, Thou art righteous; for we are left a remnant that is escaped, as it is this day; behold, we are before Thee in our guiltiness; for none can stand before Thee because of this.' {P}
10.1 א  וּכְהִתְפַּלֵּל עֶזְרָא, וּכְהִתְוַדֹּתוֹ, בֹּכֶה וּמִתְנַפֵּל, לִפְנֵי בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים:  נִקְבְּצוּ אֵלָיו מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל קָהָל רַב-מְאֹד, אֲנָשִׁים וְנָשִׁים וִילָדִים--כִּי-בָכוּ הָעָם, הַרְבֵּה-בֶכֶה.  {ס}    1 Now while Ezra prayed, and made confession, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God, there was gathered together unto him out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children; for the people wept very sore. {S}
10.2 ב  וַיַּעַן שְׁכַנְיָה בֶן-יְחִיאֵל מִבְּנֵי עולם (עֵילָם), וַיֹּאמֶר לְעֶזְרָא--אֲנַחְנוּ מָעַלְנוּ בֵאלֹהֵינוּ, וַנֹּשֶׁב נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת מֵעַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ; וְעַתָּה יֵשׁ-מִקְוֶה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-זֹאת.    2 And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said unto Ezra: 'We have broken faith with our God, and have married foreign women of the peoples of the land; yet now there is hope for Israel concerning this thing.
10.3 ג  וְעַתָּה נִכְרָת-בְּרִית לֵאלֹהֵינוּ לְהוֹצִיא כָל-נָשִׁים וְהַנּוֹלָד מֵהֶם, בַּעֲצַת אֲדֹנָי, וְהַחֲרֵדִים, בְּמִצְוַת אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וְכַתּוֹרָה, יֵעָשֶׂה.    3 Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of the LORD, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and let it be done according to the law.
10.4 ד  קוּם כִּי-עָלֶיךָ הַדָּבָר, וַאֲנַחְנוּ עִמָּךְ:  חֲזַק, וַעֲשֵׂה.  {פ}    4 Arise; for the matter belongeth unto thee, and we are with thee; be of good courage, and do it.' {P}
10.5 ה  וַיָּקָם עֶזְרָא וַיַּשְׁבַּע אֶת-שָׂרֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשׂוֹת כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה--וַיִּשָּׁבֵעוּ.    5 Then arose Ezra, and made the chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they would do according to this word. So they swore.
10.6 ו  וַיָּקָם עֶזְרָא, מִלִּפְנֵי בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, וַיֵּלֶךְ, אֶל-לִשְׁכַּת יְהוֹחָנָן בֶּן-אֶלְיָשִׁיב; וַיֵּלֶךְ שָׁם, לֶחֶם לֹא-אָכַל וּמַיִם לֹא-שָׁתָה--כִּי מִתְאַבֵּל, עַל-מַעַל הַגּוֹלָה.  {ס}    6 Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of Jehohanan the son of Eliashib; and when he came thither, he did eat no bread, nor drink water; for he mourned because of the faithlessness of them of the captivity. {S}
10.7 ז  וַיַּעֲבִירוּ קוֹל בִּיהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, לְכֹל בְּנֵי הַגּוֹלָה--לְהִקָּבֵץ, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    7 And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto all the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem;
10.8 ח  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָבוֹא לִשְׁלֹשֶׁת הַיָּמִים, כַּעֲצַת הַשָּׂרִים וְהַזְּקֵנִים--יָחֳרַם, כָּל-רְכוּשׁוֹ; וְהוּא יִבָּדֵל, מִקְּהַל הַגּוֹלָה.  {ס}    8 and that whosoever came not within three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders, all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the congregation of the captivity. {S}
10.9 ט  וַיִּקָּבְצוּ כָל-אַנְשֵׁי-יְהוּדָה וּבִנְיָמִן יְרוּשָׁלִַם לִשְׁלֹשֶׁת הַיָּמִים, הוּא חֹדֶשׁ הַתְּשִׁיעִי--בְּעֶשְׂרִים בַּחֹדֶשׁ; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ כָל-הָעָם, בִּרְחוֹב בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, מַרְעִידִים עַל-הַדָּבָר, וּמֵהַגְּשָׁמִים.  {פ}    9 Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together unto Jerusalem within the three days; it was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the broad place before the house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain. {P}
10.10 י  וַיָּקָם עֶזְרָא הַכֹּהֵן, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, אַתֶּם מְעַלְתֶּם, וַתֹּשִׁיבוּ נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת--לְהוֹסִיף, עַל-אַשְׁמַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.    10 And Ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them: 'Ye have broken faith, and have married foreign women, to increase the guilt of Israel.
10.11 יא  וְעַתָּה, תְּנוּ תוֹדָה לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-אֲבֹתֵיכֶם--וַעֲשׂוּ רְצוֹנוֹ; וְהִבָּדְלוּ מֵעַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ, וּמִן-הַנָּשִׁים הַנָּכְרִיּוֹת.    11 Now therefore make confession unto the LORD, the God of your fathers, and do His pleasure; and separate yourselves from the peoples of the land, and from the foreign women.'
10.12 יב  וַיַּעֲנוּ כָל-הַקָּהָל וַיֹּאמְרוּ, קוֹל גָּדוֹל:  כֵּן כדבריך (כִּדְבָרְךָ) עָלֵינוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת.    12 Then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice: 'As thou hast said, so it is for us to do.
10.13 יג  אֲבָל הָעָם רָב וְהָעֵת גְּשָׁמִים, וְאֵין כֹּחַ לַעֲמוֹד בַּחוּץ; וְהַמְּלָאכָה, לֹא-לְיוֹם אֶחָד וְלֹא לִשְׁנַיִם--כִּי-הִרְבִּינוּ לִפְשֹׁעַ, בַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    13 But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or two; for we have greatly transgressed in this matter.
10.14 יד  יַעַמְדוּ-נָא שָׂרֵינוּ לְכָל-הַקָּהָל וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר בֶּעָרֵינוּ, הַהֹשִׁיב נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת יָבֹא לְעִתִּים מְזֻמָּנִים, וְעִמָּהֶם זִקְנֵי-עִיר וָעִיר, וְשֹׁפְטֶיהָ:  עַד לְהָשִׁיב חֲרוֹן אַף-אֱלֹהֵינוּ, מִמֶּנּוּ--עַד, לַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.  {פ}    14 Let now our princes of all the congregation stand, and let all them that are in our cities that have married foreign women come at appointed times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God be turned from us, as touching this matter.' {P}
10.15 טו  אַךְ יוֹנָתָן בֶּן-עֲשָׂהאֵל וְיַחְזְיָה בֶן-תִּקְוָה, עָמְדוּ עַל-זֹאת; וּמְשֻׁלָּם וְשַׁבְּתַי הַלֵּוִי, עֲזָרֻם.    15 Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of Tikvah stood up against this matter; and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.
10.16 טז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן, בְּנֵי הַגּוֹלָה, וַיִּבָּדְלוּ עֶזְרָא הַכֹּהֵן אֲנָשִׁים רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם, וְכֻלָּם בְּשֵׁמוֹת; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, בְּיוֹם אֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ הָעֲשִׂירִי, לְדַרְיוֹשׁ, הַדָּבָר.    16 And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, with certain heads of fathers' houses, after their fathers' houses, and all of them by their names, were separated; and they sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.
10.17 יז  וַיְכַלּוּ בַכֹּל--אֲנָשִׁים, הַהֹשִׁיבוּ נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת:  עַד יוֹם אֶחָד, לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן.  {פ}    17 And they were finished with all the men that had married foreign women by the first day of the first month. {P}
10.18 יח  וַיִּמָּצֵא מִבְּנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֲשֶׁר הֹשִׁיבוּ נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת:  מִבְּנֵי יֵשׁוּעַ בֶּן-יוֹצָדָק, וְאֶחָיו--מַעֲשֵׂיָה וֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר, וְיָרִיב וּגְדַלְיָה.    18 And among the sons of the priests there were found that had married foreign women, namely: of the sons of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and his brethren, Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah.
10.19 יט  וַיִּתְּנוּ יָדָם, לְהוֹצִיא נְשֵׁיהֶם; וַאֲשֵׁמִים אֵיל-צֹאן, עַל-אַשְׁמָתָם.  {ס}    19 And they gave their hand that they would put away their wives; and being guilty, [they offered] a ram of the flock for their guilt. {S}
10.20 כ  וּמִבְּנֵי אִמֵּר, חֲנָנִי וּזְבַדְיָה.  {ס}    20 And of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah. {S}
10.21 כא  וּמִבְּנֵי, חָרִם--מַעֲשֵׂיָה וְאֵלִיָּה וּשְׁמַעְיָה, וִיחִיאֵל וְעֻזִּיָּה.    21 And of the sons of Harim: Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah.
10.22 כב  וּמִבְּנֵי, פַּשְׁחוּר--אֶלְיוֹעֵינַי מַעֲשֵׂיָה יִשְׁמָעֵאל נְתַנְאֵל, יוֹזָבָד וְאֶלְעָשָׂה.  {ס}    22 And of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah. {S}
10.23 כג  וּמִן-הַלְוִיִּם--יוֹזָבָד וְשִׁמְעִי, וְקֵלָיָה הוּא קְלִיטָא, פְּתַחְיָה יְהוּדָה, וֶאֱלִיעֶזֶר.  {ס}    23 And of the Levites: Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah--the same is Kelita--Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer. {S}
10.24 כד  וּמִן-הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, אֶלְיָשִׁיב; וּמִן-הַשֹּׁעֲרִים, שַׁלֻּם וָטֶלֶם וְאוּרִי.  {ס}    24 And of the singers: Eliashib; and of the porters: Shallum, and Telem, and Uri. {S}
10.25 כה  וּמִיִּשְׂרָאֵל--מִבְּנֵי פַרְעֹשׁ רַמְיָה וְיִזִּיָּה וּמַלְכִּיָּה, וּמִיָּמִן וְאֶלְעָזָר, וּמַלְכִּיָּה, וּבְנָיָה.  {ס}    25 And of Israel: of the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, and Izziah, and Malchijah, and Mijamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah. {S}
10.26 כו  וּמִבְּנֵי, עֵילָם--מַתַּנְיָה זְכַרְיָה וִיחִיאֵל וְעַבְדִּי, וִירֵמוֹת וְאֵלִיָּה.  {ס}    26 And of the sons of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Elijah. {S}
10.27 כז  וּמִבְּנֵי, זַתּוּא--אֶלְיוֹעֵנַי אֶלְיָשִׁיב מַתַּנְיָה וִירֵמוֹת, וְזָבָד וַעֲזִיזָא.  {ס}    27 And of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza. {S}
10.28 כח  וּמִבְּנֵי, בֵּבָי--יְהוֹחָנָן חֲנַנְיָה, זַבַּי עַתְלָי.  {ס}    28 And of the sons of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai. {S}
10.29 כט  וּמִבְּנֵי, בָּנִי--מְשֻׁלָּם מַלּוּךְ וַעֲדָיָה, יָשׁוּב וּשְׁאָל ירמות (וְרָמוֹת).  {ס}    29 And of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth. {S}
10.30 ל  וּמִבְּנֵי פַּחַת מוֹאָב, עַדְנָא וּכְלָל, בְּנָיָה מַעֲשֵׂיָה מַתַּנְיָה בְצַלְאֵל, וּבִנּוּי וּמְנַשֶּׁה.  {ס}    30 And of the sons of Pahath-moab: Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, and Binnui, and Manasseh. {S}
10.31 לא  וּבְנֵי, חָרִם--אֱלִיעֶזֶר יִשִּׁיָּה מַלְכִּיָּה, שְׁמַעְיָה שִׁמְעוֹן.    31 And of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon;
10.32 לב  בִּנְיָמִן מַלּוּךְ, שְׁמַרְיָה.  {ס}    32 Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah. {S}
10.33 לג  מִבְּנֵי, חָשֻׁם--מַתְּנַי מַתַּתָּה זָבָד אֱלִיפֶלֶט, יְרֵמַי מְנַשֶּׁה שִׁמְעִי.  {ס}    33 Of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei. {S}
10.34 לד  מִבְּנֵי בָנִי, מַעֲדַי עַמְרָם וְאוּאֵל.  {ס}    34 Of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, and Uel; {S}
10.35 לה  בְּנָיָה בֵדְיָה, כלוהי (כְּלוּהוּ).    35 Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhu;
10.36 לו  וַנְיָה מְרֵמוֹת, אֶלְיָשִׁיב.    36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib;
10.37 לז  מַתַּנְיָה מַתְּנַי, ויעשו (וְיַעֲשָׂי).    37 Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasai;
10.38 לח  וּבָנִי וּבִנּוּי, שִׁמְעִי.    38 and Bani, and Binnui, Shimei;
10.39 לט  וְשֶׁלֶמְיָה וְנָתָן, וַעֲדָיָה.    39 Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah;
10.40 מ  מַכְנַדְבַי שָׁשַׁי, שָׁרָי.    40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai;
10.41 מא  עֲזַרְאֵל וְשֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ, שְׁמַרְיָה.    41 Azarel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah;
10.42 מב  שַׁלּוּם אֲמַרְיָה, יוֹסֵף.  {ס}    42 Shallum, Amariah, Joseph. {S}
10.43 מג  מִבְּנֵי, נְבוֹ--יְעִיאֵל מַתִּתְיָה זָבָד זְבִינָא, ידו (יַדַּי) וְיוֹאֵל בְּנָיָה.    43 Of the sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, and Joel, Benaiah.
10.44 מד  כָּל-אֵלֶּה, נשאי (נָשְׂאוּ) נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת; וְיֵשׁ מֵהֶם נָשִׁים, וַיָּשִׂימוּ בָּנִים.  {פ}    44 All these had taken foreign wives; and some of them had wives by whom they had children. {P}
