1.1 א  הַמַּשָּׂא אֲשֶׁר חָזָה, חֲבַקּוּק הַנָּבִיא.    1 The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see.
1.2 ב  עַד-אָנָה יְהוָה שִׁוַּעְתִּי, וְלֹא תִשְׁמָע:  אֶזְעַק אֵלֶיךָ חָמָס, וְלֹא תוֹשִׁיעַ.    2 How long, O LORD, shall I cry, and Thou wilt not hear? I cry out unto Thee of violence, and Thou wilt not save.
1.3 ג  לָמָּה תַרְאֵנִי אָוֶן וְעָמָל תַּבִּיט, וְשֹׁד וְחָמָס לְנֶגְדִּי; וַיְהִי רִיב וּמָדוֹן, יִשָּׂא.    3 Why dost Thou show me iniquity, and beholdest mischief? And why are spoiling and violence before me? so that there is strife, and contention ariseth.
1.4 ד  עַל-כֵּן תָּפוּג תּוֹרָה, וְלֹא-יֵצֵא לָנֶצַח מִשְׁפָּט:  כִּי רָשָׁע מַכְתִּיר אֶת-הַצַּדִּיק, עַל-כֵּן יֵצֵא מִשְׁפָּט מְעֻקָּל.    4 Therefore the law is slacked, and right doth never go forth; for the wicked doth beset the righteous; therefore right goeth forth perverted.
1.5 ה  רְאוּ בַגּוֹיִם וְהַבִּיטוּ, וְהִתַּמְּהוּ תְּמָהוּ:  כִּי-פֹעַל פֹּעֵל בִּימֵיכֶם, לֹא תַאֲמִינוּ כִּי יְסֻפָּר.    5 Look ye among the nations, and behold, and wonder marvellously; for, behold, a work shall be wrought in your days, which ye will not believe though it be told you.
1.6 ו  כִּי-הִנְנִי מֵקִים אֶת-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, הַגּוֹי הַמַּר וְהַנִּמְהָר; הַהוֹלֵךְ, לְמֶרְחֲבֵי-אֶרֶץ, לָרֶשֶׁת, מִשְׁכָּנוֹת לֹּא-לוֹ.    6 For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and impetuous nation, that march through the breadth of the earth, to possess dwelling-places that are not theirs.
1.7 ז  אָיֹם וְנוֹרָא, הוּא; מִמֶּנּוּ, מִשְׁפָּטוֹ וּשְׂאֵתוֹ יֵצֵא.    7 They are terrible and dreadful; their law and their majesty proceed from themselves.
1.8 ח  וְקַלּוּ מִנְּמֵרִים סוּסָיו, וְחַדּוּ מִזְּאֵבֵי עֶרֶב, וּפָשׁוּ, פָּרָשָׁיו; וּפָרָשָׁיו, מֵרָחוֹק יָבֹאוּ--יָעֻפוּ, כְּנֶשֶׁר חָשׁ לֶאֱכוֹל.    8 Their horses also are swifter than leopards, and are more fierce than the wolves of the desert; and their horsemen spread themselves; yea, their horsemen come from far, they fly as a vulture that hasteth to devour.
1.9 ט  כֻּלֹּה לְחָמָס יָבוֹא, מְגַמַּת פְּנֵיהֶם קָדִימָה; וַיֶּאֱסֹף כַּחוֹל, שֶׁבִי.    9 They come all of them for violence; their faces are set eagerly as the east wind; and they gather captives as the sand.
1.10 י  וְהוּא בַּמְּלָכִים יִתְקַלָּס, וְרֹזְנִים מִשְׂחָק לוֹ; הוּא לְכָל-מִבְצָר יִשְׂחָק, וַיִּצְבֹּר עָפָר וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ.    10 And they scoff at kings, and princes are a derision unto them; they deride every stronghold, for they heap up earth, and take it.
1.11 יא  אָז חָלַף רוּחַ וַיַּעֲבֹר, וְאָשֵׁם:  זוּ כֹחוֹ, לֵאלֹהוֹ.    11 Then their spirit doth pass over and transgress, and they become guilty: even they who impute their might unto their god.
1.12 יב  הֲלוֹא אַתָּה מִקֶּדֶם, יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי קְדֹשִׁי--לֹא נָמוּת; יְהוָה לְמִשְׁפָּט שַׂמְתּוֹ, וְצוּר לְהוֹכִיחַ יְסַדְתּוֹ.    12 Art not Thou from everlasting, O LORD my God, my Holy One? we shall not die. O LORD, Thou hast ordained them for judgment, and Thou, O Rock, hast established them for correction.
1.13 יג  טְהוֹר עֵינַיִם מֵרְאוֹת רָע, וְהַבִּיט אֶל-עָמָל לֹא תוּכָל:  לָמָּה תַבִּיט, בּוֹגְדִים--תַּחֲרִישׁ, בְּבַלַּע רָשָׁע צַדִּיק מִמֶּנּוּ.    13 Thou that art of eyes too pure to behold evil, and that canst not look on mischief, wherefore lookest Thou, when they deal treacherously, and holdest Thy peace, when the wicked swalloweth up the man that is more righteous than he;
1.14 יד  וַתַּעֲשֶׂה אָדָם, כִּדְגֵי הַיָּם--כְּרֶמֶשׂ, לֹא-מֹשֵׁל בּוֹ.    14 And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?
1.15 טו  כֻּלֹּה, בְּחַכָּה הֵעֲלָה--יְגֹרֵהוּ בְחֶרְמוֹ, וְיַאַסְפֵהוּ בְּמִכְמַרְתּוֹ; עַל-כֵּן, יִשְׂמַח וְיָגִיל.    15 They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag; therefore they rejoice and exult.
1.16 טז  עַל-כֵּן יְזַבֵּחַ לְחֶרְמוֹ, וִיקַטֵּר לְמִכְמַרְתּוֹ:  כִּי בָהֵמָּה שָׁמֵן חֶלְקוֹ, וּמַאֲכָלוֹ בְּרִאָה.    16 Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and offer unto their drag; because by them their portion is fat, and their food plenteous.
1.17 יז  הַעַל כֵּן, יָרִיק חֶרְמוֹ; וְתָמִיד לַהֲרֹג גּוֹיִם, לֹא יַחְמוֹל.  {ס}    17 Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare to slay the nations continually? {S}
2.1 א  עַל-מִשְׁמַרְתִּי אֶעֱמֹדָה, וְאֶתְיַצְּבָה עַל-מָצוֹר; וַאֲצַפֶּה, לִרְאוֹת מַה-יְדַבֶּר-בִּי, וּמָה אָשִׁיב, עַל-תּוֹכַחְתִּי.    1 I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will look out to see what He will speak by me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved.
2.2 ב  וַיַּעֲנֵנִי יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר, כְּתֹב חָזוֹן, וּבָאֵר עַל-הַלֻּחוֹת--לְמַעַן יָרוּץ, קוֹרֵא בוֹ.    2 And the LORD answered me, and said: 'Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that a man may read it swiftly.
2.3 ג  כִּי עוֹד חָזוֹן לַמּוֹעֵד, וְיָפֵחַ לַקֵּץ וְלֹא יְכַזֵּב; אִם-יִתְמַהְמָהּ, חַכֵּה-לוֹ--כִּי-בֹא יָבֹא, לֹא יְאַחֵר.    3 For the vision is yet for the appointed time, and it declareth of the end, and doth not lie; though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not delay.'
2.4 ד  הִנֵּה עֻפְּלָה, לֹא-יָשְׁרָה נַפְשׁוֹ בּוֹ; וְצַדִּיק, בֶּאֱמוּנָתוֹ יִחְיֶה.  {ס}    4 Behold, his soul is puffed up, it is not upright in him; but the righteous shall live by his faith. {S}
2.5 ה  וְאַף כִּי-הַיַּיִן בֹּגֵד, גֶּבֶר יָהִיר וְלֹא יִנְוֶה:  אֲשֶׁר הִרְחִיב כִּשְׁאוֹל נַפְשׁוֹ, וְהוּא כַמָּוֶת וְלֹא יִשְׂבָּע, וַיֶּאֱסֹף אֵלָיו כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, וַיִּקְבֹּץ אֵלָיו כָּל-הָעַמִּים.    5 Yea, moreover, wine is a treacherous dealer; the haughty man abideth not; he who enlargeth his desire as the nether-world, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all peoples.
2.6 ו  הֲלוֹא-אֵלֶּה כֻלָּם, עָלָיו מָשָׁל יִשָּׂאוּ, וּמְלִיצָה, חִידוֹת לוֹ; וְיֹאמַר, הוֹי הַמַּרְבֶּה לֹּא-לוֹ--עַד-מָתַי, וּמַכְבִּיד עָלָיו עַבְטִיט.    6 Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting riddle against him, and say: 'Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and that ladeth himself with many pledges!'
2.7 ז  הֲלוֹא פֶתַע, יָקוּמוּ נֹשְׁכֶיךָ, וְיִקְצוּ, מְזַעְזְעֶיךָ; וְהָיִיתָ לִמְשִׁסּוֹת, לָמוֹ.    7 Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall exact interest of thee, and awake that shall violently shake thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?
2.8 ח  כִּי-אַתָּה שַׁלּוֹתָ גּוֹיִם רַבִּים, יְשָׁלּוּךָ כָּל-יֶתֶר עַמִּים; מִדְּמֵי אָדָם וַחֲמַס-אֶרֶץ, קִרְיָה וְכָל-יֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ.  {פ}    8 Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the peoples shall spoil thee; because of men's blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all that dwell therein. {P}
2.9 ט  הוֹי, בֹּצֵעַ בֶּצַע רָע--לְבֵיתוֹ:  לָשׂוּם בַּמָּרוֹם קִנּוֹ, לְהִנָּצֵל מִכַּף-רָע.    9 Woe to him that gaineth evil gains for his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil!
2.10 י  יָעַצְתָּ בֹּשֶׁת, לְבֵיתֶךָ; קְצוֹת-עַמִּים רַבִּים, וְחוֹטֵא נַפְשֶׁךָ.    10 Thou hast devised shame to thy house, by cutting off many peoples, and hast forfeited thy life.
2.11 יא  כִּי-אֶבֶן, מִקִּיר תִּזְעָק; וְכָפִיס, מֵעֵץ יַעֲנֶנָּה.  {פ}    11 For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. {P}
2.12 יב  הוֹי בֹּנֶה עִיר, בְּדָמִים; וְכוֹנֵן קִרְיָה, בְּעַוְלָה.    12 Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and establisheth a city by iniquity!
2.13 יג  הֲלוֹא הִנֵּה, מֵאֵת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת; וְיִיגְעוּ עַמִּים בְּדֵי-אֵשׁ, וּלְאֻמִּים בְּדֵי-רִיק יִעָפוּ.    13 Behold, is it not of the LORD of hosts that the peoples labour for the fire, and the nations weary themselves for vanity?
2.14 יד  כִּי תִּמָּלֵא הָאָרֶץ, לָדַעַת אֶת-כְּבוֹד יְהוָה, כַּמַּיִם, יְכַסּוּ עַל-יָם.  {פ}    14 For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea. {P}
2.15 טו  הוֹי מַשְׁקֵה רֵעֵהוּ, מְסַפֵּחַ חֲמָתְךָ וְאַף שַׁכֵּר--לְמַעַן הַבִּיט, עַל-מְעוֹרֵיהֶם.    15 Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy venom thereto, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness!
2.16 טז  שָׂבַעְתָּ קָלוֹן מִכָּבוֹד, שְׁתֵה גַם-אַתָּה וְהֵעָרֵל; תִּסּוֹב עָלֶיךָ, כּוֹס יְמִין יְהוָה, וְקִיקָלוֹן, עַל-כְּבוֹדֶךָ.    16 Thou art filled with shame instead of glory, drink thou also, and be uncovered; the cup of the LORD'S right hand shall be turned unto thee, and filthiness shall be upon thy glory.
2.17 יז  כִּי חֲמַס לְבָנוֹן יְכַסֶּךָּ, וְשֹׁד בְּהֵמוֹת יְחִיתַן, מִדְּמֵי אָדָם וַחֲמַס-אֶרֶץ, קִרְיָה וְכָל-יֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ.    17 For the violence done to Lebanon shall cover thee, and the destruction of the beasts, which made them afraid; because of men's blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all that dwell therein.
2.18 יח  מָה-הוֹעִיל פֶּסֶל, כִּי פְסָלוֹ יֹצְרוֹ--מַסֵּכָה, וּמוֹרֶה שָּׁקֶר:  כִּי בָטַח יֹצֵר יִצְרוֹ, עָלָיו, לַעֲשׂוֹת, אֱלִילִים אִלְּמִים.  {ס}    18 What profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof hath graven it, even the molten image, and the teacher of lies; that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols? {S}
2.19 יט  הוֹי אֹמֵר לָעֵץ הָקִיצָה, עוּרִי לְאֶבֶן דּוּמָם; הוּא יוֹרֶה--הִנֵּה-הוּא תָּפוּשׂ זָהָב וָכֶסֶף, וְכָל-רוּחַ אֵין בְּקִרְבּוֹ.    19 Woe unto him that saith to the wood: 'Awake', to the dumb stone: 'Arise!' Can this teach? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.
2.20 כ  וַיהוָה, בְּהֵיכַל קָדְשׁוֹ:  הַס מִפָּנָיו, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}    20 But the LORD is in His holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before Him. {S}
3.1 א  תְּפִלָּה, לַחֲבַקּוּק הַנָּבִיא--עַל, שִׁגְיֹנוֹת.    1 A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet. Upon Shigionoth.
3.2 ב  יְהוָה, שָׁמַעְתִּי שִׁמְעֲךָ יָרֵאתִי--יְהוָה פָּעָלְךָ בְּקֶרֶב שָׁנִים חַיֵּיהוּ, בְּקֶרֶב שָׁנִים תּוֹדִיעַ; בְּרֹגֶז, רַחֵם תִּזְכּוֹר.    2 O LORD, I have heard the report of Thee, and am afraid; O LORD, revive Thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make it known; in wrath remember compassion.
3.3 ג  אֱלוֹהַּ מִתֵּימָן יָבוֹא, וְקָדוֹשׁ מֵהַר-פָּארָן סֶלָה; כִּסָּה שָׁמַיִם הוֹדוֹ, וּתְהִלָּתוֹ מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ.    3 God cometh from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran.  Selah  His glory covereth the heavens, and the earth is full of His praise.
3.4 ד  וְנֹגַהּ כָּאוֹר תִּהְיֶה, קַרְנַיִם מִיָּדוֹ לוֹ; וְשָׁם, חֶבְיוֹן עֻזֹּה.    4 And a brightness appeareth as the light; rays hath He at His side; and there is the hiding of His power.
3.5 ה  לְפָנָיו, יֵלֶךְ דָּבֶר; וְיֵצֵא רֶשֶׁף, לְרַגְלָיו.    5 Before him goeth the pestilence, and fiery bolts go forth at His feet.
3.6 ו  עָמַד וַיְמֹדֶד אֶרֶץ, רָאָה וַיַּתֵּר גּוֹיִם, וַיִּתְפֹּצְצוּ הַרְרֵי-עַד, שַׁחוּ גִּבְעוֹת עוֹלָם; הֲלִיכוֹת עוֹלָם, לוֹ.    6 He standeth, and shaketh the earth, He beholdeth, and maketh the nations to tremble; and the everlasting mountains are dashed in pieces, the ancient hills do bow; His goings are as of old.
3.7 ז  תַּחַת אָוֶן, רָאִיתִי אָהֳלֵי כוּשָׁן; יִרְגְּזוּן, יְרִיעוֹת אֶרֶץ מִדְיָן.    7 I see the tents of Cushan in affliction; the curtains of the land of Midian do tremble.
3.8 ח  הֲבִנְהָרִים, חָרָה יְהוָה--אִם בַּנְּהָרִים אַפֶּךָ, אִם-בַּיָּם עֶבְרָתֶךָ:  כִּי תִרְכַּב עַל-סוּסֶיךָ, מַרְכְּבֹתֶיךָ יְשׁוּעָה.    8 Is it, O LORD, that against the rivers, is it that Thine anger is kindled against the rivers, or Thy wrath against the sea? that Thou dost ride upon Thy horses, upon Thy chariots of victory?
3.9 ט  עֶרְיָה תֵעוֹר קַשְׁתֶּךָ, שְׁבֻעוֹת מַטּוֹת אֹמֶר סֶלָה; נְהָרוֹת, תְּבַקַּע-אָרֶץ.    9 Thy bow is made quite bare; sworn are the rods of the word.  Selah  Thou dost cleave the earth with rivers.
3.10 י  רָאוּךָ יָחִילוּ הָרִים, זֶרֶם מַיִם עָבָר; נָתַן תְּהוֹם קוֹלוֹ, רוֹם יָדֵיהוּ נָשָׂא.    10 The mountains have seen Thee, and they tremble; the tempest of waters floweth over; the deep uttereth its voice, and lifteth up its hands on high.
3.11 יא  שֶׁמֶשׁ יָרֵחַ, עָמַד זְבֻלָה; לְאוֹר חִצֶּיךָ יְהַלֵּכוּ, לְנֹגַהּ בְּרַק חֲנִיתֶךָ.    11 The sun and moon stand still in their habitation; at the light of Thine arrows as they go, at the shining of Thy glittering spear.
3.12 יב  בְּזַעַם, תִּצְעַד-אָרֶץ; בְּאַף, תָּדוּשׁ גּוֹיִם.    12 Thou marchest through the earth in indignation, Thou threshest the nations in anger.
3.13 יג  יָצָאתָ לְיֵשַׁע עַמֶּךָ, לְיֵשַׁע אֶת-מְשִׁיחֶךָ; מָחַצְתָּ רֹּאשׁ מִבֵּית רָשָׁע, עָרוֹת יְסוֹד עַד-צַוָּאר סֶלָה.  {פ}    13 Thou art come forth for the deliverance of Thy people, for the deliverance of Thine anointed; Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, uncovering the foundation even unto the neck. Selah {P}
3.14 יד  נָקַבְתָּ בְמַטָּיו רֹאשׁ פְּרָזָו, יִסְעֲרוּ לַהֲפִיצֵנִי; עֲלִיצֻתָם, כְּמוֹ-לֶאֱכֹל עָנִי בַּמִּסְתָּר.    14 Thou hast stricken through with his own rods the head of his rulers, that come as a whirlwind to scatter me; whose rejoicing is as to devour the poor secretly.
3.15 טו  דָּרַכְתָּ בַיָּם, סוּסֶיךָ; חֹמֶר, מַיִם רַבִּים.    15 Thou hast trodden the sea with Thy horses, the foaming of mighty waters.
3.16 טז  שָׁמַעְתִּי וַתִּרְגַּז בִּטְנִי, לְקוֹל צָלְלוּ שְׂפָתַי--יָבוֹא רָקָב בַּעֲצָמַי, וְתַחְתַּי אֶרְגָּז:  אֲשֶׁר אָנוּחַ לְיוֹם צָרָה, לַעֲלוֹת לְעַם יְגוּדֶנּוּ.    16 When I heard, mine inward parts trembled, my lips quivered at the voice; rottenness entereth into my bones, and I tremble where I stand; that I should wait for the day of trouble, when he cometh up against the people that he invadeth.
3.17 יז  כִּי-תְאֵנָה לֹא-תִפְרָח, וְאֵין יְבוּל בַּגְּפָנִים--כִּחֵשׁ מַעֲשֵׂה-זַיִת, וּשְׁדֵמוֹת לֹא-עָשָׂה אֹכֶל; גָּזַר מִמִּכְלָה צֹאן, וְאֵין בָּקָר בָּרְפָתִים.    17 For though the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no food; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls;
3.18 יח  וַאֲנִי, בַּיהוָה אֶעְלוֹזָה:  אָגִילָה, בֵּאלֹהֵי יִשְׁעִי.    18 Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will exult in the God of my salvation.
3.19 יט  יְהוִה אֲדֹנָי, חֵילִי, וַיָּשֶׂם רַגְלַי כָּאַיָּלוֹת, וְעַל בָּמוֹתַי יַדְרִכֵנִי; לַמְנַצֵּחַ, בִּנְגִינוֹתָי.  {ש}    19 God, the Lord, is my strength, and He maketh my feet like hinds' feet, and He maketh me to walk upon my high places. For the Leader. With my string-music. {P}
