1.1 א  דְּבַר-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר הָיָה, אֶל-הוֹשֵׁעַ בֶּן-בְּאֵרִי, בִּימֵי עֻזִּיָּה יוֹתָם אָחָז יְחִזְקִיָּה, מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה--וּבִימֵי יָרָבְעָם בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ, מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 The word of the LORD that came unto Hosea the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.
1.2 ב  תְּחִלַּת דִּבֶּר-יְהוָה, בְּהוֹשֵׁעַ:  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הוֹשֵׁעַ, לֵךְ קַח-לְךָ אֵשֶׁת זְנוּנִים וְיַלְדֵי זְנוּנִים--כִּי-זָנֹה תִזְנֶה הָאָרֶץ, מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה.    2 When the LORD spoke at first with Hosea, {P} the LORD said unto Hosea: 'Go, take unto thee a wife of harlotry and children of harlotry; for the land doth commit great harlotry, departing from the LORD.'
1.3 ג  וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיִּקַּח, אֶת-גֹּמֶר, בַּת-דִּבְלָיִם; וַתַּהַר וַתֵּלֶד-לוֹ, בֵּן.    3 So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; and she conceived, and bore him a son.
1.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, קְרָא שְׁמוֹ יִזְרְעֶאל:  כִּי-עוֹד מְעַט, וּפָקַדְתִּי אֶת-דְּמֵי יִזְרְעֶאל עַל-בֵּית יֵהוּא, וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי, מַמְלְכוּת בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.    4 And the LORD said unto him: 'Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will visit the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel.
1.5 ה  וְהָיָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וְשָׁבַרְתִּי אֶת-קֶשֶׁת יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּעֵמֶק יִזְרְעֶאל.    5 And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.'
1.6 ו  וַתַּהַר עוֹד, וַתֵּלֶד בַּת, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, קְרָא שְׁמָהּ לֹא רֻחָמָה:  כִּי לֹא אוֹסִיף עוֹד, אֲרַחֵם אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי-נָשֹׂא אֶשָּׂא, לָהֶם.    6 And she conceived again, and bore a daughter. And He said unto him: 'Call her name Lo-ruhamah; for I will no more have compassion upon the house of Israel, that I should in any wise pardon them.
1.7 ז  וְאֶת-בֵּית יְהוּדָה אֲרַחֵם, וְהוֹשַׁעְתִּים בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וְלֹא אוֹשִׁיעֵם, בְּקֶשֶׁת וּבְחֶרֶב וּבְמִלְחָמָה, בְּסוּסִים, וּבְפָרָשִׁים.    7 But I will have compassion upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the LORD their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, nor by horses, nor by horsemen.'
1.8 ח  וַתִּגְמֹל, אֶת-לֹא רֻחָמָה; וַתַּהַר, וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן.    8 Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived, and bore a son.
1.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר, קְרָא שְׁמוֹ לֹא עַמִּי:  כִּי אַתֶּם לֹא עַמִּי, וְאָנֹכִי לֹא-אֶהְיֶה לָכֶם.  {פ}    9 And He said: 'Call his name Lo-ammi; for ye are not My people, and I will not be yours.' {P}
1.1 א  וְהָיָה מִסְפַּר בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּחוֹל הַיָּם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִמַּד, וְלֹא יִסָּפֵר; וְהָיָה בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-יֵאָמֵר לָהֶם, לֹא-עַמִּי אַתֶּם, יֵאָמֵר לָהֶם, בְּנֵי אֵל-חָי.    1 Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered; and it shall come to pass that, instead of that which was said unto them: 'Ye are not My people', it shall be said unto them: 'Ye are the children of the living God.'
1.2 ב  וְנִקְבְּצוּ בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה וּבְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, יַחְדָּו, וְשָׂמוּ לָהֶם רֹאשׁ אֶחָד, וְעָלוּ מִן-הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי גָדוֹל, יוֹם יִזְרְעֶאל.    2 And the children of Judah and the children of Israel shall be gathered together, and they shall appoint themselves one head, and shall go up out of the land; for great shall be the day of Jezreel.
2.3 ג  אִמְרוּ לַאֲחֵיכֶם, עַמִּי; וְלַאֲחוֹתֵיכֶם, רֻחָמָה.    3 Say ye unto your brethren: 'Ammi'; and to your sisters, 'Ruhamah.'
2.4 ד  רִיבוּ בְאִמְּכֶם, רִיבוּ--כִּי-הִיא לֹא אִשְׁתִּי, וְאָנֹכִי לֹא אִישָׁהּ; וְתָסֵר זְנוּנֶיהָ מִפָּנֶיהָ, וְנַאֲפוּפֶיהָ מִבֵּין שָׁדֶיהָ.    4 Plead with your mother, plead; for she is not My wife, neither am I her husband; and let her put away her harlotries from her face, and her adulteries from between her breasts;
2.5 ה  פֶּן-אַפְשִׁיטֶנָּה עֲרֻמָּה--וְהִצַּגְתִּיהָ, כְּיוֹם הִוָּלְדָהּ; וְשַׂמְתִּיהָ כַמִּדְבָּר, וְשַׁתִּהָ כְּאֶרֶץ צִיָּה, וַהֲמִתִּיהָ, בַּצָּמָא.    5 Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst.
2.6 ו  וְאֶת-בָּנֶיהָ, לֹא אֲרַחֵם:  כִּי-בְנֵי זְנוּנִים, הֵמָּה.    6 And I will not have compassion upon her children; for they are children of harlotry.
2.7 ז  כִּי זָנְתָה אִמָּם, הֹבִישָׁה הוֹרָתָם:  כִּי אָמְרָה, אֵלְכָה אַחֲרֵי מְאַהֲבַי נֹתְנֵי לַחְמִי וּמֵימַי, צַמְרִי וּפִשְׁתִּי, שַׁמְנִי וְשִׁקּוּיָי.    7 For their mother hath played the harlot, she that conceived them hath done shamefully; for she said: 'I will go after my lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink.'
2.8 ח  לָכֵן הִנְנִי-שָׂךְ אֶת-דַּרְכֵּךְ, בַּסִּירִים; וְגָדַרְתִּי אֶת-גְּדֵרָהּ, וּנְתִיבוֹתֶיהָ לֹא תִמְצָא.    8 Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and I will make a wall against her, that she shall not find her paths.
2.9 ט  וְרִדְּפָה אֶת-מְאַהֲבֶיהָ וְלֹא-תַשִּׂיג אֹתָם, וּבִקְשָׁתַם וְלֹא תִמְצָא; וְאָמְרָה, אֵלְכָה וְאָשׁוּבָה אֶל-אִישִׁי הָרִאשׁוֹן--כִּי טוֹב לִי אָז, מֵעָתָּה.    9 And she shall run after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them, and she shall seek them, but shall not find them; then shall she say: 'I will go and return to my first husband; for then was it better with me than now.'
2.10 י  וְהִיא, לֹא יָדְעָה, כִּי אָנֹכִי נָתַתִּי לָהּ, הַדָּגָן וְהַתִּירוֹשׁ וְהַיִּצְהָר; וְכֶסֶף הִרְבֵּיתִי לָהּ וְזָהָב, עָשׂוּ לַבָּעַל.    10 For she did not know that it was I that gave her the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and multiplied unto her silver and gold, which they used for Baal.
2.11 יא  לָכֵן אָשׁוּב--וְלָקַחְתִּי דְגָנִי בְּעִתּוֹ, וְתִירוֹשִׁי בְּמוֹעֲדוֹ; וְהִצַּלְתִּי צַמְרִי וּפִשְׁתִּי, לְכַסּוֹת אֶת-עֶרְוָתָהּ.    11 Therefore will I take back My corn in the time thereof, and My wine in the season thereof, and will snatch away My wool and My flax given to cover her nakedness.
2.12 יב  וְעַתָּה אֲגַלֶּה אֶת-נַבְלֻתָהּ, לְעֵינֵי מְאַהֲבֶיהָ; וְאִישׁ, לֹא-יַצִּילֶנָּה מִיָּדִי.    12 And now will I uncover her shame in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of My hand.
2.13 יג  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי, כָּל-מְשׂוֹשָׂהּ, חַגָּהּ, חָדְשָׁהּ וְשַׁבַּתָּהּ--וְכֹל, מוֹעֲדָהּ.    13 I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her appointed seasons.
2.14 יד  וַהֲשִׁמֹּתִי, גַּפְנָהּ וּתְאֵנָתָהּ, אֲשֶׁר אָמְרָה אֶתְנָה הֵמָּה לִי, אֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ-לִי מְאַהֲבָי; וְשַׂמְתִּים לְיַעַר, וַאֲכָלָתַם חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה.    14 And I will lay waste her vines and her fig-trees, whereof she hath said: 'These are my hire that my lovers have given me'; and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.
2.15 טו  וּפָקַדְתִּי עָלֶיהָ, אֶת-יְמֵי הַבְּעָלִים אֲשֶׁר תַּקְטִיר לָהֶם, וַתַּעַד נִזְמָהּ וְחֶלְיָתָהּ, וַתֵּלֶךְ אַחֲרֵי מְאַהֲבֶיהָ; וְאֹתִי שָׁכְחָה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}    15 And I will visit upon her the days of the Baalim, wherein she offered unto them, and decked herself with her ear-rings and her jewels, and went after her lovers, and forgot Me, saith the LORD. {S}
2.16 טז  לָכֵן, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי מְפַתֶּיהָ, וְהֹלַכְתִּיהָ, הַמִּדְבָּר; וְדִבַּרְתִּי, עַל-לִבָּהּ.    16 Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak tenderly unto her.
2.17 יז  וְנָתַתִּי לָהּ אֶת-כְּרָמֶיהָ מִשָּׁם, וְאֶת-עֵמֶק עָכוֹר לְפֶתַח תִּקְוָה; וְעָנְתָה שָּׁמָּה כִּימֵי נְעוּרֶיהָ, וּכְיוֹם עֲלוֹתָהּ מֵאֶרֶץ-מִצְרָיִם.    17 And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she shall respond there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.
2.18 יח  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא נְאֻם-יְהוָה, תִּקְרְאִי אִישִׁי; וְלֹא-תִקְרְאִי-לִי עוֹד, בַּעְלִי.    18 And it shall be at that day, saith the LORD, that thou shalt call Me Ishi, and shalt call Me no more Baali.
2.19 יט  וַהֲסִרֹתִי אֶת-שְׁמוֹת הַבְּעָלִים, מִפִּיהָ; וְלֹא-יִזָּכְרוּ עוֹד, בִּשְׁמָם.    19 For I will take away the names of the Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be mentioned by their name.
2.20 כ  וְכָרַתִּי לָהֶם בְּרִית, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, עִם-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה וְעִם-עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְרֶמֶשׂ הָאֲדָמָה; וְקֶשֶׁת וְחֶרֶב וּמִלְחָמָה אֶשְׁבּוֹר מִן-הָאָרֶץ, וְהִשְׁכַּבְתִּים לָבֶטַח.    20 And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground; and I will break the bow and the sword and the battle out of the land, and will make them to lie down safely.
2.21 כא  וְאֵרַשְׂתִּיךְ לִי, לְעוֹלָם; וְאֵרַשְׂתִּיךְ לִי בְּצֶדֶק וּבְמִשְׁפָּט, וּבְחֶסֶד וּבְרַחֲמִים.    21 And I will betroth thee unto Me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto Me in righteousness, and in justice, and in lovingkindness, and in compassion.
2.22 כב  וְאֵרַשְׂתִּיךְ לִי, בֶּאֱמוּנָה; וְיָדַעַתְּ, אֶת-יְהוָה.  {פ}    22 And I will betroth thee unto Me in faithfulness; and thou shalt know the LORD. {P}
2.23 כג  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֶעֱנֶה נְאֻם-יְהוָה--אֶעֱנֶה, אֶת-הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְהֵם, יַעֲנוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.    23 And it shall come to pass in that day, I will respond, saith the LORD, I will respond to the heavens, and they shall respond to the earth;
2.24 כד  וְהָאָרֶץ תַּעֲנֶה, אֶת-הַדָּגָן וְאֶת-הַתִּירוֹשׁ וְאֶת-הַיִּצְהָר; וְהֵם, יַעֲנוּ אֶת-יִזְרְעֶאל.    24 And the earth shall respond to the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shall respond to Jezreel.
2.25 כה  וּזְרַעְתִּיהָ לִּי בָּאָרֶץ, וְרִחַמְתִּי אֶת-לֹא רֻחָמָה; וְאָמַרְתִּי לְלֹא-עַמִּי עַמִּי-אַתָּה, וְהוּא יֹאמַר אֱלֹהָי.  {פ}    25 And I will sow her unto Me in the land; and I will have compassion upon her that had not obtained compassion; and I will say to them that were not My people: 'Thou art My people'; and they shall say: 'Thou art my God.' {P}
3.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, עוֹד לֵךְ אֱהַב-אִשָּׁה, אֲהֻבַת רֵעַ, וּמְנָאָפֶת:  כְּאַהֲבַת יְהוָה, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהֵם פֹּנִים אֶל-אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וְאֹהֲבֵי אֲשִׁישֵׁי עֲנָבִים.    1 And the LORD said unto me: 'Go yet, love a woman beloved of her friend and an adulteress, even as the LORD loveth the children of Israel, though they turn unto other gods, and love cakes of raisins.
3.2 ב  וָאֶכְּרֶהָ לִּי, בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר כָּסֶף; וְחֹמֶר שְׂעֹרִים, וְלֵתֶךְ שְׂעֹרִים.    2 So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver and a homer of barley, and a half-homer of barley;
3.3 ג  וָאֹמַר אֵלֶיהָ, יָמִים רַבִּים תֵּשְׁבִי לִי--לֹא תִזְנִי, וְלֹא תִהְיִי לְאִישׁ; וְגַם-אֲנִי, אֵלָיִךְ.    3 and I said unto her: 'Thou shalt sit solitary for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be any man's wife; nor will I be thine.'
3.4 ד  כִּי יָמִים רַבִּים, יֵשְׁבוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֵין מֶלֶךְ וְאֵין שָׂר, וְאֵין זֶבַח וְאֵין מַצֵּבָה; וְאֵין אֵפוֹד, וּתְרָפִים.    4 For the children of Israel shall sit solitary many days without king, and without prince, and without sacrifice, and without pillar, and without ephod or teraphim;
3.5 ה  אַחַר, יָשֻׁבוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבִקְשׁוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וְאֵת דָּוִיד מַלְכָּם; וּפָחֲדוּ אֶל-יְהוָה וְאֶל-טוּבוֹ, בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים.  {פ}    5 afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the LORD their God, and David their king; and shall come trembling unto the LORD and to His goodness in the end of days. {P}
4.1 א  שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי רִיב לַיהוָה, עִם-יוֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ--כִּי אֵין-אֱמֶת וְאֵין-חֶסֶד וְאֵין-דַּעַת אֱלֹהִים, בָּאָרֶץ.    1 Hear the word of the LORD, ye children of Israel! for the LORD hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.
4.2 ב  אָלֹה וְכַחֵשׁ, וְרָצֹחַ וְגָנֹב וְנָאֹף; פָּרָצוּ, וְדָמִים בְּדָמִים נָגָעוּ.    2 Swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery! they break all bounds, and blood toucheth blood.
4.3 ג  עַל-כֵּן תֶּאֱבַל הָאָרֶץ, וְאֻמְלַל כָּל-יוֹשֵׁב בָּהּ, בְּחַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, וּבְעוֹף הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְגַם-דְּגֵי הַיָּם, יֵאָסֵפוּ.    3 Therefore doth the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein doth languish, with the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also are taken away.
4.4 ד  אַךְ אִישׁ אַל-יָרֵב, וְאַל-יוֹכַח אִישׁ; וְעַמְּךָ, כִּמְרִיבֵי כֹהֵן.    4 Yet let no man strive, neither let any man reprove; for thy people are as they that strive with the priest.
4.5 ה  וְכָשַׁלְתָּ הַיּוֹם, וְכָשַׁל גַּם-נָבִיא עִמְּךָ לָיְלָה; וְדָמִיתִי, אִמֶּךָ.    5 Therefore shalt thou stumble in the day, and the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night; and I will destroy thy mother.
4.6 ו  נִדְמוּ עַמִּי, מִבְּלִי הַדָּעַת:  כִּי-אַתָּה הַדַּעַת מָאַסְתָּ, ואמאסאך (וְאֶמְאָסְךָ) מִכַּהֵן לִי, וַתִּשְׁכַּח תּוֹרַת אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֶשְׁכַּח בָּנֶיךָ גַּם-אָנִי.    6 My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to Me; seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy children.
4.7 ז  כְּרֻבָּם, כֵּן חָטְאוּ-לִי; כְּבוֹדָם, בְּקָלוֹן אָמִיר.    7 The more they were increased, the more they sinned against Me; I will change their glory into shame.
4.8 ח  חַטַּאת עַמִּי, יֹאכֵלוּ; וְאֶל-עֲוֺנָם, יִשְׂאוּ נַפְשׁוֹ.    8 They feed on the sin of My people, and set their heart on their iniquity.
4.9 ט  וְהָיָה כָעָם, כַּכֹּהֵן; וּפָקַדְתִּי עָלָיו דְּרָכָיו, וּמַעֲלָלָיו אָשִׁיב לוֹ.    9 And it is like people, like priest; and I will punish him for his ways, and will recompense him his doings.
4.10 י  וְאָכְלוּ וְלֹא יִשְׂבָּעוּ, הִזְנוּ וְלֹא יִפְרֹצוּ:  כִּי-אֶת-יְהוָה עָזְבוּ, לִשְׁמֹר.    10 And they shall eat, and not have enough, they shall commit harlotry, and shall not increase; because they have left off to take heed to the LORD.
4.11 יא  זְנוּת וְיַיִן וְתִירוֹשׁ, יִקַּח-לֵב.    11 Harlotry, wine, and new wine take away the heart.
4.12 יב  עַמִּי בְּעֵצוֹ יִשְׁאָל, וּמַקְלוֹ יַגִּיד לוֹ:  כִּי רוּחַ זְנוּנִים הִתְעָה, וַיִּזְנוּ מִתַּחַת אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.    12 My people ask counsel at their stock, and their staff declareth unto them; for the spirit of harlotry hath caused them to err, and they have gone astray from under their God.
4.13 יג  עַל-רָאשֵׁי הֶהָרִים יְזַבֵּחוּ, וְעַל-הַגְּבָעוֹת יְקַטֵּרוּ, תַּחַת אַלּוֹן וְלִבְנֶה וְאֵלָה, כִּי טוֹב צִלָּהּ; עַל-כֵּן, תִּזְנֶינָה בְּנוֹתֵיכֶם, וְכַלּוֹתֵיכֶם, תְּנָאַפְנָה.    13 They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and offer upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and terebinths, because the shadow thereof is good; therefore your daughters commit harlotry, and your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
4.14 יד  לֹא-אֶפְקוֹד עַל-בְּנוֹתֵיכֶם כִּי תִזְנֶינָה, וְעַל-כַּלּוֹתֵיכֶם כִּי תְנָאַפְנָה--כִּי-הֵם עִם-הַזֹּנוֹת יְפָרֵדוּ, וְעִם-הַקְּדֵשׁוֹת יְזַבֵּחוּ; וְעָם לֹא-יָבִין, יִלָּבֵט.    14 I will not punish your daughters when they commit harlotry, nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery; for they themselves consort with lewd women, and they sacrifice with harlots; and the people that is without understanding is distraught.
4.15 טו  אִם-זֹנֶה אַתָּה יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַל-יֶאְשַׁם יְהוּדָה; וְאַל-תָּבֹאוּ הַגִּלְגָּל, וְאַל-תַּעֲלוּ בֵּית אָוֶן, וְאַל-תִּשָּׁבְעוּ, חַי-יְהוָה.    15 Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah become guilty; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear: 'As the LORD liveth.'
4.16 טז  כִּי כְּפָרָה סֹרֵרָה, סָרַר יִשְׂרָאֵל; עַתָּה יִרְעֵם יְהוָה, כְּכֶבֶשׂ בַּמֶּרְחָב.    16 For Israel is stubborn like a stubborn heifer; now shall the LORD feed them as a lamb in a large place?
4.17 יז  חֲבוּר עֲצַבִּים אֶפְרָיִם, הַנַּח-לוֹ.    17 Ephraim is joined to idols; let him alone.
4.18 יח  סָר, סָבְאָם; הַזְנֵה הִזְנוּ, אָהֲבוּ הֵבוּ קָלוֹן מָגִנֶּיהָ.    18 When their carouse is over, they take to harlotry; her rulers deeply love dishonour.
4.19 יט  צָרַר רוּחַ אוֹתָהּ, בִּכְנָפֶיהָ; וְיֵבֹשׁוּ, מִזִּבְחוֹתָם.  {פ}    19 The wind hath bound her up in her skirts; and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices. {P}
5.1 א  שִׁמְעוּ-זֹאת הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַקְשִׁיבוּ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ הַאֲזִינוּ--כִּי לָכֶם, הַמִּשְׁפָּט:  כִּי-פַח הֱיִיתֶם לְמִצְפָּה, וְרֶשֶׁת פְּרוּשָׂה עַל-תָּבוֹר.    1 Hear this, O ye priests, and attend, ye house of Israel, and give ear, O house of the king, for unto you pertaineth the judgment; for ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.
5.2 ב  וְשַׁחֲטָה שֵׂטִים, הֶעְמִיקוּ; וַאֲנִי, מוּסָר לְכֻלָּם.    2 And they that fall away are gone deep in making slaughter; and I am rejected of them all.
5.3 ג  אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי אֶפְרַיִם, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא-נִכְחַד מִמֶּנִּי:  כִּי עַתָּה הִזְנֵיתָ אֶפְרַיִם, נִטְמָא יִשְׂרָאֵל.    3 I, even I, know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from Me; for now, O Ephraim, thou hast committed harlotry, Israel is defiled.
5.4 ד  לֹא יִתְּנוּ מַעַלְלֵיהֶם, לָשׁוּב אֶל-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם:  כִּי רוּחַ זְנוּנִים בְּקִרְבָּם, וְאֶת-יְהוָה לֹא יָדָעוּ.    4 Their doings will not suffer them to return unto their God; for the spirit of harlotry is within them, and they know not the LORD.
5.5 ה  וְעָנָה גְאוֹן-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּפָנָיו; וְיִשְׂרָאֵל וְאֶפְרַיִם, יִכָּשְׁלוּ בַּעֲוֺנָם--כָּשַׁל גַּם-יְהוּדָה, עִמָּם.    5 But the pride of Israel shall testify to his face; and Israel and Ephraim shall stumble in their iniquity, Judah also shall stumble with them.
5.6 ו  בְּצֹאנָם וּבִבְקָרָם, יֵלְכוּ לְבַקֵּשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה--וְלֹא יִמְצָאוּ:  חָלַץ, מֵהֶם.    6 With their flocks and with their herds they shall go to seek the LORD, but they shall not find Him; He hath withdrawn Himself from them.
5.7 ז  בַּיהוָה בָּגָדוּ, כִּי-בָנִים זָרִים יָלָדוּ; עַתָּה יֹאכְלֵם חֹדֶשׁ, אֶת-חֶלְקֵיהֶם.  {ס}    7 They have dealt treacherously against the LORD, for they have begotten strange children; now shall the new moon devour them with their portions. {S}
5.8 ח  תִּקְעוּ שׁוֹפָר בַּגִּבְעָה, חֲצֹצְרָה בָּרָמָה; הָרִיעוּ בֵּית אָוֶן, אַחֲרֶיךָ בִּנְיָמִין.    8 Blow ye the horn in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah; sound an alarm at Beth-aven: 'Behind thee, O Benjamin!'
5.9 ט  אֶפְרַיִם לְשַׁמָּה תִהְיֶה, בְּיוֹם תּוֹכֵחָה; בְּשִׁבְטֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוֹדַעְתִּי, נֶאֱמָנָה.    9 Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke; among the tribes of Israel do I make known that which shall surely be.
5.10 י  הָיוּ שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, כְּמַסִּיגֵי גְּבוּל; עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶשְׁפּוֹךְ כַּמַּיִם עֶבְרָתִי.    10 The princes of Judah are like them that remove the landmark; I will pour out My wrath upon them like water.
5.11 יא  עָשׁוּק אֶפְרַיִם, רְצוּץ מִשְׁפָּט:  כִּי הוֹאִיל, הָלַךְ אַחֲרֵי-צָו.    11 Oppressed is Ephraim, crushed in his right; because he willingly walked after filth.
5.12 יב  וַאֲנִי כָעָשׁ, לְאֶפְרָיִם; וְכָרָקָב, לְבֵית יְהוּדָה.    12 Therefore am I unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.
5.13 יג  וַיַּרְא אֶפְרַיִם אֶת-חָלְיוֹ, וִיהוּדָה אֶת-מְזֹרוֹ, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶפְרַיִם אֶל-אַשּׁוּר, וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יָרֵב; וְהוּא, לֹא יוּכַל לִרְפֹּא לָכֶם, וְלֹא-יִגְהֶה מִכֶּם, מָזוֹר.    13 And when Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound, Ephraim went to Assyria, and sent to King Contentious; but he is not able to heal you, neither shall he cure you of your wound.
5.14 יד  כִּי אָנֹכִי כַשַּׁחַל לְאֶפְרַיִם, וְכַכְּפִיר לְבֵית יְהוּדָה; אֲנִי אֲנִי אֶטְרֹף וְאֵלֵךְ, אֶשָּׂא וְאֵין מַצִּיל.    14 For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah; I, even I, will tear and go away, I will take away, and there shall be none to deliver.
5.15 טו  אֵלֵךְ אָשׁוּבָה אֶל-מְקוֹמִי, עַד אֲשֶׁר-יֶאְשְׁמוּ וּבִקְשׁוּ פָנָי:  בַּצַּר לָהֶם, יְשַׁחֲרֻנְנִי.    15 I will go and return to My place, till they acknowledge their guilt, and seek My face; in their trouble they will seek Me earnestly:
6.1 א  לְכוּ וְנָשׁוּבָה אֶל-יְהוָה, כִּי הוּא טָרָף וְיִרְפָּאֵנוּ; יַךְ, וְיַחְבְּשֵׁנוּ.    1 'Come, and let us return unto the LORD; for He hath torn, and He will heal us, He hath smitten, and He will bind us up.
6.2 ב  יְחַיֵּנוּ, מִיֹּמָיִם; בַּיּוֹם, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, יְקִמֵנוּ, וְנִחְיֶה לְפָנָיו.    2 After two days will He revive us, on the third day He will raise us up, that we may live in His presence.
6.3 ג  וְנֵדְעָה נִרְדְּפָה, לָדַעַת אֶת-יְהוָה, כְּשַׁחַר, נָכוֹן מֹצָאוֹ; וְיָבוֹא כַגֶּשֶׁם לָנוּ, כְּמַלְקוֹשׁ יוֹרֶה אָרֶץ.    3 And let us know, eagerly strive to know the LORD, His going forth is sure as the morning; and He shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain that watereth the earth.'
6.4 ד  מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה-לְּךָ אֶפְרַיִם, מָה אֶעֱשֶׂה-לְּךָ יְהוּדָה; וְחַסְדְּכֶם, כַּעֲנַן-בֹּקֶר, וְכַטַּל, מַשְׁכִּים הֹלֵךְ.    4 O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the dew that early passeth away.
6.5 ה  עַל-כֵּן, חָצַבְתִּי בַּנְּבִיאִים--הֲרַגְתִּים, בְּאִמְרֵי-פִי; וּמִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ, אוֹר יֵצֵא.    5 Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets, I have slain them by the words of My mouth; and thy judgment goeth forth as the light.
6.6 ו  כִּי חֶסֶד חָפַצְתִּי, וְלֹא-זָבַח; וְדַעַת אֱלֹהִים, מֵעֹלוֹת.    6 For I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather than burnt-offerings.
6.7 ז  וְהֵמָּה, כְּאָדָם עָבְרוּ בְרִית; שָׁם, בָּגְדוּ בִי.    7 But they like men have transgressed the covenant; there have they dealt treacherously against Me.
6.8 ח  גִּלְעָד, קִרְיַת פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן--עֲקֻבָּה, מִדָּם.    8 Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, it is covered with footprints of blood.
6.9 ט  וּכְחַכֵּי אִישׁ גְּדוּדִים, חֶבֶר כֹּהֲנִים, דֶּרֶךְ, יְרַצְּחוּ-שֶׁכְמָה:  כִּי זִמָּה, עָשׂוּ.    9 And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so doth the company of priests; they murder in the way toward Shechem; yea, they commit enormity.
6.10 י  בְּבֵית, יִשְׂרָאֵל, רָאִיתִי, שעריריה (שַׁעֲרוּרִיָּה); שָׁם זְנוּת לְאֶפְרַיִם, נִטְמָא יִשְׂרָאֵל.    10 In the house of Israel I have seen a horrible thing; there harlotry is found in Ephraim, Israel is defiled.
6.11 יא  גַּם-יְהוּדָה, שָׁת קָצִיר לָךְ, בְּשׁוּבִי, שְׁבוּת עַמִּי.  {פ}    11 Also, O Judah, there is a harvest appointed for thee! When I would turn the captivity of My people, {P}
7.1 א  כְּרָפְאִי לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְנִגְלָה עֲוֺן אֶפְרַיִם וְרָעוֹת שֹׁמְרוֹן--כִּי פָעֲלוּ, שָׁקֶר; וְגַנָּב יָבוֹא, פָּשַׁט גְּדוּד בַּחוּץ.    1 when I would heal Israel, then is the iniquity of Ephraim uncovered, and the wickedness of Samaria, for they commit falsehood; and the thief entereth in, and the troop of robbers maketh a raid without.
7.2 ב  וּבַל-יֹאמְרוּ, לִלְבָבָם, כָּל-רָעָתָם, זָכָרְתִּי; עַתָּה סְבָבוּם מַעַלְלֵיהֶם, נֶגֶד פָּנַי הָיוּ.    2 And let them not say to their heart--I remember all their wickedness; now their own doings have beset them about, they are before My face.
7.3 ג  בְּרָעָתָם, יְשַׂמְּחוּ-מֶלֶךְ; וּבְכַחֲשֵׁיהֶם, שָׂרִים.    3 They make the king glad with their wickedness, and the princes with their lies.
7.4 ד  כֻּלָּם, מְנָאֲפִים--כְּמוֹ תַנּוּר, בֹּעֵרָה מֵאֹפֶה; יִשְׁבּוֹת מֵעִיר, מִלּוּשׁ בָּצֵק עַד-חֻמְצָתוֹ.    4 They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, who ceaseth to stir from the kneading of the dough until it be leavened.
7.5 ה  יוֹם מַלְכֵּנוּ, הֶחֱלוּ שָׂרִים חֲמַת מִיָּיִן; מָשַׁךְ יָדוֹ, אֶת-לֹצְצִים.    5 On the day of our king the princes make him sick with the heat of wine, he stretcheth out his hand with scorners.
7.6 ו  כִּי-קֵרְבוּ כַתַּנּוּר לִבָּם, בְּאָרְבָּם:  כָּל-הַלַּיְלָה, יָשֵׁן אֹפֵהֶם--בֹּקֶר, הוּא בֹעֵר כְּאֵשׁ לֶהָבָה.    6 For they have made ready their heart like an oven, while they lie in wait; their baker sleepeth all the night, in the morning it burneth as a flaming fire.
7.7 ז  כֻּלָּם יֵחַמּוּ כַּתַּנּוּר, וְאָכְלוּ אֶת-שֹׁפְטֵיהֶם; כָּל-מַלְכֵיהֶם נָפָלוּ, אֵין-קֹרֵא בָהֶם אֵלָי.    7 They are all hot as an oven, and devour their judges; all their kings are fallen, there is none among them that calleth unto Me.
7.8 ח  אֶפְרַיִם, בָּעַמִּים הוּא יִתְבּוֹלָל; אֶפְרַיִם הָיָה עֻגָה, בְּלִי הֲפוּכָה.    8 Ephraim, he mixeth himself with the peoples; Ephraim is become a cake not turned.
7.9 ט  אָכְלוּ זָרִים כֹּחוֹ, וְהוּא לֹא יָדָע; גַּם-שֵׂיבָה זָרְקָה בּוֹ, וְהוּא לֹא יָדָע.    9 Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and he knoweth it not.
7.10 י  וְעָנָה גְאוֹן-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּפָנָיו; וְלֹא-שָׁבוּ אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וְלֹא בִקְשֻׁהוּ בְּכָל-זֹאת.    10 And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face; but they have not returned unto the LORD their God, nor sought Him, for all this.
7.11 יא  וַיְהִי אֶפְרַיִם, כְּיוֹנָה פוֹתָה אֵין לֵב; מִצְרַיִם קָרָאוּ, אַשּׁוּר הָלָכוּ.    11 And Ephraim is become like a silly dove, without understanding; they call unto Egypt, they go to Assyria.
7.12 יב  כַּאֲשֶׁר יֵלֵכוּ, אֶפְרוֹשׂ עֲלֵיהֶם רִשְׁתִּי--כְּעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, אוֹרִידֵם; אַיְסִירֵם, כְּשֵׁמַע לַעֲדָתָם.  {ס}    12 Even as they go, I will spread My net upon them; I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will chastise them, as their congregation hath been made to hear. {S}
7.13 יג  אוֹי לָהֶם כִּי-נָדְדוּ מִמֶּנִּי, שֹׁד לָהֶם כִּי-פָשְׁעוּ בִי; וְאָנֹכִי אֶפְדֵּם--וְהֵמָּה, דִּבְּרוּ עָלַי כְּזָבִים.    13 Woe unto them! for they have strayed from Me; Destruction unto them! for they have transgressed against Me; Shall I then redeem them, seeing they have spoken lies against Me?
7.14 יד  וְלֹא-זָעֲקוּ אֵלַי בְּלִבָּם, כִּי יְיֵלִילוּ עַל-מִשְׁכְּבוֹתָם; עַל-דָּגָן וְתִירוֹשׁ יִתְגּוֹרָרוּ, יָסוּרוּ בִי.    14 And they have not cried unto Me with their heart, though they wail upon their beds; they assemble themselves for corn and wine, they rebel against Me.
7.15 טו  וַאֲנִי יִסַּרְתִּי, חִזַּקְתִּי זְרוֹעֹתָם; וְאֵלַי, יְחַשְּׁבוּ-רָע.    15 Though I have trained and strengthened their arms, yet do they devise evil against Me.
7.16 טז  יָשׁוּבוּ לֹא עָל, הָיוּ כְּקֶשֶׁת רְמִיָּה--יִפְּלוּ בַחֶרֶב שָׂרֵיהֶם, מִזַּעַם לְשׁוֹנָם; זוֹ לַעְגָּם, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    16 They return, but not upwards; they are become like a deceitful bow; their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue; this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.
8.1 א  אֶל-חִכְּךָ שֹׁפָר, כַּנֶּשֶׁר עַל-בֵּית יְהוָה--יַעַן עָבְרוּ בְרִיתִי, וְעַל-תּוֹרָתִי פָּשָׁעוּ.    1 Set the horn to thy mouth. As a vulture he cometh against the house of the LORD; because they have transgressed My covenant, and trespassed against My law.
8.2 ב  לִי, יִזְעָקוּ; אֱלֹהַי יְדַעֲנוּךָ, יִשְׂרָאֵל.    2 Will they cry unto Me: 'My God, we Israel know Thee'?
8.3 ג  זָנַח יִשְׂרָאֵל, טוֹב; אוֹיֵב, יִרְדְּפוֹ.    3 Israel hath cast off that which is good; the enemy shall pursue him.
8.4 ד  הֵם הִמְלִיכוּ וְלֹא מִמֶּנִּי, הֵשִׂירוּ וְלֹא יָדָעְתִּי; כַּסְפָּם וּזְהָבָם, עָשׂוּ לָהֶם עֲצַבִּים, לְמַעַן, יִכָּרֵת.    4 They have set up kings, but not from Me, they have made princes, and I knew it not; of their silver and their gold have they made them idols, that they may be cut off.
8.5 ה  זָנַח עֶגְלֵךְ שֹׁמְרוֹן, חָרָה אַפִּי בָּם; עַד-מָתַי, לֹא יוּכְלוּ נִקָּיֹן.    5 Thy calf, O Samaria, is cast off; Mine anger is kindled against them; how long will it be ere they attain to innocency?
8.6 ו  כִּי מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, וְהוּא--חָרָשׁ עָשָׂהוּ, וְלֹא אֱלֹהִים הוּא:  כִּי-שְׁבָבִים יִהְיֶה, עֵגֶל שֹׁמְרוֹן.    6 For from Israel is even this: the craftsman made it, and it is no God; yea, the calf of Samaria shall be broken in shivers.
8.7 ז  כִּי רוּחַ יִזְרָעוּ, וְסוּפָתָה יִקְצֹרוּ; קָמָה אֵין-לוֹ, צֶמַח בְּלִי יַעֲשֶׂה-קֶּמַח--אוּלַי יַעֲשֶׂה, זָרִים יִבְלָעֻהוּ.    7 For they sow the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind; it hath no stalk, the bud that shall yield no meal; if so be it yield, strangers shall swallow it up.
8.8 ח  נִבְלַע, יִשְׂרָאֵל; עַתָּה הָיוּ בַגּוֹיִם, כִּכְלִי אֵין-חֵפֶץ בּוֹ.    8 Israel is swallowed up; now are they become among the nations as a vessel wherein is no value.
8.9 ט  כִּי-הֵמָּה עָלוּ אַשּׁוּר, פֶּרֶא בּוֹדֵד לוֹ; אֶפְרַיִם, הִתְנוּ אֲהָבִים.    9 For they are gone up to Assyria, like a wild ass alone by himself; Ephraim hath hired lovers.
8.10 י  גַּם כִּי-יִתְנוּ בַגּוֹיִם, עַתָּה אֲקַבְּצֵם; וַיָּחֵלּוּ מְּעָט, מִמַּשָּׂא מֶלֶךְ שָׂרִים.    10 Yea, though they hire among the nations, now will I gather them up; and they begin to be minished by reason of the burden of king and princes.
8.11 יא  כִּי-הִרְבָּה אֶפְרַיִם מִזְבְּחוֹת, לַחֲטֹא:  הָיוּ-לוֹ מִזְבְּחוֹת, לַחֲטֹא.    11 For Ephraim hath multiplied altars to sin, yea, altars have been unto him to sin.
8.12 יב  אכתוב- (אֶכְתָּב-) לוֹ--רבו (רֻבֵּי), תּוֹרָתִי:  כְּמוֹ-זָר, נֶחְשָׁבוּ.    12 Though I write for him never so many things of My Law, they are accounted as a stranger's.
8.13 יג  זִבְחֵי הַבְהָבַי, יִזְבְּחוּ בָשָׂר וַיֹּאכֵלוּ--יְהוָה, לֹא רָצָם; עַתָּה יִזְכֹּר עֲוֺנָם, וְיִפְקֹד חַטֹּאותָם--הֵמָּה, מִצְרַיִם יָשׁוּבוּ.    13 As for the sacrifices that are made by fire unto Me, let them sacrifice flesh and eat it, for the LORD accepteth them not. Now will He remember their iniquity, and punish their sins; they shall return to Egypt.
8.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁכַּח יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-עֹשֵׂהוּ, וַיִּבֶן הֵיכָלוֹת, וִיהוּדָה, הִרְבָּה עָרִים בְּצֻרוֹת; וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי-אֵשׁ בְּעָרָיו, וְאָכְלָה אַרְמְנֹתֶיהָ.  {פ}    14 For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and builded palaces, and Judah hath multiplied fortified cities; but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the castles thereof. {P}
9.1 א  אַל-תִּשְׂמַח יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-גִּיל כָּעַמִּים, כִּי זָנִיתָ מֵעַל אֱלֹהֶיךָ; אָהַבְתָּ אֶתְנָן, עַל כָּל-גָּרְנוֹת דָּגָן.    1 Rejoice not, O Israel, unto exultation, like the peoples, for thou hast gone astray from thy God, thou hast loved a harlot's hire upon every corn-floor.
9.2 ב  גֹּרֶן וָיֶקֶב, לֹא יִרְעֵם; וְתִירוֹשׁ, יְכַחֶשׁ בָּהּ.    2 The threshing-floor and the wine-press shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail her.
9.3 ג  לֹא יֵשְׁבוּ, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוָה; וְשָׁב אֶפְרַיִם מִצְרַיִם, וּבְאַשּׁוּר טָמֵא יֹאכֵלוּ.    3 They shall not dwell in the LORD'S land; but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean food in Assyria.
9.4 ד  לֹא-יִסְּכוּ לַיהוָה יַיִן, וְלֹא יֶעֶרְבוּ-לוֹ--זִבְחֵיהֶם כְּלֶחֶם אוֹנִים לָהֶם, כָּל-אֹכְלָיו יִטַּמָּאוּ:  כִּי-לַחְמָם לְנַפְשָׁם, לֹא יָבוֹא בֵּית יְהוָה.    4 They shall not pour out wine-offerings to the LORD, neither shall they be pleasing unto Him; their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners, all that eat thereof shall be polluted; for their bread shall be for their appetite, it shall not come into the house of the LORD.
9.5 ה  מַה-תַּעֲשׂוּ, לְיוֹם מוֹעֵד, וּלְיוֹם, חַג-יְהוָה.    5 What will ye do in the day of the appointed season, and in the day of the feast of the LORD?
9.6 ו  כִּי-הִנֵּה הָלְכוּ מִשֹּׁד, מִצְרַיִם תְּקַבְּצֵם מֹף תְּקַבְּרֵם; מַחְמַד לְכַסְפָּם, קִמּוֹשׂ יִירָשֵׁם, חוֹחַ, בְּאָהֳלֵיהֶם.    6 For, lo, they are gone away from destruction, yet Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them; their precious treasures of silver, nettles shall possess them, thorns shall be in their tents.
9.7 ז  בָּאוּ יְמֵי הַפְּקֻדָּה, בָּאוּ יְמֵי הַשִּׁלֻּם--יֵדְעוּ, יִשְׂרָאֵל; אֱוִיל הַנָּבִיא, מְשֻׁגָּע אִישׁ הָרוּחַ--עַל רֹב עֲוֺנְךָ, וְרַבָּה מַשְׂטֵמָה.    7 The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel shall know it. The prophet is a fool, the man of the spirit is mad! For the multitude of thine iniquity, the enmity is great.
9.8 ח  צֹפֶה אֶפְרַיִם, עִם-אֱלֹהָי; נָבִיא פַּח יָקוֹשׁ, עַל-כָּל-דְּרָכָיו--מַשְׂטֵמָה, בְּבֵית אֱלֹהָיו.    8 Ephraim is a watchman with my God; as for the prophet, a fowler's snare is in all his ways, and enmity in the house of his God.
9.9 ט  הֶעְמִיקוּ שִׁחֵתוּ, כִּימֵי הַגִּבְעָה; יִזְכּוֹר עֲוֺנָם, יִפְקוֹד חַטֹּאותָם.  {ס}    9 They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah; He will remember their iniquity, He will punish their sins. {S}
9.10 י  כַּעֲנָבִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, מָצָאתִי יִשְׂרָאֵל--כְּבִכּוּרָה בִתְאֵנָה בְּרֵאשִׁיתָהּ, רָאִיתִי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם; הֵמָּה בָּאוּ בַעַל-פְּעוֹר, וַיִּנָּזְרוּ לַבֹּשֶׁת, וַיִּהְיוּ שִׁקּוּצִים, כְּאָהֳבָם.    10 I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness, I saw your fathers as the first-ripe in the fig-tree at her first season; but so soon as they came to Baal-peor, they separated themselves unto the shameful thing, and became detestable like that which they loved.
9.11 יא  אֶפְרַיִם, כָּעוֹף יִתְעוֹפֵף כְּבוֹדָם; מִלֵּדָה וּמִבֶּטֶן, וּמֵהֵרָיוֹן.    11 As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird; there shall be no birth, and none with child, and no conception.
9.12 יב  כִּי אִם-יְגַדְּלוּ אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם, וְשִׁכַּלְתִּים מֵאָדָם:  כִּי-גַם-אוֹי לָהֶם, בְּשׂוּרִי מֵהֶם.    12 Yea, though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that there be not a man left; yea, woe also to them when I depart from them!
9.13 יג  אֶפְרַיִם כַּאֲשֶׁר-רָאִיתִי לְצוֹר, שְׁתוּלָה בְנָוֶה; וְאֶפְרַיִם, לְהוֹצִיא אֶל-הֹרֵג בָּנָיו.    13 Ephraim, like as I have seen Tyre, is planted in a pleasant place; but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the slayer.
9.14 יד  תֵּן-לָהֶם יְהוָה, מַה-תִּתֵּן; תֵּן-לָהֶם רֶחֶם מַשְׁכִּיל, וְשָׁדַיִם צֹמְקִים.    14 Give them, O LORD, whatsoever Thou wilt give; give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
9.15 טו  כָּל-רָעָתָם בַּגִּלְגָּל, כִּי-שָׁם שְׂנֵאתִים, עַל רֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיהֶם, מִבֵּיתִי אֲגָרְשֵׁם; לֹא אוֹסֵף אַהֲבָתָם, כָּל-שָׂרֵיהֶם סֹרְרִים.    15 All their wickedness is in Gilgal, for there I hated them; because of the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of My house; I will love them no more, all their princes are rebellious.
9.16 טז  הֻכָּה אֶפְרַיִם--שָׁרְשָׁם יָבֵשׁ, פְּרִי בלי- (בַל-) יַעֲשׂוּן; גַּם כִּי יֵלֵדוּן, וְהֵמַתִּי מַחֲמַדֵּי בִטְנָם.    16 Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit; yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay the beloved fruit of their womb.
9.17 יז  יִמְאָסֵם אֱלֹהַי, כִּי לֹא שָׁמְעוּ לוֹ; וְיִהְיוּ נֹדְדִים, בַּגּוֹיִם.  {ס}    17 My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto Him; and they shall be wanderers among the nations. {S}
10.1 א  גֶּפֶן בּוֹקֵק יִשְׂרָאֵל, פְּרִי יְשַׁוֶּה-לּוֹ; כְּרֹב לְפִרְיוֹ, הִרְבָּה לַמִּזְבְּחוֹת--כְּטוֹב לְאַרְצוֹ, הֵיטִיבוּ מַצֵּבוֹת.    1 Israel was a luxuriant vine, which put forth fruit freely: as his fruit increased, he increased his altars; the more goodly his land was, the more goodly were his pillars.
10.2 ב  חָלַק לִבָּם, עַתָּה יֶאְשָׁמוּ; הוּא יַעֲרֹף מִזְבְּחוֹתָם, יְשֹׁדֵד מַצֵּבוֹתָם.    2 Their heart is divided; now shall they bear their guilt; He will break down their altars, He will spoil their pillars.
10.3 ג  כִּי עַתָּה יֹאמְרוּ, אֵין מֶלֶךְ לָנוּ:  כִּי לֹא יָרֵאנוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וְהַמֶּלֶךְ מַה-יַּעֲשֶׂה-לָּנוּ.    3 Surely now shall they say: 'We have no king; for we feared not the LORD; and the king, what can he do for us?'
10.4 ד  דִּבְּרוּ דְבָרִים, אָלוֹת שָׁוְא כָּרֹת בְּרִית; וּפָרַח כָּרֹאשׁ מִשְׁפָּט, עַל תַּלְמֵי שָׂדָי.    4 They speak words, they swear falsely, they make covenants; thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.
10.5 ה  לְעֶגְלוֹת בֵּית אָוֶן, יָגוּרוּ שְׁכַן שֹׁמְרוֹן:  כִּי-אָבַל עָלָיו עַמּוֹ, וּכְמָרָיו עָלָיו יָגִילוּ--עַל-כְּבוֹדוֹ, כִּי-גָלָה מִמֶּנּוּ.    5 The inhabitants of Samaria shall be in dread for the calves of Beth-aven; for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and the priests thereof shall tremble for it, for its glory, because it is departed from it.
10.6 ו  גַּם-אוֹתוֹ לְאַשּׁוּר יוּבָל, מִנְחָה לְמֶלֶךְ יָרֵב; בָּשְׁנָה אֶפְרַיִם יִקָּח, וְיֵבוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵעֲצָתוֹ.    6 It also shall be carried unto Assyria, for a present to King Contentious; Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.
10.7 ז  נִדְמֶה שֹׁמְרוֹן, מַלְכָּהּ, כְּקֶצֶף, עַל-פְּנֵי-מָיִם.    7 As for Samaria, her king is cut off, as foam upon the water.
10.8 ח  וְנִשְׁמְדוּ בָּמוֹת אָוֶן, חַטַּאת יִשְׂרָאֵל--קוֹץ וְדַרְדַּר, יַעֲלֶה עַל-מִזְבְּחוֹתָם; וְאָמְרוּ לֶהָרִים כַּסּוּנוּ, וְלַגְּבָעוֹת נִפְלוּ עָלֵינוּ.  {פ}    8 The high places also of Aven shall be destroyed, even the sin of Israel. The thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains: 'Cover us', and to the hills: 'Fall on us.' {P}
10.9 ט  מִימֵי, הַגִּבְעָה, חָטָאתָ, יִשְׂרָאֵל; שָׁם עָמָדוּ, לֹא-תַשִּׂיגֵם בַּגִּבְעָה מִלְחָמָה עַל-בְּנֵי עַלְוָה.    9 From the days of Gibeah thou hast sinned, O Israel; there they stood; no battle was to overtake them in Gibeah, nor the children of arrogancy.
10.10 י  בְּאַוָּתִי, וְאֶסֳּרֵם; וְאֻסְּפוּ עֲלֵיהֶם עַמִּים, בְּאָסְרָם לִשְׁתֵּי עינתם (עוֹנוֹתָם).    10 When it is My desire, I will chastise them; and the peoples shall be gathered against them, when they are yoked to their two rings.
10.11 יא  וְאֶפְרַיִם עֶגְלָה מְלֻמָּדָה, אֹהַבְתִּי לָדוּשׁ, וַאֲנִי עָבַרְתִּי, עַל-טוּב צַוָּארָהּ; אַרְכִּיב אֶפְרַיִם יַחֲרוֹשׁ יְהוּדָה, יְשַׂדֶּד-לוֹ יַעֲקֹב.    11 And Ephraim is a heifer well broken, that loveth to thresh, and I have passed over upon her fair neck; I will make Ephraim to ride, Judah shall plow, Jacob shall break his clods.
10.12 יב  זִרְעוּ לָכֶם לִצְדָקָה קִצְרוּ לְפִי-חֶסֶד, נִירוּ לָכֶם נִיר; וְעֵת, לִדְרוֹשׁ אֶת-יְהוָה, עַד-יָבוֹא, וְיֹרֶה צֶדֶק לָכֶם.    12 Sow to yourselves according to righteousness, reap according to mercy, break up your fallow ground; for it is time to seek the LORD, till He come and cause righteousness to rain upon you.
10.13 יג  חֲרַשְׁתֶּם-רֶשַׁע עַוְלָתָה קְצַרְתֶּם, אֲכַלְתֶּם פְּרִי-כָחַשׁ--כִּי-בָטַחְתָּ בְדַרְכְּךָ, בְּרֹב גִּבּוֹרֶיךָ.    13 Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of lies; for thou didst trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.
10.14 יד  וְקָאם שָׁאוֹן, בְּעַמֶּךָ, וְכָל-מִבְצָרֶיךָ יוּשַּׁד, כְּשֹׁד שַׁלְמַן בֵּית אַרְבֵאל בְּיוֹם מִלְחָמָה:  אֵם עַל-בָּנִים, רֻטָּשָׁה.    14 Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy hosts, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of battle; the mother was dashed in pieces with her children.
10.15 טו  כָּכָה, עָשָׂה לָכֶם בֵּית-אֵל, מִפְּנֵי, רָעַת רָעַתְכֶם; בַּשַּׁחַר, נִדְמֹה נִדְמָה מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל.    15 So hath Beth-el done unto you because of your great wickedness; at daybreak is the king of Israel utterly cut off.
11.1 א  כִּי נַעַר יִשְׂרָאֵל, וָאֹהֲבֵהוּ; וּמִמִּצְרַיִם, קָרָאתִי לִבְנִי.    1 When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and out of Egypt I called My son.
11.2 ב  קָרְאוּ, לָהֶם; כֵּן, הָלְכוּ מִפְּנֵיהֶם--לַבְּעָלִים יְזַבֵּחוּ, וְלַפְּסִלִים יְקַטֵּרוּן.    2 The more they called them, the more they went from them; they sacrificed unto the Baalim, and offered to graven images.
11.3 ג  וְאָנֹכִי תִרְגַּלְתִּי לְאֶפְרַיִם, קָחָם עַל-זְרוֹעֹתָיו; וְלֹא יָדְעוּ, כִּי רְפָאתִים.    3 And I, I taught Ephraim to walk, taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them.
11.4 ד  בְּחַבְלֵי אָדָם אֶמְשְׁכֵם בַּעֲבֹתוֹת אַהֲבָה, וָאֶהְיֶה לָהֶם כִּמְרִימֵי עֹל עַל לְחֵיהֶם; וְאַט אֵלָיו, אוֹכִיל.    4 I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love; and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I fed them gently.
11.5 ה  לֹא יָשׁוּב אֶל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וְאַשּׁוּר הוּא מַלְכּוֹ:  כִּי מֵאֲנוּ, לָשׁוּב.    5 He shall not return into the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his king, because they refused to return.
11.6 ו  וְחָלָה חֶרֶב בְּעָרָיו, וְכִלְּתָה בַדָּיו וְאָכָלָה--מִמֹּעֲצוֹתֵיהֶם.    6 And the sword shall fall upon his cities, and shall consume his bars, and devour them, because of their own counsels.
11.7 ז  וְעַמִּי תְלוּאִים, לִמְשׁוּבָתִי; וְאֶל-עַל, יִקְרָאֻהוּ--יַחַד, לֹא יְרוֹמֵם.    7 And My people are in suspense about returning to Me; and though they call them upwards, none at all will lift himself up.
11.8 ח  אֵיךְ אֶתֶּנְךָ אֶפְרַיִם, אֲמַגֶּנְךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֵיךְ אֶתֶּנְךָ כְאַדְמָה, אֲשִׂימְךָ כִּצְבֹאיִם; נֶהְפַּךְ עָלַי לִבִּי, יַחַד נִכְמְרוּ נִחוּמָי.    8 How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I surrender thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned within Me, My compassions are kindled together.
11.9 ט  לֹא אֶעֱשֶׂה חֲרוֹן אַפִּי, לֹא אָשׁוּב לְשַׁחֵת אֶפְרָיִם:  כִּי אֵל אָנֹכִי, וְלֹא-אִישׁ--בְּקִרְבְּךָ קָדוֹשׁ, וְלֹא אָבוֹא בְּעִיר.    9 I will not execute the fierceness of Mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I am God, and not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee; and I will not come in fury.
11.10 י  אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה יֵלְכוּ, כְּאַרְיֵה יִשְׁאָג:  כִּי-הוּא יִשְׁאַג, וְיֶחֶרְדוּ בָנִים מִיָּם.    10 They shall walk after the LORD, who shall roar like a lion; for He shall roar, and the children shall come trembling from the west.
11.11 יא  יֶחֶרְדוּ כְצִפּוֹר מִמִּצְרַיִם, וּכְיוֹנָה מֵאֶרֶץ אַשּׁוּר; וְהוֹשַׁבְתִּים עַל-בָּתֵּיהֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}    11 They shall come trembling as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria; and I will make them to dwell in their houses, saith the LORD. {S}
11.12 יב  סְבָבֻנִי בְכַחַשׁ אֶפְרַיִם, וּבְמִרְמָה בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וִיהוּדָה, עֹד רָד עִם-אֵל, וְעִם-קְדוֹשִׁים, נֶאֱמָן.    1 Ephraim compasseth Me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit; and Judah is yet wayward towards God, and towards the Holy One who is faithful.
12.1 א  אֶפְרַיִם רֹעֶה רוּחַ, וְרֹדֵף קָדִים--כָּל-הַיּוֹם, כָּזָב וָשֹׁד יַרְבֶּה; וּבְרִית עִם-אַשּׁוּר יִכְרֹתוּ, וְשֶׁמֶן לְמִצְרַיִם יוּבָל.    2 Ephraim striveth after wind, and followeth after the east wind; all the day he multiplieth lies and desolation; and they make a covenant with Assyria, and oil is carried into Egypt.
12.2 ב  וְרִיב לַיהוָה, עִם-יְהוּדָה; וְלִפְקֹד עַל-יַעֲקֹב כִּדְרָכָיו, כְּמַעֲלָלָיו יָשִׁיב לוֹ.    3 The LORD hath also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob according to his ways, according to his doings will He recompense him.
12.3 ג  בַּבֶּטֶן, עָקַב אֶת-אָחִיו; וּבְאוֹנוֹ, שָׂרָה אֶת-אֱלֹהִים.    4 In the womb he took his brother by the heel, and by his strength he strove with a godlike being;
12.4 ד  וַיָּשַׂר אֶל-מַלְאָךְ וַיֻּכָל, בָּכָה וַיִּתְחַנֶּן-לוֹ; בֵּית-אֵל, יִמְצָאֶנּוּ, וְשָׁם, יְדַבֵּר עִמָּנוּ.    5 So he strove with an angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made supplication unto him; at Beth-el he would find him, and there he would speak with us;
12.5 ה  וַיהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי הַצְּבָאוֹת--יְהוָה, זִכְרוֹ.    6 But the LORD, the God of hosts, the LORD is His name.
12.6 ו  וְאַתָּה, בֵּאלֹהֶיךָ תָשׁוּב; חֶסֶד וּמִשְׁפָּט שְׁמֹר, וְקַוֵּה אֶל-אֱלֹהֶיךָ תָּמִיד.    7 Therefore turn thou to thy God; keep mercy and justice, and wait for thy God continually.
12.7 ז  כְּנַעַן, בְּיָדוֹ מֹאזְנֵי מִרְמָה--לַעֲשֹׁק אָהֵב.    8 As for the trafficker, the balances of deceit are in his hand. He loveth to oppress.
12.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶפְרַיִם--אַךְ עָשַׁרְתִּי, מָצָאתִי אוֹן לִי; כָּל-יְגִיעַי, לֹא יִמְצְאוּ-לִי עָוֺן אֲשֶׁר-חֵטְא.    9 And Ephraim said: 'Surely I am become rich, I have found me wealth; in all my labours they shall find in me no iniquity that were sin.'
12.9 ט  וְאָנֹכִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; עֹד אוֹשִׁיבְךָ בָאֳהָלִים, כִּימֵי מוֹעֵד.    10 But I am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt; I will yet again make thee to dwell in tents, as in the days of the appointed season.
12.10 י  וְדִבַּרְתִּי, עַל-הַנְּבִיאִים, וְאָנֹכִי, חָזוֹן הִרְבֵּיתִי; וּבְיַד הַנְּבִיאִים, אֲדַמֶּה.    11 I have also spoken unto the prophets, and I have multiplied visions; and by the ministry of the prophets have I used similitudes.
12.11 יא  אִם-גִּלְעָד אָוֶן אַךְ-שָׁוְא הָיוּ, בַּגִּלְגָּל שְׁוָרִים זִבֵּחוּ; גַּם מִזְבְּחוֹתָם כְּגַלִּים, עַל תַּלְמֵי שָׂדָי.    12 If Gilead be given to iniquity becoming altogether vanity, in Gilgal they sacrifice unto bullocks; yea, their altars shall be as heaps in the furrows of the field.
12.12 יב  וַיִּבְרַח יַעֲקֹב, שְׂדֵה אֲרָם; וַיַּעֲבֹד יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּאִשָּׁה, וּבְאִשָּׁה שָׁמָר.    13 And Jacob fled into the field of Aram, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.
12.13 יג  וּבְנָבִיא, הֶעֱלָה יְהוָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִמִּצְרָיִם; וּבְנָבִיא, נִשְׁמָר.    14 And by a prophet the LORD brought Israel up out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he kept.
12.14 יד  הִכְעִיס אֶפְרַיִם, תַּמְרוּרִים; וְדָמָיו, עָלָיו יִטּוֹשׁ, וְחֶרְפָּתוֹ, יָשִׁיב לוֹ אֲדֹנָיו.    15 Ephraim hath provoked most bitterly; therefore shall his blood be cast upon him, and his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.
13.1 א  כְּדַבֵּר אֶפְרַיִם רְתֵת, נָשָׂא הוּא בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֶּאְשַׁם בַּבַּעַל, וַיָּמֹת.    1 When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he became guilty through Baal, he died.
13.2 ב  וְעַתָּה יוֹסִפוּ לַחֲטֹא, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ לָהֶם מַסֵּכָה מִכַּסְפָּם כִּתְבוּנָם עֲצַבִּים, מַעֲשֵׂה חָרָשִׁים, כֻּלֹּה; לָהֶם, הֵם אֹמְרִים, זֹבְחֵי אָדָם, עֲגָלִים יִשָּׁקוּן.    2 And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of their silver, according to their own understanding, even idols, all of them the work of the craftsmen; of them they say: 'They that sacrifice men kiss calves.'
13.3 ג  לָכֵן, יִהְיוּ כַּעֲנַן-בֹּקֶר, וְכַטַּל, מַשְׁכִּים הֹלֵךְ; כְּמֹץ יְסֹעֵר מִגֹּרֶן, וּכְעָשָׁן מֵאֲרֻבָּה.    3 Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the dew that early passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the wind out of the threshing-floor, and as the smoke out of the window.
13.4 ד  וְאָנֹכִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וֵאלֹהִים זוּלָתִי לֹא תֵדָע, וּמוֹשִׁיעַ אַיִן בִּלְתִּי.    4 Yet I am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt; and thou knowest no God but Me, and beside Me there is no saviour.
13.5 ה  אֲנִי יְדַעְתִּיךָ, בַּמִּדְבָּר--בְּאֶרֶץ, תַּלְאֻבוֹת.    5 I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.
13.6 ו  כְּמַרְעִיתָם, וַיִּשְׂבָּעוּ--שָׂבְעוּ, וַיָּרָם לִבָּם; עַל-כֵּן, שְׁכֵחוּנִי.    6 When they were fed, they became full, they were filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten Me.
13.7 ז  וָאֱהִי לָהֶם, כְּמוֹ-שָׁחַל--כְּנָמֵר, עַל-דֶּרֶךְ אָשׁוּר.    7 Therefore am I become unto them as a lion; as a leopard will I watch by the way;
13.8 ח  אֶפְגְּשֵׁם כְּדֹב שַׁכּוּל, וְאֶקְרַע סְגוֹר לִבָּם; וְאֹכְלֵם שָׁם כְּלָבִיא, חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה תְּבַקְּעֵם.    8 I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the enclosure of their heart; and there will I devour them like a lioness; the wild beast shall tear them.
13.9 ט  שִׁחֶתְךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי-בִי בְעֶזְרֶךָ.    9 It is thy destruction, O Israel, that thou art against Me, against thy help.
13.10 י  אֱהִי מַלְכְּךָ אֵפוֹא, וְיוֹשִׁיעֲךָ בְּכָל-עָרֶיךָ; וְשֹׁפְטֶיךָ--אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתָּ, תְּנָה-לִּי מֶלֶךְ וְשָׂרִים.    10 Ho, now, thy king, that he may save thee in all thy cities! and thy judges, of whom thou saidst: 'Give me a king and princes!'
13.11 יא  אֶתֶּן-לְךָ מֶלֶךְ בְּאַפִּי, וְאֶקַּח בְּעֶבְרָתִי.  {פ}    11 I give thee a king in Mine anger, and take him away in My wrath. {P}
13.12 יב  צָרוּר עֲוֺן אֶפְרָיִם, צְפוּנָה חַטָּאתוֹ.    12 The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is laid up in store.
13.13 יג  חֶבְלֵי יוֹלֵדָה, יָבֹאוּ לוֹ; הוּא-בֵן לֹא חָכָם, כִּי-עֵת לֹא-יַעֲמֹד בְּמִשְׁבַּר בָּנִים.    13 The throes of a travailing woman shall come upon him; he is an unwise son; for it is time he should not tarry in the place of the breaking forth of children.
13.14 יד  מִיַּד שְׁאוֹל אֶפְדֵּם, מִמָּוֶת אֶגְאָלֵם; אֱהִי דְבָרֶיךָ מָוֶת, אֱהִי קָטָבְךָ שְׁאוֹל--נֹחַם, יִסָּתֵר מֵעֵינָי.    14 Shall I ransom them from the power of the nether-world? Shall I redeem them from death? Ho, thy plagues, O death! Ho, thy destruction, O nether-world! Repentance be hid from Mine eyes!
13.15 טו  כִּי הוּא, בֵּין אַחִים יַפְרִיא; יָבוֹא קָדִים רוּחַ יְהוָה מִמִּדְבָּר עֹלֶה, וְיֵבוֹשׁ מְקוֹרוֹ וְיֶחֱרַב מַעְיָנוֹ--הוּא יִשְׁסֶה, אוֹצַר כָּל-כְּלִי חֶמְדָּה.    15 For though he be fruitful among the reed-plants, an east wind shall come, the wind of the LORD coming up from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up; he shall spoil the treasure of all precious vessels.
13.16 טז  תֶּאְשַׁם, שֹׁמְרוֹן, כִּי מָרְתָה, בֵּאלֹהֶיהָ; בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ--עֹלְלֵיהֶם יְרֻטָּשׁוּ, וְהָרִיּוֹתָיו יְבֻקָּעוּ.  {פ}    1 Samaria shall bear her guilt, for she hath rebelled against her God; they shall fall by the sword; their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up. {P}
14.1 א  שׁוּבָה, יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ:  כִּי כָשַׁלְתָּ, בַּעֲוֺנֶךָ.    2 Return, O Israel, unto the LORD thy God; for thou hast stumbled in thine iniquity.
14.2 ב  קְחוּ עִמָּכֶם דְּבָרִים, וְשׁוּבוּ אֶל-יְהוָה; אִמְרוּ אֵלָיו, כָּל-תִּשָּׂא עָוֺן וְקַח-טוֹב, וּנְשַׁלְּמָה פָרִים, שְׂפָתֵינוּ.    3 Take with you words, and return unto the LORD; say unto Him: 'Forgive all iniquity, and accept that which is good; so will we render for bullocks the offering of our lips.
14.3 ג  אַשּׁוּר לֹא יוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ, עַל-סוּס לֹא נִרְכָּב, וְלֹא-נֹאמַר עוֹד אֱלֹהֵינוּ, לְמַעֲשֵׂה יָדֵינוּ--אֲשֶׁר-בְּךָ, יְרֻחַם יָתוֹם.    4 Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses; neither will we call any more the work of our hands our gods; for in Thee the fatherless findeth mercy.'
14.4 ד  אֶרְפָּא, מְשׁוּבָתָם--אֹהֲבֵם, נְדָבָה:  כִּי שָׁב אַפִּי, מִמֶּנּוּ.    5 I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely; for Mine anger is turned away from him.
14.5 ה  אֶהְיֶה כַטַּל לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, יִפְרַח כַּשּׁוֹשַׁנָּה; וְיַךְ שָׁרָשָׁיו, כַּלְּבָנוֹן.    6 I will be as the dew unto Israel; he shall blossom as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.
14.6 ו  יֵלְכוּ, יֹנְקוֹתָיו, וִיהִי כַזַּיִת, הוֹדוֹ; וְרֵיחַ לוֹ, כַּלְּבָנוֹן.    7 His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive-tree, and his fragrance as Lebanon.
14.7 ז  יָשֻׁבוּ יֹשְׁבֵי בְצִלּוֹ, יְחַיּוּ דָגָן וְיִפְרְחוּ כַגָּפֶן; זִכְרוֹ, כְּיֵין לְבָנוֹן.    8 They that dwell under his shadow shall again make corn to grow, and shall blossom as the vine; the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.
14.8 ח  אֶפְרַיִם, מַה-לִּי עוֹד לָעֲצַבִּים; אֲנִי עָנִיתִי וַאֲשׁוּרֶנּוּ, אֲנִי כִּבְרוֹשׁ רַעֲנָן--מִמֶּנִּי, פֶּרְיְךָ נִמְצָא.    9 Ephraim [shall say]: 'What have I to do any more with idols?' As for Me, I respond and look on him; I am like a leafy cypress-tree; from Me is thy fruit found.
14.9 ט  מִי חָכָם וְיָבֵן אֵלֶּה, נָבוֹן וְיֵדָעֵם:  כִּי-יְשָׁרִים דַּרְכֵי יְהוָה, וְצַדִּקִים יֵלְכוּ בָם, וּפֹשְׁעִים, יִכָּשְׁלוּ בָם.  {ש}    10 Whoso is wise, let him understand these things, whoso is prudent, let him know them. For the ways of the LORD are right, and the just do walk in them; but transgressors do stumble therein. {P}
