1.1 א  חֲזוֹן, יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ, אֲשֶׁר חָזָה, עַל-יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִָם--בִּימֵי עֻזִּיָּהוּ יוֹתָם אָחָז יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה.	1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
1.2 ב  שִׁמְעוּ שָׁמַיִם וְהַאֲזִינִי אֶרֶץ, כִּי יְהוָה דִּבֵּר:  בָּנִים גִּדַּלְתִּי וְרוֹמַמְתִּי, וְהֵם פָּשְׁעוּ בִי.	2 Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the LORD hath spoken: Children I have reared, and brought up, and they have rebelled against Me.
1.3 ג  יָדַע שׁוֹר קֹנֵהוּ, וַחֲמוֹר אֵבוּס בְּעָלָיו; יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא יָדַע, עַמִּי לֹא הִתְבּוֹנָן.	3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib; but Israel doth not know, My people doth not consider.
1.4 ד  הוֹי גּוֹי חֹטֵא, עַם כֶּבֶד עָוֺן--זֶרַע מְרֵעִים, בָּנִים מַשְׁחִיתִים; עָזְבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, נִאֲצוּ אֶת-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל--נָזֹרוּ אָחוֹר.	4 Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil-doers, children that deal corruptly; they have forsaken the LORD, they have contemned the Holy One of Israel, they are turned away backward.
1.5 ה  עַל מֶה תֻכּוּ עוֹד, תּוֹסִיפוּ סָרָה; כָּל-רֹאשׁ לָחֳלִי, וְכָל-לֵבָב דַּוָּי.	5 On what part will ye yet be stricken, seeing ye stray away more and more? The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint;
1.6 ו  מִכַּף-רֶגֶל וְעַד-רֹאשׁ אֵין-בּוֹ מְתֹם, פֶּצַע וְחַבּוּרָה וּמַכָּה טְרִיָּה; לֹא-זֹרוּ וְלֹא חֻבָּשׁוּ, וְלֹא רֻכְּכָה בַּשָּׁמֶן.	6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and festering sores: they have not been pressed, neither bound up, neither mollified with oil.
1.7 ז  אַרְצְכֶם שְׁמָמָה, עָרֵיכֶם שְׂרֻפוֹת אֵשׁ; אַדְמַתְכֶם, לְנֶגְדְּכֶם זָרִים אֹכְלִים אֹתָהּ, וּשְׁמָמָה, כְּמַהְפֵּכַת זָרִים.	7 Your country is desolate; your cities are burned with fire; your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by floods.
1.8 ח  וְנוֹתְרָה בַת-צִיּוֹן, כְּסֻכָּה בְכָרֶם; כִּמְלוּנָה בְמִקְשָׁה, כְּעִיר נְצוּרָה.	8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.
1.9 ט  לוּלֵי יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הוֹתִיר לָנוּ שָׂרִיד כִּמְעָט--כִּסְדֹם הָיִינוּ, לַעֲמֹרָה דָּמִינוּ.  {פ}	9 Except the LORD of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like unto Gomorrah. {P}
1.10 י  שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, קְצִינֵי סְדֹם; הַאֲזִינוּ תּוֹרַת אֱלֹהֵינוּ, עַם עֲמֹרָה.	10 Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.
1.11 יא  לָמָּה-לִּי רֹב-זִבְחֵיכֶם יֹאמַר יְהוָה, שָׂבַעְתִּי עֹלוֹת אֵילִים וְחֵלֶב מְרִיאִים; וְדַם פָּרִים וּכְבָשִׂים וְעַתּוּדִים, לֹא חָפָצְתִּי.	11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto Me? saith the LORD; I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats.
1.12 יב  כִּי תָבֹאוּ, לֵרָאוֹת פָּנָי--מִי-בִקֵּשׁ זֹאת מִיֶּדְכֶם, רְמֹס חֲצֵרָי.	12 When ye come to appear before Me, who hath required this at your hand, to trample My courts?
1.13 יג  לֹא תוֹסִיפוּ, הָבִיא מִנְחַת-שָׁוְא--קְטֹרֶת תּוֹעֵבָה הִיא, לִי; חֹדֶשׁ וְשַׁבָּת קְרֹא מִקְרָא, לֹא-אוּכַל אָוֶן וַעֲצָרָה.	13 Bring no more vain oblations; it is an offering of abomination unto Me; new moon and sabbath, the holding of convocations--I cannot endure iniquity along with the solemn assembly.
1.14 יד  חָדְשֵׁיכֶם וּמוֹעֲדֵיכֶם שָׂנְאָה נַפְשִׁי, הָיוּ עָלַי לָטֹרַח; נִלְאֵיתִי, נְשֹׂא.	14 Your new moons and your appointed seasons My soul hateth; they are a burden unto Me; I am weary to bear them.
1.15 טו  וּבְפָרִשְׂכֶם כַּפֵּיכֶם, אַעְלִים עֵינַי מִכֶּם--גַּם כִּי-תַרְבּוּ תְפִלָּה, אֵינֶנִּי שֹׁמֵעַ:  יְדֵיכֶם, דָּמִים מָלֵאוּ.	15 And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide Mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood.
1.16 טז  רַחֲצוּ, הִזַּכּוּ--הָסִירוּ רֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיכֶם, מִנֶּגֶד עֵינָי:  חִדְלוּ, הָרֵעַ.	16 Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before Mine eyes, cease to do evil;
1.17 יז  לִמְדוּ הֵיטֵב דִּרְשׁוּ מִשְׁפָּט, אַשְּׁרוּ חָמוֹץ; שִׁפְטוּ יָתוֹם, רִיבוּ אַלְמָנָה.  {ס}	17 Learn to do well; seek justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. {S}
1.18 יח  לְכוּ-נָא וְנִוָּכְחָה, יֹאמַר יְהוָה; אִם-יִהְיוּ חֲטָאֵיכֶם כַּשָּׁנִים כַּשֶּׁלֶג יַלְבִּינוּ, אִם-יַאְדִּימוּ כַתּוֹלָע כַּצֶּמֶר יִהְיוּ.	18 Come now, and let us reason together, saith the LORD; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
1.19 יט  אִם-תֹּאבוּ, וּשְׁמַעְתֶּם--טוּב הָאָרֶץ, תֹּאכֵלוּ.	19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land;
1.20 כ  וְאִם-תְּמָאֲנוּ, וּמְרִיתֶם--חֶרֶב תְּאֻכְּלוּ, כִּי פִּי יְהוָה דִּבֵּר.  {פ}	20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken. {P}
1.21 כא  אֵיכָה הָיְתָה לְזוֹנָה, קִרְיָה נֶאֱמָנָה; מְלֵאֲתִי מִשְׁפָּט, צֶדֶק יָלִין בָּהּ--וְעַתָּה מְרַצְּחִים.	21 How is the faithful city become a harlot! She that was full of justice, righteousness lodged in her, but now murderers.
1.22 כב  כַּסְפֵּךְ, הָיָה לְסִיגִים; סָבְאֵךְ, מָהוּל בַּמָּיִם.	22 Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.
1.23 כג  שָׂרַיִךְ סוֹרְרִים, וְחַבְרֵי גַּנָּבִים--כֻּלּוֹ אֹהֵב שֹׁחַד, וְרֹדֵף שַׁלְמֹנִים; יָתוֹם לֹא יִשְׁפֹּטוּ, וְרִיב אַלְמָנָה לֹא-יָבוֹא אֲלֵיהֶם.  {ס}	23 Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves; every one loveth bribes, and followeth after rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. {S}
1.24 כד  לָכֵן, נְאֻם הָאָדוֹן יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--אֲבִיר, יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הוֹי אֶנָּחֵם מִצָּרַי, וְאִנָּקְמָה מֵאוֹיְבָי.	24 Therefore saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts, the Mighty One of Israel: Ah, I will ease Me of Mine adversaries, and avenge Me of Mine enemies;
1.25 כה  וְאָשִׁיבָה יָדִי עָלַיִךְ, וְאֶצְרֹף כַּבֹּר סִיגָיִךְ; וְאָסִירָה, כָּל-בְּדִילָיִךְ.	25 And I will turn My hand upon thee, and purge away thy dross as with lye, and will take away all thine alloy;
1.26 כו  וְאָשִׁיבָה שֹׁפְטַיִךְ כְּבָרִאשֹׁנָה, וְיֹעֲצַיִךְ כְּבַתְּחִלָּה; אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, יִקָּרֵא לָךְ עִיר הַצֶּדֶק--קִרְיָה, נֶאֱמָנָה.	26 And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning; afterward thou shalt be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city.
1.27 כז  צִיּוֹן, בְּמִשְׁפָּט תִּפָּדֶה; וְשָׁבֶיהָ, בִּצְדָקָה.	27 Zion shall be redeemed with justice, and they that return of her with righteousness.
1.28 כח  וְשֶׁבֶר פֹּשְׁעִים וְחַטָּאִים, יַחְדָּו; וְעֹזְבֵי יְהוָה, יִכְלוּ.	28 But the destruction of the transgressors and the sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the LORD shall be consumed.
1.29 כט  כִּי יֵבֹשׁוּ, מֵאֵילִים אֲשֶׁר חֲמַדְתֶּם; וְתַחְפְּרוּ--מֵהַגַּנּוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בְּחַרְתֶּם.	29 For they shall be ashamed of the terebinths which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.
1.30 ל  כִּי תִהְיוּ, כְּאֵלָה נֹבֶלֶת עָלֶהָ; וּכְגַנָּה, אֲשֶׁר-מַיִם אֵין לָהּ.	30 For ye shall be as a terebinth whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.
1.31 לא  וְהָיָה הֶחָסֹן לִנְעֹרֶת, וּפֹעֲלוֹ לְנִיצוֹץ; וּבָעֲרוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם יַחְדָּו, וְאֵין מְכַבֶּה.  {פ}	31 And the strong shall be as tow, and his work as a spark; and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them. {P}
2.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר חָזָה, יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶּן-אָמוֹץ, עַל-יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִָם.	1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
2.2 ב  וְהָיָה בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים, נָכוֹן יִהְיֶה הַר בֵּית-יְהוָה בְּרֹאשׁ הֶהָרִים, וְנִשָּׂא, מִגְּבָעוֹת; וְנָהֲרוּ אֵלָיו, כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם.	2 And it shall come to pass in the end of days, that the mountain of the LORD'S house shall be established as the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.
2.3 ג  וְהָלְכוּ עַמִּים רַבִּים, וְאָמְרוּ לְכוּ וְנַעֲלֶה אֶל-הַר-יְהוָה אֶל-בֵּית אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב, וְיֹרֵנוּ מִדְּרָכָיו, וְנֵלְכָה בְּאֹרְחֹתָיו:  כִּי מִצִּיּוֹן תֵּצֵא תוֹרָה, וּדְבַר-יְהוָה מִירוּשָׁלִָם.	3 And many peoples shall go and say: 'Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths.' For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.
2.4 ד  וְשָׁפַט בֵּין הַגּוֹיִם, וְהוֹכִיחַ לְעַמִּים רַבִּים; וְכִתְּתוּ חַרְבוֹתָם לְאִתִּים, וַחֲנִיתוֹתֵיהֶם לְמַזְמֵרוֹת--לֹא-יִשָּׂא גוֹי אֶל-גּוֹי חֶרֶב, וְלֹא-יִלְמְדוּ עוֹד מִלְחָמָה.  {פ}	4 And He shall judge between the nations, and shall decide for many peoples; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. {P}
2.5 ה  בֵּית, יַעֲקֹב--לְכוּ וְנֵלְכָה, בְּאוֹר יְהוָה.	5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the LORD.
2.6 ו  כִּי נָטַשְׁתָּה, עַמְּךָ בֵּית יַעֲקֹב--כִּי מָלְאוּ מִקֶּדֶם, וְעֹנְנִים כַּפְּלִשְׁתִּים; וּבְיַלְדֵי נָכְרִים, יַשְׂפִּיקוּ.	6 For Thou hast forsaken Thy people the house of Jacob; for they are replenished from the east, and with soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the brood of aliens.
2.7 ז  וַתִּמָּלֵא אַרְצוֹ כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, וְאֵין קֵצֶה לְאֹצְרֹתָיו; וַתִּמָּלֵא אַרְצוֹ סוּסִים, וְאֵין קֵצֶה לְמַרְכְּבֹתָיו.	7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land also is full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots.
2.8 ח  וַתִּמָּלֵא אַרְצוֹ, אֱלִילִים:  לְמַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו יִשְׁתַּחֲווּ, לַאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֶצְבְּעֹתָיו.	8 Their land also is full of idols; every one worshippeth the work of his own hands, that which his own fingers have made.
2.9 ט  וַיִּשַּׁח אָדָם, וַיִּשְׁפַּל-אִישׁ; וְאַל-תִּשָּׂא, לָהֶם.	9 And man boweth down, and man lowereth himself; and Thou canst not bear with them.
2.10 י  בּוֹא בַצּוּר, וְהִטָּמֵן בֶּעָפָר, מִפְּנֵי פַּחַד יְהוָה, וּמֵהֲדַר גְּאֹנוֹ.	10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, from before the terror of the LORD, and from the glory of His majesty.
2.11 יא  עֵינֵי גַּבְהוּת אָדָם, שָׁפֵל, וְשַׁח, רוּם אֲנָשִׁים; וְנִשְׂגַּב יְהוָה לְבַדּוֹ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.  {פ}	11 The lofty looks of man shall be brought low, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that day. {P}
2.12 יב  כִּי יוֹם לַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עַל כָּל-גֵּאֶה--וָרָם; וְעַל, כָּל-נִשָּׂא וְשָׁפֵל.	12 For the LORD of hosts hath a day upon all that is proud and lofty, and upon all that is lifted up, and it shall be brought low;
2.13 יג  וְעַל כָּל-אַרְזֵי הַלְּבָנוֹן, הָרָמִים וְהַנִּשָּׂאִים; וְעַל, כָּל-אַלּוֹנֵי הַבָּשָׁן.	13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan;
2.14 יד  וְעַל, כָּל-הֶהָרִים הָרָמִים; וְעַל, כָּל-הַגְּבָעוֹת הַנִּשָּׂאוֹת.	14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up;
2.15 טו  וְעַל, כָּל-מִגְדָּל גָּבֹהַּ; וְעַל, כָּל-חוֹמָה בְצוּרָה.	15 And upon every lofty tower, and upon every fortified wall;
2.16 טז  וְעַל, כָּל-אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ; וְעַל, כָּל-שְׂכִיּוֹת הַחֶמְדָּה.	16 And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all delightful imagery.
2.17 יז  וְשַׁח גַּבְהוּת הָאָדָם, וְשָׁפֵל רוּם אֲנָשִׁים; וְנִשְׂגַּב יְהוָה לְבַדּוֹ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.	17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be brought low; and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that day.
2.18 יח  וְהָאֱלִילִים, כָּלִיל יַחֲלֹף.	18 And the idols shall utterly pass away.
2.19 יט  וּבָאוּ בִּמְעָרוֹת צֻרִים, וּבִמְחִלּוֹת עָפָר--מִפְּנֵי פַּחַד יְהוָה, וּמֵהֲדַר גְּאוֹנוֹ, בְּקוּמוֹ, לַעֲרֹץ הָאָרֶץ.	19 And men shall go into the caves of the rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from before the terror of the LORD, and from the glory of His majesty, when He ariseth to shake mightily the earth.
2.20 כ  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יַשְׁלִיךְ הָאָדָם, אֵת אֱלִילֵי כַסְפּוֹ, וְאֵת אֱלִילֵי זְהָבוֹ--אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ-לוֹ לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת, לַחְפֹּר פֵּרוֹת וְלָעֲטַלֵּפִים.	20 In that day a man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made for themselves to worship, to the moles and to the bats;
2.21 כא  לָבוֹא בְּנִקְרוֹת הַצֻּרִים, וּבִסְעִפֵי הַסְּלָעִים--מִפְּנֵי פַּחַד יְהוָה, וּמֵהֲדַר גְּאוֹנוֹ, בְּקוּמוֹ, לַעֲרֹץ הָאָרֶץ.	21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the crevices of the crags, from before the terror of the LORD, and from the glory of His majesty, when he ariseth to shake mightily the earth.
2.22 כב  חִדְלוּ לָכֶם מִן-הָאָדָם, אֲשֶׁר נְשָׁמָה בְּאַפּוֹ:  כִּי-בַמֶּה נֶחְשָׁב, הוּא.  {פ}	22 Cease ye from man, in whose nostrils is a breath; for how little is he to be accounted! {P}
3.1 א  כִּי הִנֵּה הָאָדוֹן יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, מֵסִיר מִירוּשָׁלִַם וּמִיהוּדָה, מַשְׁעֵן, וּמַשְׁעֵנָה:  כֹּל, מִשְׁעַן-לֶחֶם, וְכֹל, מִשְׁעַן-מָיִם.	1 For, behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah stay and staff, every stay of bread, and every stay of water;
3.2 ב  גִּבּוֹר, וְאִישׁ מִלְחָמָה; שׁוֹפֵט וְנָבִיא, וְקֹסֵם וְזָקֵן.	2 The mighty man, and the man of war; the judge, and the prophet, and the diviner, and the elder;
3.3 ג  שַׂר-חֲמִשִּׁים, וּנְשׂוּא פָנִים; וְיוֹעֵץ וַחֲכַם חֲרָשִׁים, וּנְבוֹן לָחַשׁ.	3 The captain of fifty, and the man of rank, and the counsellor, and the cunning charmer, and the skilful enchanter.
3.4 ד  וְנָתַתִּי נְעָרִים, שָׂרֵיהֶם; וְתַעֲלוּלִים, יִמְשְׁלוּ-בָם.	4 And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them.
3.5 ה  וְנִגַּשׂ הָעָם, אִישׁ בְּאִישׁ וְאִישׁ בְּרֵעֵהוּ; יִרְהֲבוּ, הַנַּעַר בַּזָּקֵן, וְהַנִּקְלֶה, בַּנִּכְבָּד.	5 And the people shall oppress one another, every man his fellow, and every man his neighbour; the child shall behave insolently against the aged, and the base against the honourable,
3.6 ו  כִּי-יִתְפֹּשׂ אִישׁ בְּאָחִיו, בֵּית אָבִיו, שִׂמְלָה לְכָה, קָצִין תִּהְיֶה-לָּנוּ; וְהַמַּכְשֵׁלָה הַזֹּאת, תַּחַת יָדֶךָ.	6 For a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father: 'Thou hast a mantle, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand.'
3.7 ז  יִשָּׂא בַיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר, לֹא-אֶהְיֶה חֹבֵשׁ, וּבְבֵיתִי, אֵין לֶחֶם וְאֵין שִׂמְלָה; לֹא תְשִׂימֻנִי, קְצִין עָם.	7 In that day shall he swear, saying: 'I will not be a healer; for in my house is neither bread nor a mantle; ye shall not make me ruler of a people.'
3.8 ח  כִּי כָשְׁלָה יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וִיהוּדָה נָפָל:  כִּי-לְשׁוֹנָם וּמַעַלְלֵיהֶם אֶל-יְהוָה, לַמְרוֹת עֵנֵי כְבוֹדוֹ.	8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen; because their tongue and their doings are against the LORD, to provoke the eyes of His glory.
3.9 ט  הַכָּרַת פְּנֵיהֶם עָנְתָה בָּם, וְחַטָּאתָם כִּסְדֹם הִגִּידוּ לֹא כִחֵדוּ; אוֹי לְנַפְשָׁם, כִּי-גָמְלוּ לָהֶם רָעָה.	9 The show of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have wrought evil unto themselves.
3.10 י  אִמְרוּ צַדִּיק, כִּי-טוֹב:  כִּי-פְרִי מַעַלְלֵיהֶם, יֹאכֵלוּ.	10 Say ye of the righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.
3.11 יא  אוֹי, לְרָשָׁע רָע:  כִּי-גְמוּל יָדָיו, יֵעָשֶׂה לּוֹ.	11 Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him; for the work of his hands shall be done to him.
3.12 יב  עַמִּי נֹגְשָׂיו מְעוֹלֵל, וְנָשִׁים מָשְׁלוּ בוֹ; עַמִּי מְאַשְּׁרֶיךָ מַתְעִים, וְדֶרֶךְ אֹרְחֹתֶיךָ בִּלֵּעוּ.  {פ}	12 As for My people, a babe is their master, and women rule over them. O My people, they that lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. {P}
3.13 יג  נִצָּב לָרִיב, יְהוָה; וְעֹמֵד, לָדִין עַמִּים.	13 The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the peoples.
3.14 יד  יְהוָה בְּמִשְׁפָּט יָבוֹא, עִם-זִקְנֵי עַמּוֹ וְשָׂרָיו; וְאַתֶּם בִּעַרְתֶּם הַכֶּרֶם, גְּזֵלַת הֶעָנִי בְּבָתֵּיכֶם.	14 The LORD will enter into judgment with the elders of His people, and the princes thereof: 'It is ye that have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses;
3.15 טו  מלכם (מַה-לָּכֶם) תְּדַכְּאוּ עַמִּי, וּפְנֵי עֲנִיִּים תִּטְחָנוּ:  נְאֻם-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, צְבָאוֹת.  {ס}	15 What mean ye that ye crush My people, and grind the face of the poor?' saith the Lord, the GOD of hosts. {S}
3.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, יַעַן כִּי גָבְהוּ בְּנוֹת צִיּוֹן, וַתֵּלַכְנָה נטוות (נְטוּיוֹת) גָּרוֹן, וּמְשַׂקְּרוֹת עֵינָיִם; הָלוֹךְ וְטָפֹף תֵּלַכְנָה, וּבְרַגְלֵיהֶם תְּעַכַּסְנָה.	16 Moreover the LORD said: Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet;
3.17 יז  וְשִׂפַּח אֲדֹנָי, קָדְקֹד בְּנוֹת צִיּוֹן; וַיהוָה, פָּתְהֵן יְעָרֶה.  {ס}	17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD will lay bare their secret parts. {S}
3.18 יח  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא יָסִיר אֲדֹנָי, אֵת תִּפְאֶרֶת הָעֲכָסִים וְהַשְּׁבִיסִים--וְהַשַּׂהֲרֹנִים.	18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their anklets, and the fillets, and the crescents;
3.19 יט  הַנְּטִפוֹת וְהַשֵּׁירוֹת, וְהָרְעָלוֹת.	19 the pendants, and the bracelets, and the veils;
3.20 כ  הַפְּאֵרִים וְהַצְּעָדוֹת וְהַקִּשֻּׁרִים, וּבָתֵּי הַנֶּפֶשׁ וְהַלְּחָשִׁים.	20 the headtires, and the armlets, and the sashes, and the corselets, and the amulets;
3.21 כא  הַטַּבָּעוֹת, וְנִזְמֵי הָאָף.	21 the rings, and the nose-jewels;
3.22 כב  הַמַּחֲלָצוֹת, וְהַמַּעֲטָפוֹת, וְהַמִּטְפָּחוֹת, וְהָחֲרִיטִים.	22 the aprons, and the mantelets, and the cloaks, and the girdles;
3.23 כג  וְהַגִּלְיֹנִים, וְהַסְּדִינִים, וְהַצְּנִיפוֹת, וְהָרְדִידִים.	23 and the gauze robes, and the fine linen, and the turbans, and the mantles.
3.24 כד  וְהָיָה תַחַת בֹּשֶׂם מַק יִהְיֶה, וְתַחַת חֲגוֹרָה נִקְפָּה וְתַחַת מַעֲשֶׂה מִקְשֶׁה קָרְחָה, וְתַחַת פְּתִיגִיל, מַחֲגֹרֶת שָׂק:  כִּי-תַחַת, יֹפִי.	24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet spices there shall be rottenness; and instead of a girdle rags; and instead of curled hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; branding instead of beauty.
3.25 כה  מְתַיִךְ, בַּחֶרֶב יִפֹּלוּ; וּגְבוּרָתֵךְ, בַּמִּלְחָמָה.	25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.
3.26 כו  וְאָנוּ וְאָבְלוּ, פְּתָחֶיהָ; וְנִקָּתָה, לָאָרֶץ תֵּשֵׁב.	26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and utterly bereft she shall sit upon the ground.
4.1 א  וְהֶחֱזִיקוּ שֶׁבַע נָשִׁים בְּאִישׁ אֶחָד, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר, לַחְמֵנוּ נֹאכֵל, וְשִׂמְלָתֵנוּ נִלְבָּשׁ:  רַק, יִקָּרֵא שִׁמְךָ עָלֵינוּ--אֱסֹף, חֶרְפָּתֵנוּ.  {ס}	1 And seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying: 'We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name; take thou away our reproach.' {S}
4.2 ב  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִהְיֶה צֶמַח יְהוָה, לִצְבִי, וּלְכָבוֹד; וּפְרִי הָאָרֶץ לְגָאוֹן וּלְתִפְאֶרֶת, לִפְלֵיטַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 In that day shall the growth of the LORD be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the land excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel.
4.3 ג  וְהָיָה הַנִּשְׁאָר בְּצִיּוֹן, וְהַנּוֹתָר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם--קָדוֹשׁ, יֵאָמֶר לוֹ:  כָּל-הַכָּתוּב לַחַיִּים, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	3 And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written unto life in Jerusalem;
4.4 ד  אִם רָחַץ אֲדֹנָי, אֵת צֹאַת בְּנוֹת-צִיּוֹן, וְאֶת-דְּמֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, יָדִיחַ מִקִּרְבָּהּ--בְּרוּחַ מִשְׁפָּט, וּבְרוּחַ בָּעֵר.	4 when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of destruction.
4.5 ה  וּבָרָא יְהוָה עַל כָּל-מְכוֹן הַר-צִיּוֹן וְעַל-מִקְרָאֶהָ, עָנָן יוֹמָם וְעָשָׁן, וְנֹגַהּ אֵשׁ לֶהָבָה, לָיְלָה:  כִּי עַל-כָּל-כָּבוֹד, חֻפָּה.	5 And the LORD will create over the whole habitation of mount Zion, and over her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for over all the glory shall be a canopy.
4.6 ו  וְסֻכָּה תִּהְיֶה לְצֵל-יוֹמָם, מֵחֹרֶב; וּלְמַחְסֶה, וּלְמִסְתּוֹר, מִזֶּרֶם, וּמִמָּטָר.  {פ}	6 And there shall be a pavilion for a shadow in the day-time from the heat, and for a refuge and for a covert from storm and from rain. {P}
5.1 א  אָשִׁירָה נָּא לִידִידִי, שִׁירַת דּוֹדִי לְכַרְמוֹ:  כֶּרֶם הָיָה לִידִידִי, בְּקֶרֶן בֶּן-שָׁמֶן.	1 Let me sing of my well-beloved, a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My well-beloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill;
5.2 ב  וַיְעַזְּקֵהוּ וַיְסַקְּלֵהוּ, וַיִּטָּעֵהוּ שֹׂרֵק, וַיִּבֶן מִגְדָּל בְּתוֹכוֹ, וְגַם-יֶקֶב חָצֵב בּוֹ; וַיְקַו לַעֲשׂוֹת עֲנָבִים, וַיַּעַשׂ בְּאֻשִׁים.	2 And he digged it, and cleared it of stones, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also hewed out a vat therein; and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.
5.3 ג  וְעַתָּה יוֹשֵׁב יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה--שִׁפְטוּ-נָא, בֵּינִי וּבֵין כַּרְמִי.	3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.
5.4 ד  מַה-לַּעֲשׂוֹת עוֹד לְכַרְמִי, וְלֹא עָשִׂיתִי בּוֹ:  מַדּוּעַ קִוֵּיתִי לַעֲשׂוֹת עֲנָבִים, וַיַּעַשׂ בְּאֻשִׁים.	4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?
5.5 ה  וְעַתָּה אוֹדִיעָה-נָּא אֶתְכֶם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה לְכַרְמִי:  הָסֵר מְשׂוּכָּתוֹ וְהָיָה לְבָעֵר, פָּרֹץ גְּדֵרוֹ וְהָיָה לְמִרְמָס.	5 And now come, I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; I will break down the fence thereof, and it shall be trodden down;
5.6 ו  וַאֲשִׁיתֵהוּ בָתָה, לֹא יִזָּמֵר וְלֹא יֵעָדֵר, וְעָלָה שָׁמִיר, וָשָׁיִת; וְעַל הֶעָבִים אֲצַוֶּה, מֵהַמְטִיר עָלָיו מָטָר.	6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned nor hoed, but there shall come up briers and thorns; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.
5.7 ז  כִּי כֶרֶם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה, נְטַע שַׁעֲשׁוּעָיו; וַיְקַו לְמִשְׁפָּט וְהִנֵּה מִשְׂפָּח, לִצְדָקָה וְהִנֵּה צְעָקָה.  {פ}	7 For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah the plant of His delight; and He looked for justice, but behold violence; for righteousness, but behold a cry. {P}
5.8 ח  הוֹי, מַגִּיעֵי בַיִת בְּבַיִת--שָׂדֶה בְשָׂדֶה, יַקְרִיבוּ:  עַד אֶפֶס מָקוֹם, וְהוּשַׁבְתֶּם לְבַדְּכֶם בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ.	8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no room, and ye be made to dwell alone in the midst of the land!
5.9 ט  בְּאָזְנָי, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת:  אִם-לֹא בָּתִּים רַבִּים, לְשַׁמָּה יִהְיוּ--גְּדֹלִים וְטוֹבִים, מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב.	9 In mine ears said the LORD of hosts: of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.
5.10 י  כִּי, עֲשֶׂרֶת צִמְדֵּי-כֶרֶם, יַעֲשׂוּ, בַּת אֶחָת; וְזֶרַע חֹמֶר, יַעֲשֶׂה אֵיפָה.  {ס}	10 For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah. {S}
5.11 יא  הוֹי מַשְׁכִּימֵי בַבֹּקֶר, שֵׁכָר יִרְדֹּפוּ; מְאַחֲרֵי בַנֶּשֶׁף, יַיִן יַדְלִיקֵם.	11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink; that tarry late into the night, till wine inflame them!
5.12 יב  וְהָיָה כִנּוֹר וָנֶבֶל, תֹּף וְחָלִיל וָיַיִן--מִשְׁתֵּיהֶם; וְאֵת פֹּעַל יְהוָה לֹא יַבִּיטוּ, וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו לֹא רָאוּ.	12 And the harp and the psaltery, the tabret and the pipe, and wine, are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the LORD, neither have they considered the operation of His hands.
5.13 יג  לָכֵן גָּלָה עַמִּי, מִבְּלִי-דָעַת; וּכְבוֹדוֹ מְתֵי רָעָב, וַהֲמוֹנוֹ צִחֵה צָמָא.	13 Therefore My people are gone into captivity, for want of knowledge; and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude are parched with thirst.
5.14 יד  לָכֵן, הִרְחִיבָה שְּׁאוֹל נַפְשָׁהּ, וּפָעֲרָה פִיהָ, לִבְלִי-חֹק; וְיָרַד הֲדָרָהּ וַהֲמוֹנָהּ וּשְׁאוֹנָהּ, וְעָלֵז בָּהּ.	14 Therefore the nether-world hath enlarged her desire, and opened her mouth without measure; and down goeth their glory, and their tumult, and their uproar, and he that rejoiceth among them.
5.15 טו  וַיִּשַּׁח אָדָם, וַיִּשְׁפַּל-אִישׁ; וְעֵינֵי גְבֹהִים, תִּשְׁפַּלְנָה.	15 And man is bowed down, and man is humbled, and the eyes of the lofty are humbled;
5.16 טז  וַיִּגְבַּהּ יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט; וְהָאֵל, הַקָּדוֹשׁ, נִקְדָּשׁ, בִּצְדָקָה.	16 But the LORD of hosts is exalted through justice, and God the Holy One is sanctified through righteousness.
5.17 יז  וְרָעוּ כְבָשִׂים, כְּדָבְרָם; וְחָרְבוֹת מֵחִים, גָּרִים יֹאכֵלוּ.  {ס}	17 Then shall the lambs feed as in their pasture, and the waste places of the fat ones shall wanderers eat. {S}
5.18 יח  הוֹי מֹשְׁכֵי הֶעָוֺן, בְּחַבְלֵי הַשָּׁוְא; וְכַעֲבוֹת הָעֲגָלָה, חַטָּאָה.	18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope,
5.19 יט  הָאֹמְרִים, יְמַהֵר יָחִישָׁה מַעֲשֵׂהוּ--לְמַעַן נִרְאֶה; וְתִקְרַב וְתָבוֹאָה, עֲצַת קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל--וְנֵדָעָה.  {פ}	19 That say: 'Let Him make speed, let Him hasten His work, that we may see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!' {P}
5.20 כ  הוֹי הָאֹמְרִים לָרַע טוֹב, וְלַטּוֹב רָע:  שָׂמִים חֹשֶׁךְ לְאוֹר וְאוֹר לְחֹשֶׁךְ, שָׂמִים מַר לְמָתוֹק וּמָתוֹק לְמָר.  {ס}	20 Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that change darkness into light, and light into darkness; that change bitter into sweet, and sweet into bitter! {S}
5.21 כא  הוֹי, חֲכָמִים בְּעֵינֵיהֶם; וְנֶגֶד פְּנֵיהֶם, נְבֹנִים.  {ס}	21 Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight! {S}
5.22 כב  הוֹי, גִּבּוֹרִים לִשְׁתּוֹת יָיִן; וְאַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל, לִמְסֹךְ שֵׁכָר.	22 Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink;
5.23 כג  מַצְדִּיקֵי רָשָׁע, עֵקֶב שֹׁחַד; וְצִדְקַת צַדִּיקִים, יָסִירוּ מִמֶּנּוּ.  {פ}	23 That justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! {P}
5.24 כד  לָכֵן כֶּאֱכֹל קַשׁ לְשׁוֹן אֵשׁ, וַחֲשַׁשׁ לֶהָבָה יִרְפֶּה, שָׁרְשָׁם כַּמָּק יִהְיֶה, וּפִרְחָם כָּאָבָק יַעֲלֶה:  כִּי מָאֲסוּ, אֵת תּוֹרַת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וְאֵת אִמְרַת קְדוֹשׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, נִאֵצוּ.	24 Therefore as the tongue of fire devoureth the stubble, and as the chaff is consumed in the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have rejected the law of the LORD of hosts, and contemned the word of the Holy One of Israel.
5.25 כה  עַל-כֵּן חָרָה אַף-יְהוָה בְּעַמּוֹ וַיֵּט יָדוֹ עָלָיו וַיַּכֵּהוּ, וַיִּרְגְּזוּ הֶהָרִים, וַתְּהִי נִבְלָתָם כַּסּוּחָה, בְּקֶרֶב חוּצוֹת; בְּכָל-זֹאת לֹא-שָׁב אַפּוֹ, וְעוֹד יָדוֹ נְטוּיָה.	25 Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against His people, and He hath stretched forth His hand against them, and hath smitten them, and the hills did tremble, and their carcasses were as refuse in the midst of the streets. For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still.
5.26 כו  וְנָשָׂא-נֵס לַגּוֹיִם מֵרָחוֹק, וְשָׁרַק לוֹ מִקְצֵה הָאָרֶץ; וְהִנֵּה מְהֵרָה, קַל יָבוֹא.	26 And He will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth; and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly;
5.27 כז  אֵין-עָיֵף וְאֵין-כּוֹשֵׁל בּוֹ, לֹא יָנוּם וְלֹא יִישָׁן; וְלֹא נִפְתַּח אֵזוֹר חֲלָצָיו, וְלֹא נִתַּק שְׂרוֹךְ נְעָלָיו.	27 None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken;
5.28 כח  אֲשֶׁר חִצָּיו שְׁנוּנִים, וְכָל-קַשְּׁתֹתָיו דְּרֻכוֹת; פַּרְסוֹת סוּסָיו כַּצַּר נֶחְשָׁבוּ, וְגַלְגִּלָּיו כַּסּוּפָה.	28 Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent; their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind;
5.29 כט  שְׁאָגָה לוֹ, כַּלָּבִיא; ושאג (יִשְׁאַג) כַּכְּפִירִים וְיִנְהֹם וְיֹאחֵז טֶרֶף, וְיַפְלִיט וְאֵין מַצִּיל.	29 Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions, yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and carry it away safe, and there shall be none to deliver.
5.30 ל  וְיִנְהֹם עָלָיו בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כְּנַהֲמַת-יָם; וְנִבַּט לָאָרֶץ, וְהִנֵּה-חֹשֶׁךְ, צַר וָאוֹר, חָשַׁךְ בַּעֲרִיפֶיהָ.  {פ}	30 And they shall roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea; and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and distress, and the light is darkened in the skies thereof. {P}
6.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת-מוֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ עֻזִּיָּהוּ, וָאֶרְאֶה אֶת-אֲדֹנָי יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא רָם וְנִשָּׂא; וְשׁוּלָיו, מְלֵאִים אֶת-הַהֵיכָל.	1 In the year that king Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, and His train filled the temple.
6.2 ב  שְׂרָפִים עֹמְדִים מִמַּעַל לוֹ, שֵׁשׁ כְּנָפַיִם שֵׁשׁ כְּנָפַיִם לְאֶחָד:  בִּשְׁתַּיִם יְכַסֶּה פָנָיו, וּבִשְׁתַּיִם יְכַסֶּה רַגְלָיו--וּבִשְׁתַּיִם יְעוֹפֵף.	2 Above Him stood the seraphim; each one had six wings: with twain he covered his face and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.
6.3 ג  וְקָרָא זֶה אֶל-זֶה וְאָמַר, קָדוֹשׁ קָדוֹשׁ קָדוֹשׁ יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת; מְלֹא כָל-הָאָרֶץ, כְּבוֹדוֹ.	3 And one called unto another, and said: Holy, holy, holy, is the LORD of hosts; the whole earth is full of His glory.
6.4 ד  וַיָּנֻעוּ אַמּוֹת הַסִּפִּים, מִקּוֹל הַקּוֹרֵא; וְהַבַּיִת, יִמָּלֵא עָשָׁן.	4 And the posts of the door were moved at the voice of them that called, and the house was filled with smoke.
6.5 ה  וָאֹמַר אוֹי-לִי כִי-נִדְמֵיתִי, כִּי אִישׁ טְמֵא-שְׂפָתַיִם אָנֹכִי, וּבְתוֹךְ עַם-טְמֵא שְׂפָתַיִם, אָנֹכִי יוֹשֵׁב:  כִּי, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--רָאוּ עֵינָי.	5 Then said I: Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts.
6.6 ו  וַיָּעָף אֵלַי, אֶחָד מִן-הַשְּׂרָפִים, וּבְיָדוֹ, רִצְפָּה; בְּמֶלְקַחַיִם--לָקַח, מֵעַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	6 Then flew unto me one of the seraphim, with a glowing stone in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar;
6.7 ז  וַיַּגַּע עַל-פִּי--וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה נָגַע זֶה עַל-שְׂפָתֶיךָ; וְסָר עֲוֺנֶךָ, וְחַטָּאתְךָ תְּכֻפָּר.	7 and he touched my mouth with it, and said: Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin expiated.
6.8 ח  וָאֶשְׁמַע אֶת-קוֹל אֲדֹנָי, אֹמֵר, אֶת-מִי אֶשְׁלַח, וּמִי יֵלֶךְ-לָנוּ; וָאֹמַר, הִנְנִי שְׁלָחֵנִי.	8 And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then I said: 'Here am I; send me.'
6.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר, לֵךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ לָעָם הַזֶּה:  שִׁמְעוּ שָׁמוֹעַ וְאַל-תָּבִינוּ, וּרְאוּ רָאוֹ וְאַל-תֵּדָעוּ.	9 And He said: 'Go, and tell this people: hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.
6.10 י  הַשְׁמֵן לֵב-הָעָם הַזֶּה, וְאָזְנָיו הַכְבֵּד וְעֵינָיו הָשַׁע:  פֶּן-יִרְאֶה בְעֵינָיו וּבְאָזְנָיו יִשְׁמָע, וּלְבָבוֹ יָבִין וָשָׁב--וְרָפָא לוֹ.	10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they, seeing with their eyes, and hearing with their ears, and understanding with their heart, return, and be healed.'
6.11 יא  וָאֹמַר, עַד-מָתַי אֲדֹנָי; וַיֹּאמֶר עַד אֲשֶׁר אִם-שָׁאוּ עָרִים מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב, וּבָתִּים מֵאֵין אָדָם, וְהָאֲדָמָה, תִּשָּׁאֶה שְׁמָמָה.	11 Then said I: 'Lord, how long?' And He answered: 'Until cities be waste without inhabitant, and houses without man, and the land become utterly waste,
6.12 יב  וְרִחַק יְהוָה, אֶת-הָאָדָם; וְרַבָּה הָעֲזוּבָה, בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ.	12 And the LORD have removed men far away, and the forsaken places be many in the midst of the land.
6.13 יג  וְעוֹד בָּהּ עֲשִׂרִיָּה, וְשָׁבָה וְהָיְתָה לְבָעֵר:  כָּאֵלָה וְכָאַלּוֹן, אֲשֶׁר בְּשַׁלֶּכֶת מַצֶּבֶת בָּם--זֶרַע קֹדֶשׁ, מַצַּבְתָּהּ.  {פ}	13 And if there be yet a tenth in it, it shall again be eaten up; as a terebinth, and as an oak, whose stock remaineth, when they cast their leaves, so the holy seed shall be the stock thereof.' {P}
7.1 א  וַיְהִי בִּימֵי אָחָז בֶּן-יוֹתָם בֶּן-עֻזִּיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, עָלָה רְצִין מֶלֶךְ-אֲרָם וּפֶקַח בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לַמִּלְחָמָה, עָלֶיהָ; וְלֹא יָכֹל, לְהִלָּחֵם עָלֶיהָ.	1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Aram, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it; but could not prevail against it.
7.2 ב  וַיֻּגַּד, לְבֵית דָּוִד לֵאמֹר, נָחָה אֲרָם, עַל-אֶפְרָיִם; וַיָּנַע לְבָבוֹ וּלְבַב עַמּוֹ, כְּנוֹעַ עֲצֵי-יַעַר מִפְּנֵי-רוּחַ.  {ס}	2 And it was told the house of David, saying: 'Aram is confederate with Ephraim.' And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the forest are moved with the wind. {S}
7.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, צֵא-נָא לִקְרַאת אָחָז, אַתָּה וּשְׁאָר יָשׁוּב בְּנֶךָ:  אֶל-קְצֵה, תְּעָלַת הַבְּרֵכָה הָעֶלְיוֹנָה--אֶל-מְסִלַּת, שְׂדֵה כוֹבֵס.	3 Then said the LORD unto Isaiah: 'Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, in the highway of the fullers' field;
7.4 ד  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו הִשָּׁמֵר וְהַשְׁקֵט אַל-תִּירָא, וּלְבָבְךָ אַל-יֵרַךְ, מִשְּׁנֵי זַנְבוֹת הָאוּדִים הָעֲשֵׁנִים, הָאֵלֶּה--בָּחֳרִי-אַף רְצִין וַאֲרָם, וּבֶן-רְמַלְיָהוּ.	4 and say unto him: Keep calm, and be quiet; fear not, neither let thy heart be faint, because of these two tails of smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin and Aram, and of the son of Remaliah.
7.5 ה  יַעַן, כִּי-יָעַץ עָלֶיךָ אֲרָם--רָעָה:  אֶפְרַיִם וּבֶן-רְמַלְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	5 Because Aram hath counselled evil against thee, Ephraim also, and the son of Remaliah, saying:
7.6 ו  נַעֲלֶה בִיהוּדָה וּנְקִיצֶנָּה, וְנַבְקִעֶנָּה אֵלֵינוּ; וְנַמְלִיךְ מֶלֶךְ בְּתוֹכָהּ, אֵת בֶּן-טָבְאַל.  {פ}	6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set up a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeel; {P}
7.7 ז  כֹּה אָמַר, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה:  לֹא תָקוּם, וְלֹא תִהְיֶה.	7 thus saith the Lord GOD: It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.
7.8 ח  כִּי רֹאשׁ אֲרָם דַּמֶּשֶׂק, וְרֹאשׁ דַּמֶּשֶׂק רְצִין; וּבְעוֹד, שִׁשִּׁים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה, יֵחַת אֶפְרַיִם, מֵעָם.	8 For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people;
7.9 ט  וְרֹאשׁ אֶפְרַיִם שֹׁמְרוֹן, וְרֹאשׁ שֹׁמְרוֹן בֶּן-רְמַלְיָהוּ; אִם לֹא תַאֲמִינוּ, כִּי לֹא תֵאָמֵנוּ.  {פ}	9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not have faith, surely ye shall not be established.' {P}
7.10 י  וַיּוֹסֶף יְהוָה, דַּבֵּר אֶל-אָחָז לֵאמֹר.	10 And the LORD spoke again unto Ahaz, saying:
7.11 יא  שְׁאַל-לְךָ אוֹת, מֵעִם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ; הַעְמֵק שְׁאָלָה, אוֹ הַגְבֵּהַּ לְמָעְלָה.	11 'Ask thee a sign of the LORD thy God: ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.'
7.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר, אָחָז:  לֹא-אֶשְׁאַל וְלֹא-אֲנַסֶּה, אֶת-יְהוָה.	12 But Ahaz said: 'I will not ask, neither will I try the LORD.'
7.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁמְעוּ-נָא בֵּית דָּוִד:  הַמְעַט מִכֶּם הַלְאוֹת אֲנָשִׁים, כִּי תַלְאוּ גַּם אֶת-אֱלֹהָי.	13 And he said: 'Hear ye now, O house of David: Is it a small thing for you to weary men, that ye will weary my God also?
7.14 יד  לָכֵן יִתֵּן אֲדֹנָי הוּא, לָכֶם--אוֹת:  הִנֵּה הָעַלְמָה, הָרָה וְיֹלֶדֶת בֵּן, וְקָרָאת שְׁמוֹ, עִמָּנוּ אֵל.	14 Therefore the Lord Himself shall give you a sign: behold, the young woman shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.
7.15 טו  חֶמְאָה וּדְבַשׁ, יֹאכֵל--לְדַעְתּוֹ מָאוֹס בָּרָע, וּבָחוֹר בַּטּוֹב.	15 Curd and honey shall he eat, when he knoweth to refuse the evil, and choose the good.
7.16 טז  כִּי בְּטֶרֶם יֵדַע הַנַּעַר, מָאֹס בָּרָע--וּבָחֹר בַּטּוֹב:  תֵּעָזֵב הָאֲדָמָה אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה קָץ, מִפְּנֵי שְׁנֵי מְלָכֶיהָ.	16 Yea, before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land whose two kings thou hast a horror of shall be forsaken.
7.17 יז  יָבִיא יְהוָה עָלֶיךָ, וְעַל-עַמְּךָ וְעַל-בֵּית אָבִיךָ, יָמִים אֲשֶׁר לֹא-בָאוּ, לְמִיּוֹם סוּר-אֶפְרַיִם מֵעַל יְהוּדָה:  אֵת, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.  {פ}	17 The LORD shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.' {P}
7.18 יח  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִשְׁרֹק יְהוָה לַזְּבוּב, אֲשֶׁר בִּקְצֵה, יְאֹרֵי מִצְרָיִם; וְלַדְּבוֹרָה--אֲשֶׁר, בְּאֶרֶץ אַשּׁוּר.	18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.
7.19 יט  וּבָאוּ וְנָחוּ כֻלָּם בְּנַחֲלֵי הַבַּתּוֹת, וּבִנְקִיקֵי הַסְּלָעִים; וּבְכֹל, הַנַּעֲצוּצִים, וּבְכֹל, הַנַּהֲלֹלִים.	19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the rugged valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all brambles.
7.20 כ  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא יְגַלַּח אֲדֹנָי בְּתַעַר הַשְּׂכִירָה בְּעֶבְרֵי נָהָר, בְּמֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, אֶת-הָרֹאשׁ, וְשַׂעַר הָרַגְלָיִם; וְגַם אֶת-הַזָּקָן, תִּסְפֶּה.  {פ}	20 In that day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired in the parts beyond the River, even with the king of Assyria, the head and the hair of the feet; and it shall also sweep away the beard. {P}
7.21 כא  וְהָיָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; יְחַיֶּה-אִישׁ עֶגְלַת בָּקָר, וּשְׁתֵּי-צֹאן.	21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall rear a young cow, and two sheep;
7.22 כב  וְהָיָה, מֵרֹב עֲשׂוֹת חָלָב--יֹאכַל חֶמְאָה:  כִּי-חֶמְאָה וּדְבַשׁ יֹאכֵל, כָּל-הַנּוֹתָר בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}	22 and it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall give, he shall eat curd; for curd and honey shall every one eat that is left in the midst of the land. {S}
7.23 כג  וְהָיָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא--יִהְיֶה כָל-מָקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה-שָּׁם אֶלֶף גֶּפֶן, בְּאֶלֶף כָּסֶף:  לַשָּׁמִיר וְלַשַּׁיִת, יִהְיֶה.	23 And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, shall even be for briers and thorns.
7.24 כד  בַּחִצִּים וּבַקֶּשֶׁת, יָבוֹא שָׁמָּה:  כִּי-שָׁמִיר וָשַׁיִת, תִּהְיֶה כָל-הָאָרֶץ.	24 With arrows and with bow shall one come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns.
7.25 כה  וְכֹל הֶהָרִים, אֲשֶׁר בַּמַּעְדֵּר יֵעָדֵרוּן--לֹא-תָבוֹא שָׁמָּה, יִרְאַת שָׁמִיר וָשָׁיִת; וְהָיָה לְמִשְׁלַח שׁוֹר, וּלְמִרְמַס שֶׂה.  {פ}	25 And all the hills that were digged with the mattock, thou shalt not come thither for fear of briers and thorns, but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of sheep. {P}
8.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, קַח-לְךָ גִּלָּיוֹן גָּדוֹל; וּכְתֹב עָלָיו בְּחֶרֶט אֱנוֹשׁ, לְמַהֵר שָׁלָל חָשׁ בַּז.	1 And the LORD said unto me: 'Take thee a great tablet, and write upon it in common script: The spoil speedeth, the prey hasteth;
8.2 ב  וְאָעִידָה לִּי, עֵדִים נֶאֱמָנִים--אֵת אוּרִיָּה הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶת-זְכַרְיָהוּ בֶּן יְבֶרֶכְיָהוּ.	2 and I will take unto Me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.'
8.3 ג  וָאֶקְרַב, אֶל-הַנְּבִיאָה, וַתַּהַר, וַתֵּלֶד בֵּן;  {ס}  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלַי, קְרָא שְׁמוֹ, מַהֵר שָׁלָל חָשׁ בַּז.	3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bore a son. {S} Then said the LORD unto me: 'Call his name Maher-shalal-hashbaz.
8.4 ד  כִּי, בְּטֶרֶם יֵדַע הַנַּעַר, קְרֹא, אָבִי וְאִמִּי--יִשָּׂא אֶת-חֵיל דַּמֶּשֶׂק, וְאֵת שְׁלַל שֹׁמְרוֹן, לִפְנֵי, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.  {ס}	4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry: My father, and: My mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be carried away before the king of Assyria.' {S}
8.5 ה  וַיֹּסֶף יְהוָה, דַּבֵּר אֵלַי עוֹד לֵאמֹר.	5 And the LORD spoke unto me yet again, saying:
8.6 ו  יַעַן, כִּי מָאַס הָעָם הַזֶּה, אֵת מֵי הַשִּׁלֹחַ, הַהֹלְכִים לְאַט; וּמְשׂוֹשׂ אֶת-רְצִין, וּבֶן-רְמַלְיָהוּ.	6 Forasmuch as this people hath refused the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoiceth with Rezin and Remaliah's son;
8.7 ז  וְלָכֵן הִנֵּה אֲדֹנָי מַעֲלֶה עֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-מֵי הַנָּהָר, הָעֲצוּמִים וְהָרַבִּים--אֶת-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וְאֶת-כָּל-כְּבוֹדוֹ; וְעָלָה, עַל-כָּל-אֲפִיקָיו, וְהָלַךְ, עַל-כָּל-גְּדוֹתָיו.	7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the River, mighty and many, even the king of Assyria and all his glory; and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks;
8.8 ח  וְחָלַף בִּיהוּדָה שָׁטַף וְעָבַר, עַד-צַוָּאר יַגִּיעַ; וְהָיָה מֻטּוֹת כְּנָפָיו, מְלֹא רֹחַב-אַרְצְךָ עִמָּנוּ אֵל.  {ס}	8 And he shall sweep through Judah overflowing as he passeth through he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel. {S}
8.9 ט  רֹעוּ עַמִּים, וָחֹתּוּ, וְהַאֲזִינוּ, כֹּל מֶרְחַקֵּי-אָרֶץ; הִתְאַזְּרוּ וָחֹתּוּ, הִתְאַזְּרוּ וָחֹתּוּ.	9 Make an uproar, O ye peoples, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.
8.10 י  עֻצוּ עֵצָה, וְתֻפָר; דַּבְּרוּ דָבָר וְלֹא יָקוּם, כִּי עִמָּנוּ אֵל.  {ס}	10 Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand; for God is with us. {S}
8.11 יא  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה אֵלַי, כְּחֶזְקַת הַיָּד; וְיִסְּרֵנִי, מִלֶּכֶת בְּדֶרֶךְ הָעָם-הַזֶּה לֵאמֹר.	11 For the LORD spoke thus to me with a strong hand, admonishing me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying:
8.12 יב  לֹא-תֹאמְרוּן קֶשֶׁר, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יֹאמַר הָעָם הַזֶּה קָשֶׁר; וְאֶת-מוֹרָאוֹ לֹא-תִירְאוּ, וְלֹא תַעֲרִיצוּ.	12 'Say ye not: A conspiracy, concerning all whereof this people do say: A conspiracy; neither fear ye their fear, nor account it dreadful.
8.13 יג  אֶת-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֹתוֹ תַקְדִּישׁוּ; וְהוּא מוֹרַאֲכֶם, וְהוּא מַעֲרִצְכֶם.	13 The LORD of hosts, Him shall ye sanctify; and let Him be your fear, and let Him be your dread.
8.14 יד  וְהָיָה, לְמִקְדָּשׁ; וּלְאֶבֶן נֶגֶף וּלְצוּר מִכְשׁוֹל לִשְׁנֵי בָתֵּי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְפַח וּלְמוֹקֵשׁ--לְיוֹשֵׁב, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	14 And He shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
8.15 טו  וְכָשְׁלוּ בָם, רַבִּים; וְנָפְלוּ וְנִשְׁבָּרוּ, וְנוֹקְשׁוּ וְנִלְכָּדוּ.  {פ}	15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.' {P}
8.16 טז  צוֹר, תְּעוּדָה; חֲתוֹם תּוֹרָה, בְּלִמֻּדָי.	16 'Bind up the testimony, seal the instruction among My disciples.'
8.17 יז  וְחִכִּיתִי, לַיהוָה, הַמַּסְתִּיר פָּנָיו, מִבֵּית יַעֲקֹב; וְקִוֵּיתִי-לוֹ.	17 And I will wait for the LORD, that hideth His face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for Him.
8.18 יח  הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי, וְהַיְלָדִים אֲשֶׁר נָתַן-לִי יְהוָה, לְאֹתוֹת וּלְמוֹפְתִים, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--מֵעִם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הַשֹּׁכֵן בְּהַר צִיּוֹן.  {ס}	18 Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given me shall be for signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion. {S}
8.19 יט  וְכִי-יֹאמְרוּ אֲלֵיכֶם, דִּרְשׁוּ אֶל-הָאֹבוֹת וְאֶל-הַיִּדְּעֹנִים, הַמְצַפְצְפִים, וְהַמַּהְגִּים:  הֲלוֹא-עַם אֶל-אֱלֹהָיו יִדְרֹשׁ, בְּעַד הַחַיִּים אֶל-הַמֵּתִים.	19 And when they shall say unto you: 'Seek unto the ghosts and the familiar spirits, that chirp and that mutter; should not a people seek unto their God? on behalf of the living unto the dead
8.20 כ  לְתוֹרָה, וְלִתְעוּדָה; אִם-לֹא יֹאמְרוּ כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לוֹ שָׁחַר.	20 for instruction and for testimony?'--Surely they will speak according to this word, wherein there is no light.--
8.21 כא  וְעָבַר בָּהּ, נִקְשֶׁה וְרָעֵב; וְהָיָה כִי-יִרְעַב וְהִתְקַצַּף, וְקִלֵּל בְּמַלְכּוֹ וּבֵאלֹהָיו--וּפָנָה לְמָעְלָה.	21 And they shall pass this way that are sore bestead and hungry; and it shall come to pass that, when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse by their king and by their God, and, whether they turn their faces upward,
8.22 כב  וְאֶל-אֶרֶץ, יַבִּיט; וְהִנֵּה צָרָה וַחֲשֵׁכָה מְעוּף צוּקָה, וַאֲפֵלָה מְנֻדָּח.	22 or look unto the earth, behold distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish, and outspread thick darkness.
9.23 כג  כִּי לֹא מוּעָף, לַאֲשֶׁר מוּצָק לָהּ, כָּעֵת הָרִאשׁוֹן הֵקַל אַרְצָה זְבֻלוּן וְאַרְצָה נַפְתָּלִי, וְהָאַחֲרוֹן הִכְבִּיד--דֶּרֶךְ הַיָּם עֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן, גְּלִיל הַגּוֹיִם.	23 For is there no gloom to her that was stedfast? Now the former hath lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but the latter hath dealt a more grievous blow by the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, in the district of the nations.
9.1 א  הָעָם הַהֹלְכִים בַּחֹשֶׁךְ, רָאוּ אוֹר גָּדוֹל:  יֹשְׁבֵי בְּאֶרֶץ צַלְמָוֶת, אוֹר נָגַהּ עֲלֵיהֶם.	1 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined.
9.2 ב  הִרְבִּיתָ הַגּוֹי, לא (לוֹ) הִגְדַּלְתָּ הַשִּׂמְחָה; שָׂמְחוּ לְפָנֶיךָ כְּשִׂמְחַת בַּקָּצִיר, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָגִילוּ בְּחַלְּקָם שָׁלָל.	2 Thou hast multiplied the nation, Thou hast increased their joy; they joy before Thee according to the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
9.3 ג  כִּי אֶת-עֹל סֻבֳּלוֹ, וְאֵת מַטֵּה שִׁכְמוֹ, שֵׁבֶט, הַנֹּגֵשׂ בּוֹ--הַחִתֹּתָ, כְּיוֹם מִדְיָן.	3 For the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, Thou hast broken as in the day of Midian.
9.4 ד  כִּי כָל-סְאוֹן סֹאֵן בְּרַעַשׁ, וְשִׂמְלָה מְגוֹלָלָה בְדָמִים; וְהָיְתָה לִשְׂרֵפָה, מַאֲכֹלֶת אֵשׁ.	4 For every boot stamped with fierceness, and every cloak rolled in blood, shall even be for burning, for fuel of fire.
9.5 ה  כִּי-יֶלֶד יֻלַּד-לָנוּ, בֵּן נִתַּן-לָנוּ, וַתְּהִי הַמִּשְׂרָה, עַל-שִׁכְמוֹ; וַיִּקְרָא שְׁמוֹ פֶּלֶא יוֹעֵץ, אֵל גִּבּוֹר, אֲבִי-עַד, שַׂר-שָׁלוֹם.	5 For a child is born unto us, a son is given unto us; and the government is upon his shoulder; and his name is called Pele-joez-el-gibbor-Abi-ad-sar-shalom;
9.6 ו  לם רבה (לְמַרְבֵּה) הַמִּשְׂרָה וּלְשָׁלוֹם אֵין-קֵץ, עַל-כִּסֵּא דָוִד וְעַל-מַמְלַכְתּוֹ, לְהָכִין אֹתָהּ וּלְסַעֲדָהּ, בְּמִשְׁפָּט וּבִצְדָקָה; מֵעַתָּה, וְעַד-עוֹלָם, קִנְאַת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, תַּעֲשֶׂה-זֹּאת.  {פ}	6 That the government may be increased, and of peace there be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it through justice and through righteousness from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts doth perform this. {P}
9.7 ז  דָּבָר שָׁלַח אֲדֹנָי, בְּיַעֲקֹב; וְנָפַל, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.
9.8 ח  וְיָדְעוּ הָעָם כֻּלּוֹ, אֶפְרַיִם וְיוֹשֵׁב שֹׁמְרוֹן, בְּגַאֲוָה וּבְגֹדֶל לֵבָב, לֵאמֹר.	8 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in pride and in arrogancy of heart:
9.9 ט  לְבֵנִים נָפָלוּ, וְגָזִית נִבְנֶה; שִׁקְמִים גֻּדָּעוּ, וַאֲרָזִים נַחֲלִיף.	9 'The bricks are fallen, but we will build with hewn stones; the sycamores are cut down, but cedars will we put in their place.'
9.10 י  וַיְשַׂגֵּב יְהוָה אֶת-צָרֵי רְצִין, עָלָיו; וְאֶת-אֹיְבָיו, יְסַכְסֵךְ.	10 Therefore the LORD doth set upon high the adversaries of Rezin against him, and spur his enemies;
9.11 יא  אֲרָם מִקֶּדֶם, וּפְלִשְׁתִּים מֵאָחוֹר, וַיֹּאכְלוּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּכָל-פֶּה; בְּכָל-זֹאת לֹא-שָׁב אַפּוֹ, וְעוֹד יָדוֹ נְטוּיָה.	11 The Arameans on the east, and the Philistines on the west; and they devour Israel with open mouth. For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still.
9.12 יב  וְהָעָם לֹא-שָׁב, עַד-הַמַּכֵּהוּ; וְאֶת-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לֹא דָרָשׁוּ.  {ס}	12 Yet the people turneth not unto Him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the LORD of hosts. {S}
9.13 יג  וַיַּכְרֵת יְהוָה מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, רֹאשׁ וְזָנָב כִּפָּה וְאַגְמוֹן--יוֹם אֶחָד.	13 Therefore the LORD doth cut off from Israel head and tail, palm-branch and rush, in one day.
9.14 יד  זָקֵן וּנְשׂוּא-פָנִים, הוּא הָרֹאשׁ; וְנָבִיא מוֹרֶה-שֶּׁקֶר, הוּא הַזָּנָב.	14 The elder and the man of rank, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.
9.15 טו  וַיִּהְיוּ מְאַשְּׁרֵי הָעָם-הַזֶּה, מַתְעִים; וּמְאֻשָּׁרָיו, מְבֻלָּעִים.	15 For they that lead this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed.
9.16 טז  עַל-כֵּן עַל-בַּחוּרָיו לֹא-יִשְׂמַח אֲדֹנָי, וְאֶת-יְתֹמָיו וְאֶת-אַלְמְנוֹתָיו לֹא יְרַחֵם--כִּי כֻלּוֹ חָנֵף וּמֵרַע, וְכָל-פֶּה דֹּבֵר נְבָלָה; בְּכָל-זֹאת לֹא-שָׁב אַפּוֹ, וְעוֹד יָדוֹ נְטוּיָה.	16 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall He have compassion on their fatherless and widows; for every one is ungodly and an evil-doer, and every mouth speaketh wantonness. For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still.
9.17 יז  כִּי-בָעֲרָה כָאֵשׁ רִשְׁעָה, שָׁמִיר וָשַׁיִת תֹּאכֵל; וַתִּצַּת בְּסִבְכֵי הַיַּעַר, וַיִּתְאַבְּכוּ גֵּאוּת עָשָׁן.	17 For wickedness burneth as the fire; it devoureth the briers and thorns; yea, it kindleth in the thickets of the forest, and they roll upward in thick clouds of smoke.
9.18 יח  בְּעֶבְרַת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, נֶעְתַּם אָרֶץ; וַיְהִי הָעָם כְּמַאֲכֹלֶת אֵשׁ, אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו לֹא יַחְמֹלוּ.	18 Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts is the land burnt up; the people also are as the fuel of fire; no man spareth his brother.
9.19 יט  וַיִּגְזֹר עַל-יָמִין וְרָעֵב, וַיֹּאכַל עַל-שְׂמֹאול וְלֹא שָׂבֵעוּ:  אִישׁ בְּשַׂר-זְרֹעוֹ, יֹאכֵלוּ.	19 And one snatcheth on the right hand, and is hungry; and he eateth on the left hand, and is not satisfied; they eat every man the flesh of his own arm:
9.20 כ  מְנַשֶּׁה אֶת-אֶפְרַיִם, וְאֶפְרַיִם אֶת-מְנַשֶּׁה--יַחְדָּו הֵמָּה, עַל-יְהוּדָה; בְּכָל-זֹאת לֹא-שָׁב אַפּוֹ, וְעוֹד יָדוֹ נְטוּיָה.  {ס}	20 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; and they together are against Judah. For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still. {S}
10.1 א  הוֹי הַחֹקְקִים, חִקְקֵי-אָוֶן; וּמְכַתְּבִים עָמָל, כִּתֵּבוּ.	1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and to the writers that write iniquity;
10.2 ב  לְהַטּוֹת מִדִּין, דַּלִּים, וְלִגְזֹל, מִשְׁפַּט עֲנִיֵּי עַמִּי--לִהְיוֹת אַלְמָנוֹת שְׁלָלָם, וְאֶת-יְתוֹמִים יָבֹזּוּ.	2 To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right of the poor of My people, that widows may be their spoil, and that they may make the fatherless their prey!
10.3 ג  וּמַה-תַּעֲשׂוּ לְיוֹם פְּקֻדָּה, וּלְשׁוֹאָה מִמֶּרְחָק תָּבוֹא:  עַל-מִי תָּנוּסוּ לְעֶזְרָה, וְאָנָה תַעַזְבוּ כְּבוֹדְכֶם.	3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the ruin which shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for help? And where will ye leave your glory?
10.4 ד  בִּלְתִּי כָרַע תַּחַת אַסִּיר, וְתַחַת הֲרוּגִים יִפֹּלוּ; בְּכָל-זֹאת לֹא-שָׁב אַפּוֹ, וְעוֹד יָדוֹ נְטוּיָה.  {פ}	4 They can do nought except crouch under the captives, and fall under the slain. For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still. {P}
10.5 ה  הוֹי אַשּׁוּר, שֵׁבֶט אַפִּי; וּמַטֶּה-הוּא בְיָדָם, זַעְמִי.	5 O Asshur, the rod of Mine anger, in whose hand as a staff is Mine indignation!
10.6 ו  בְּגוֹי חָנֵף אֲשַׁלְּחֶנּוּ, וְעַל-עַם עֶבְרָתִי אֲצַוֶּנּוּ--לִשְׁלֹל שָׁלָל וְלָבֹז בַּז, ולשימו (וּלְשׂוּמוֹ) מִרְמָס כְּחֹמֶר חוּצוֹת.	6 I do send him against an ungodly nation, and against the people of My wrath do I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.
10.7 ז  וְהוּא לֹא-כֵן יְדַמֶּה, וּלְבָבוֹ לֹא-כֵן יַחְשֹׁב:  כִּי לְהַשְׁמִיד בִּלְבָבוֹ, וּלְהַכְרִית גּוֹיִם לֹא מְעָט.	7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off nations not a few.
10.8 ח  כִּי, יֹאמַר:  הֲלֹא שָׂרַי יַחְדָּו, מְלָכִים.	8 For he saith: 'Are not my princes all of them kings?
10.9 ט  הֲלֹא כְּכַרְכְּמִישׁ, כַּלְנוֹ:  אִם-לֹא כְאַרְפַּד חֲמָת, אִם-לֹא כְדַמֶּשֶׂק שֹׁמְרוֹן.	9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus?
10.10 י  כַּאֲשֶׁר מָצְאָה יָדִי, לְמַמְלְכֹת הָאֱלִיל; וּפְסִילֵיהֶם, מִירוּשָׁלִַם וּמִשֹּׁמְרוֹן.	10 As my hand hath reached the kingdoms of the idols, whose graven images did exceed them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;
10.11 יא  הֲלֹא, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי לְשֹׁמְרוֹן--וְלֶאֱלִילֶיהָ:  כֵּן אֶעֱשֶׂה לִירוּשָׁלִַם, וְלַעֲצַבֶּיהָ.  {פ}	11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?' {P}
10.12 יב  וְהָיָה, כִּי-יְבַצַּע אֲדֹנָי אֶת-כָּל-מַעֲשֵׂהוּ, בְּהַר צִיּוֹן, וּבִירוּשָׁלִָם--אֶפְקֹד, עַל-פְּרִי-גֹדֶל לְבַב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, וְעַל-תִּפְאֶרֶת, רוּם עֵינָיו.	12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed His whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the arrogant heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his haughty looks.
10.13 יג  כִּי אָמַר, בְּכֹחַ יָדִי עָשִׂיתִי, וּבְחָכְמָתִי, כִּי נְבֻנוֹתִי; וְאָסִיר גְּבוּלֹת עַמִּים, ועתידתיהם (וַעֲתוּדֹתֵיהֶם) שׁוֹשֵׂתִי, וְאוֹרִיד כַּאבִּיר, יוֹשְׁבִים.	13 For he hath said: by the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent; in that I have removed the bounds of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures, and have brought down as one mighty the inhabitants;
10.14 יד  וַתִּמְצָא כַקֵּן יָדִי, לְחֵיל הָעַמִּים, וְכֶאֱסֹף בֵּיצִים עֲזֻבוֹת, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ אֲנִי אָסָפְתִּי; וְלֹא הָיָה נֹדֵד כָּנָף, וּפֹצֶה פֶה וּמְצַפְצֵף.	14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the peoples; and as one gathereth eggs that are forsaken, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or that opened the mouth, or chirped.
10.15 טו  הֲיִתְפָּאֵר, הַגַּרְזֶן, עַל, הַחֹצֵב בּוֹ:  אִם-יִתְגַּדֵּל הַמַּשּׂוֹר, עַל-מְנִיפוֹ, כְּהָנִיף שֵׁבֶט וְאֶת-מְרִימָיו, כְּהָרִים מַטֶּה לֹא-עֵץ.  {פ}	15 Should the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? Should the saw magnify itself against him that moveth it? as if a rod should move them that lift it up, or as if a staff should lift up him that is not wood. {P}
10.16 טז  לָכֵן יְשַׁלַּח הָאָדוֹן יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, בְּמִשְׁמַנָּיו--רָזוֹן; וְתַחַת כְּבֹדוֹ יֵקַד יְקֹד, כִּיקוֹד אֵשׁ.	16 Therefore will the Lord, the LORD of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory there shall be kindled a burning like the burning of fire.
10.17 יז  וְהָיָה אוֹר-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְאֵשׁ, וּקְדוֹשׁוֹ לְלֶהָבָה; וּבָעֲרָה, וְאָכְלָה שִׁיתוֹ וּשְׁמִירוֹ--בְּיוֹם אֶחָד.	17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame; and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day.
10.18 יח  וּכְבוֹד יַעְרוֹ וְכַרְמִלּוֹ, מִנֶּפֶשׁ וְעַד-בָּשָׂר יְכַלֶּה; וְהָיָה, כִּמְסֹס נֹסֵס.	18 And the glory of his forest and of his fruitful field, he will consume both soul and body; and it shall be as when a sick man wasteth away.
10.19 יט  וּשְׁאָר עֵץ יַעְרוֹ, מִסְפָּר יִהְיוּ; וְנַעַר, יִכְתְּבֵם.  {ס}	19 And the remnant of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them down. {S}
10.20 כ  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, לֹא-יוֹסִיף עוֹד שְׁאָר יִשְׂרָאֵל וּפְלֵיטַת בֵּית-יַעֲקֹב, לְהִשָּׁעֵן, עַל-מַכֵּהוּ; וְנִשְׁעַן, עַל-יְהוָה קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל--בֶּאֱמֶת.	20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and they that are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
10.21 כא  שְׁאָר יָשׁוּב, שְׁאָר יַעֲקֹב--אֶל-אֵל, גִּבּוֹר.	21 A remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto God the Mighty.
10.22 כב  כִּי אִם-יִהְיֶה עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּחוֹל הַיָּם--שְׁאָר, יָשׁוּב בּוֹ; כִּלָּיוֹן חָרוּץ, שׁוֹטֵף צְדָקָה.	22 For though thy people, O Israel, be as the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them shall return; an extermination is determined, overflowing with righteousness.
10.23 כג  כִּי כָלָה, וְנֶחֱרָצָה--אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת, עֹשֶׂה בְּקֶרֶב כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	23 For an extermination wholly determined shall the Lord, the GOD of hosts, make in the midst of all the earth. {P}
10.24 כד  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת, אַל-תִּירָא עַמִּי יֹשֵׁב צִיּוֹן, מֵאַשּׁוּר; בַּשֵּׁבֶט יַכֶּכָּה, וּמַטֵּהוּ יִשָּׂא-עָלֶיךָ בְּדֶרֶךְ מִצְרָיִם.	24 Therefore thus saith the Lord, the GOD of hosts: O My people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of Asshur, though he smite thee with the rod, and lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt.
10.25 כה  כִּי-עוֹד, מְעַט מִזְעָר, וְכָלָה זַעַם, וְאַפִּי עַל-תַּבְלִיתָם.	25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall be accomplished, and Mine anger shall be to their destruction.
10.26 כו  וְעוֹרֵר עָלָיו יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שׁוֹט, כְּמַכַּת מִדְיָן, בְּצוּר עוֹרֵב; וּמַטֵּהוּ, עַל-הַיָּם, וּנְשָׂאוֹ, בְּדֶרֶךְ מִצְרָיִם.	26 And the LORD of hosts shall stir up against him a scourge, as in the slaughter of Midian at the Rock of Oreb; and as His rod was over the sea, so shall He lift it up after the manner of Egypt.
10.27 כז  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יָסוּר סֻבֳּלוֹ מֵעַל שִׁכְמֶךָ, וְעֻלּוֹ, מֵעַל צַוָּארֶךָ; וְחֻבַּל עֹל, מִפְּנֵי-שָׁמֶן.	27 And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall depart from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed by reason of fatness.
10.28 כח  בָּא עַל-עַיַּת, עָבַר בְּמִגְרוֹן; לְמִכְמָשׂ, יַפְקִיד כֵּלָיו.	28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed through Migron; at Michmas he layeth up his baggage;
10.29 כט  עָבְרוּ, מַעְבָּרָה, גֶּבַע, מָלוֹן לָנוּ; חָרְדָה, הָרָמָה--גִּבְעַת שָׁאוּל, נָסָה.	29 They are gone over the pass; they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah trembleth; Gibeath-shaul is fled.
10.30 ל  צַהֲלִי קוֹלֵךְ, בַּת-גַּלִּים; הַקְשִׁיבִי לַיְשָׁה, עֲנִיָּה עֲנָתוֹת.	30 Cry thou with a shrill voice, O daughter of Gallim! Hearken, O Laish! O thou poor Anathoth!
10.31 לא  נָדְדָה, מַדְמֵנָה; יֹשְׁבֵי הַגֵּבִים, הֵעִיזוּ.	31 Madmenah is in mad flight; the inhabitants of Gebim flee to cover.
10.32 לב  עוֹד הַיּוֹם, בְּנֹב לַעֲמֹד; יְנֹפֵף יָדוֹ הַר בית- (בַּת-) צִיּוֹן, גִּבְעַת יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	32 This very day shall he halt at Nob, shaking his hand at the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. {P}
10.33 לג  הִנֵּה הָאָדוֹן יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, מְסָעֵף פֻּארָה בְּמַעֲרָצָה; וְרָמֵי הַקּוֹמָה גְּדוּעִים, וְהַגְּבֹהִים יִשְׁפָּלוּ.	33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, shall lop the boughs with terror; and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the lofty shall be laid low.
10.34 לד  וְנִקַּף סִבְכֵי הַיַּעַר, בַּבַּרְזֶל; וְהַלְּבָנוֹן, בְּאַדִּיר יִפּוֹל.  {ס}	34 And He shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one. {S}
11.1 א  וְיָצָא חֹטֶר, מִגֵּזַע יִשָׁי; וְנֵצֶר, מִשָּׁרָשָׁיו יִפְרֶה.	1 And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse, and a twig shall grow forth out of his roots.
11.2 ב  וְנָחָה עָלָיו, רוּחַ יְהוָה--רוּחַ חָכְמָה וּבִינָה, רוּחַ עֵצָה וּגְבוּרָה, רוּחַ דַּעַת, וְיִרְאַת יְהוָה.	2 And the spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD.
11.3 ג  וַהֲרִיחוֹ, בְּיִרְאַת יְהוָה; וְלֹא-לְמַרְאֵה עֵינָיו יִשְׁפּוֹט, וְלֹא-לְמִשְׁמַע אָזְנָיו יוֹכִיחַ.	3 And his delight shall be in the fear of the LORD; and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither decide after the hearing of his ears;
11.4 ד  וְשָׁפַט בְּצֶדֶק דַּלִּים, וְהוֹכִיחַ בְּמִישׁוֹר לְעַנְוֵי-אָרֶץ; וְהִכָּה-אֶרֶץ בְּשֵׁבֶט פִּיו, וּבְרוּחַ שְׂפָתָיו יָמִית רָשָׁע.	4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and decide with equity for the meek of the land; and he shall smite the land with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
11.5 ה  וְהָיָה צֶדֶק, אֵזוֹר מָתְנָיו; וְהָאֱמוּנָה, אֵזוֹר חֲלָצָיו.	5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
11.6 ו  וְגָר זְאֵב עִם-כֶּבֶשׂ, וְנָמֵר עִם-גְּדִי יִרְבָּץ; וְעֵגֶל וּכְפִיר וּמְרִיא יַחְדָּו, וְנַעַר קָטֹן נֹהֵג בָּם.	6 And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.
11.7 ז  וּפָרָה וָדֹב תִּרְעֶינָה, יַחְדָּו יִרְבְּצוּ יַלְדֵיהֶן; וְאַרְיֵה, כַּבָּקָר יֹאכַל-תֶּבֶן.	7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
11.8 ח  וְשִׁעֲשַׁע יוֹנֵק, עַל-חֻר פָּתֶן; וְעַל מְאוּרַת צִפְעוֹנִי, גָּמוּל יָדוֹ הָדָה.	8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the basilisk's den.
11.9 ט  לֹא-יָרֵעוּ וְלֹא-יַשְׁחִיתוּ, בְּכָל-הַר קָדְשִׁי:  כִּי-מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ, דֵּעָה אֶת-יְהוָה, כַּמַּיִם, לַיָּם מְכַסִּים.  {ס}	9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea. {S}
11.10 י  וְהָיָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, שֹׁרֶשׁ יִשַׁי אֲשֶׁר עֹמֵד לְנֵס עַמִּים, אֵלָיו גּוֹיִם יִדְרֹשׁוּ; וְהָיְתָה מְנֻחָתוֹ, כָּבוֹד.  {פ}	10 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the root of Jesse, that standeth for an ensign of the peoples, unto him shall the nations seek; and his resting-place shall be glorious. {P}
11.11 יא  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יוֹסִיף אֲדֹנָי שֵׁנִית יָדוֹ, לִקְנוֹת, אֶת-שְׁאָר עַמּוֹ--אֲשֶׁר יִשָּׁאֵר מֵאַשּׁוּר וּמִמִּצְרַיִם וּמִפַּתְרוֹס וּמִכּוּשׁ, וּמֵעֵילָם וּמִשִּׁנְעָר וּמֵחֲמָת, וּמֵאִיֵּי, הַיָּם.	11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord will set His hand again the second time to recover the remnant of His people, that shall remain from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.
11.12 יב  וְנָשָׂא נֵס לַגּוֹיִם, וְאָסַף נִדְחֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּנְפֻצוֹת יְהוּדָה יְקַבֵּץ, מֵאַרְבַּע כַּנְפוֹת הָאָרֶץ.	12 And He will set up an ensign for the nations, and will assemble the dispersed of Israel, and gather together the scattered of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
11.13 יג  וְסָרָה קִנְאַת אֶפְרַיִם, וְצֹרְרֵי יְהוּדָה יִכָּרֵתוּ:  אֶפְרַיִם לֹא-יְקַנֵּא אֶת-יְהוּדָה, וִיהוּדָה לֹא-יָצֹר אֶת-אֶפְרָיִם.	13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and they that harass Judah shall be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.
11.14 יד  וְעָפוּ בְכָתֵף פְּלִשְׁתִּים יָמָּה, יַחְדָּו יָבֹזּוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי-קֶדֶם; אֱדוֹם וּמוֹאָב מִשְׁלוֹחַ יָדָם, וּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן מִשְׁמַעְתָּם.	14 And they shall fly down upon the shoulder of the Philistines on the west; together shall they spoil the children of the east; they shall put forth their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.
11.15 טו  וְהֶחֱרִים יְהוָה, אֵת לְשׁוֹן יָם-מִצְרַיִם, וְהֵנִיף יָדוֹ עַל-הַנָּהָר, בַּעְיָם רוּחוֹ; וְהִכָּהוּ לְשִׁבְעָה נְחָלִים, וְהִדְרִיךְ בַּנְּעָלִים.	15 And the LORD will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with His scorching wind will He shake His hand over the River, and will smite it into seven streams, and cause men to march over dry-shod.
11.16 טז  וְהָיְתָה מְסִלָּה--לִשְׁאָר עַמּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יִשָּׁאֵר מֵאַשּׁוּר:  כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיְתָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּיוֹם עֲלֹתוֹ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of His people, that shall remain from Assyria, like as there was for Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.
12.1 א  וְאָמַרְתָּ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אוֹדְךָ יְהוָה, כִּי אָנַפְתָּ בִּי; יָשֹׁב אַפְּךָ, וּתְנַחֲמֵנִי.	1 And in that day thou shalt say: 'I will give thanks unto Thee, O LORD; for though Thou was angry with me, Thine anger is turned away, and Thou comfortest me.
12.2 ב  הִנֵּה אֵל יְשׁוּעָתִי אֶבְטַח, וְלֹא אֶפְחָד:  כִּי-עָזִּי וְזִמְרָת יָהּ יְהוָה, וַיְהִי-לִי לִישׁוּעָה.	2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and will not be afraid; for GOD the LORD is my strength and song; and He is become my salvation.'
12.3 ג  וּשְׁאַבְתֶּם-מַיִם, בְּשָׂשׂוֹן, מִמַּעַיְנֵי, הַיְשׁוּעָה.	3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.
12.4 ד  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה קִרְאוּ בִשְׁמוֹ, הוֹדִיעוּ בָעַמִּים, עֲלִילֹתָיו; הַזְכִּירוּ, כִּי נִשְׂגָּב שְׁמוֹ.	4 And in that day shall ye say: 'Give thanks unto the LORD, proclaim His name, declare His doings among the peoples, make mention that His name is exalted.
12.5 ה  זַמְּרוּ יְהוָה, כִּי גֵאוּת עָשָׂה; מידעת (מוּדַעַת) זֹאת, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ.	5 Sing unto the LORD; for He hath done gloriously; this is made known in all the earth.
12.6 ו  צַהֲלִי וָרֹנִּי, יוֹשֶׁבֶת צִיּוֹן:  כִּי-גָדוֹל בְּקִרְבֵּךְ, קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	6 Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.' {S}
13.1 א  מַשָּׂא, בָּבֶל--אֲשֶׁר חָזָה, יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶּן-אָמוֹץ.	1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.
13.2 ב  עַל הַר-נִשְׁפֶּה שְׂאוּ-נֵס, הָרִימוּ קוֹל לָהֶם; הָנִיפוּ יָד, וְיָבֹאוּ פִּתְחֵי נְדִיבִים.	2 Set ye up an ensign upon the high mountain, lift up the voice unto them, wave the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
13.3 ג  אֲנִי צִוֵּיתִי, לִמְקֻדָּשָׁי; גַּם קָרָאתִי גִבּוֹרַי לְאַפִּי, עַלִּיזֵי גַּאֲוָתִי.	3 I have commanded My consecrated ones, yea, I have called My mighty ones for mine anger, even My proudly exulting ones.
13.4 ד  קוֹל הָמוֹן בֶּהָרִים, דְּמוּת עַם-רָב; קוֹל שְׁאוֹן מַמְלְכוֹת גּוֹיִם, נֶאֱסָפִים--יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, מְפַקֵּד צְבָא מִלְחָמָה.	4 Hark, a tumult in the mountains, like as of a great people! Hark, the uproar of the kingdoms of the nations gathered together! The LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.
13.5 ה  בָּאִים מֵאֶרֶץ מֶרְחָק, מִקְצֵה הַשָּׁמָיִם; יְהוָה וּכְלֵי זַעְמוֹ, לְחַבֵּל כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}	5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the LORD, and the weapons of His indignation, to destroy the whole earth. {S}
13.6 ו  הֵילִילוּ, כִּי קָרוֹב יוֹם יְהוָה; כְּשֹׁד, מִשַּׁדַּי יָבוֹא.	6 Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is at hand; as destruction from the Almighty shall it come.
13.7 ז  עַל-כֵּן, כָּל-יָדַיִם תִּרְפֶּינָה; וְכָל-לְבַב אֱנוֹשׁ, יִמָּס.	7 Therefore shall all hands be slack, and every heart of man shall melt.
13.8 ח  וְנִבְהָלוּ--צִירִים וַחֲבָלִים יֹאחֵזוּן, כַּיּוֹלֵדָה יְחִילוּן; אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ יִתְמָהוּ, פְּנֵי לְהָבִים פְּנֵיהֶם.	8 And they shall be affrighted; pangs and throes shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman in travail; they shall look aghast one at another; their faces shall be faces of flame.
13.9 ט  הִנֵּה יוֹם-יְהוָה בָּא, אַכְזָרִי וְעֶבְרָה וַחֲרוֹן אָף--לָשׂוּם הָאָרֶץ לְשַׁמָּה, וְחַטָּאֶיהָ יַשְׁמִיד מִמֶּנָּה.	9 Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel, and full of wrath and fierce anger; to make the earth a desolation, and to destroy the sinners thereof out of it,
13.10 י  כִּי-כוֹכְבֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם וּכְסִילֵיהֶם, לֹא יָהֵלּוּ אוֹרָם; חָשַׁךְ הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ בְּצֵאתוֹ, וְיָרֵחַ לֹא-יַגִּיהַּ אוֹרוֹ.	10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light; the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.
13.11 יא  וּפָקַדְתִּי עַל-תֵּבֵל רָעָה, וְעַל-רְשָׁעִים עֲוֺנָם; וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי גְּאוֹן זֵדִים, וְגַאֲוַת עָרִיצִים אַשְׁפִּיל.	11 And I will visit upon the world their evil, and upon the wicked their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the tyrants.
13.12 יב  אוֹקִיר אֱנוֹשׁ, מִפָּז; וְאָדָם, מִכֶּתֶם אוֹפִיר.	12 I will make man more rare than fine gold, even man than the pure gold of Ophir.
13.13 יג  עַל-כֵּן שָׁמַיִם אַרְגִּיז, וְתִרְעַשׁ הָאָרֶץ מִמְּקוֹמָהּ--בְּעֶבְרַת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וּבְיוֹם חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ.	13 Therefore I will make the heavens to tremble, and the earth shall be shaken out of her place, for the wrath of the LORD of hosts, and for the day of His fierce anger.
13.14 יד  וְהָיָה כִּצְבִי מֻדָּח, וּכְצֹאן וְאֵין מְקַבֵּץ:  אִישׁ אֶל-עַמּוֹ יִפְנוּ, וְאִישׁ אֶל-אַרְצוֹ יָנוּסוּ.	14 And it shall come to pass, that as the chased gazelle, and as sheep that no man gathereth, they shall turn every man to his own people, and shall flee every man to his own land.
13.15 טו  כָּל-הַנִּמְצָא, יִדָּקֵר; וְכָל-הַנִּסְפֶּה, יִפּוֹל בֶּחָרֶב.	15 Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is caught shall fall by the sword.
13.16 טז  וְעֹלְלֵיהֶם יְרֻטְּשׁוּ, לְעֵינֵיהֶם; יִשַּׁסּוּ, בָּתֵּיהֶם, וּנְשֵׁיהֶם, תשגלנה (תִּשָּׁכַבְנָה).	16 Their babes also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.
13.17 יז  הִנְנִי מֵעִיר עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת-מָדָי, אֲשֶׁר-כֶּסֶף לֹא יַחְשֹׁבוּ, וְזָהָב לֹא יַחְפְּצוּ-בוֹ.	17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, who shall not regard silver, and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.
13.18 יח  וּקְשָׁתוֹת, נְעָרִים תְּרַטַּשְׁנָה:  וּפְרִי-בֶטֶן לֹא יְרַחֵמוּ, עַל-בָּנִים לֹא-תָחוּס עֵינָם.	18 And their bows shall dash the young men in pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children.
13.19 יט  וְהָיְתָה בָבֶל צְבִי מַמְלָכוֹת, תִּפְאֶרֶת גְּאוֹן כַּשְׂדִּים, כְּמַהְפֵּכַת אֱלֹהִים, אֶת-סְדֹם וְאֶת-עֲמֹרָה.	19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans' pride, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
13.20 כ  לֹא-תֵשֵׁב לָנֶצַח, וְלֹא תִשְׁכֹּן עַד-דּוֹר וָדוֹר; וְלֹא-יַהֵל שָׁם עֲרָבִי, וְרֹעִים לֹא-יַרְבִּצוּ שָׁם.	20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation; neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.
13.21 כא  וְרָבְצוּ-שָׁם צִיִּים, וּמָלְאוּ בָתֵּיהֶם אֹחִים; וְשָׁכְנוּ שָׁם בְּנוֹת יַעֲנָה, וּשְׂעִירִים יְרַקְּדוּ-שָׁם.	21 But wild-cats shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of ferrets; and ostriches shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.
13.22 כב  וְעָנָה אִיִּים בְּאַלְמְנוֹתָיו, וְתַנִּים בְּהֵיכְלֵי עֹנֶג; וְקָרוֹב לָבוֹא עִתָּהּ, וְיָמֶיהָ לֹא יִמָּשֵׁכוּ.	22 And jackals shall howl in their castles, and wild-dogs in the pleasant palaces; and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.
14.1 א  כִּי יְרַחֵם יְהוָה אֶת-יַעֲקֹב, וּבָחַר עוֹד בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהִנִּיחָם, עַל-אַדְמָתָם; וְנִלְוָה הַגֵּר עֲלֵיהֶם, וְנִסְפְּחוּ עַל-בֵּית יַעֲקֹב.	1 For the LORD will have compassion on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the stranger shall join himself with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.
14.2 ב  וּלְקָחוּם עַמִּים, וֶהֱבִיאוּם אֶל-מְקוֹמָם, וְהִתְנַחֲלוּם בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל עַל אַדְמַת יְהוָה, לַעֲבָדִים וְלִשְׁפָחוֹת; וְהָיוּ שֹׁבִים לְשֹׁבֵיהֶם, וְרָדוּ בְּנֹגְשֵׂיהֶם.  {ס}	2 And the peoples shall take them, and bring them to their place; and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the LORD for servants and for handmaids; and they shall take them captive, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors. {S}
14.3 ג  וְהָיָה, בְּיוֹם הָנִיחַ יְהוָה לְךָ, מֵעָצְבְּךָ, וּמִרָגְזֶךָ--וּמִן-הָעֲבֹדָה הַקָּשָׁה, אֲשֶׁר עֻבַּד-בָּךְ.	3 And it shall come to pass in the day that the LORD shall give thee rest from thy travail, and from thy trouble, and from the hard service wherein thou wast made to serve,
14.4 ד  וְנָשָׂאתָ הַמָּשָׁל הַזֶּה, עַל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--וְאָמָרְתָּ:  אֵיךְ שָׁבַת נֹגֵשׂ, שָׁבְתָה מַדְהֵבָה.	4 that thou shalt take up this parable against the king of Babylon, and say: How hath the oppressor ceased! the exactress of gold ceased!
14.5 ה  שָׁבַר יְהוָה, מַטֵּה רְשָׁעִים--שֵׁבֶט, מֹשְׁלִים.	5 The LORD hath broken the staff of the wicked, the sceptre of the rulers,
14.6 ו  מַכֶּה עַמִּים בְּעֶבְרָה, מַכַּת בִּלְתִּי סָרָה; רֹדֶה בָאַף גּוֹיִם, מֻרְדָּף בְּלִי חָשָׂךְ.	6 That smote the peoples in wrath with an incessant stroke, that ruled the nations in anger, with a persecution that none restrained.
14.7 ז  נָחָה שָׁקְטָה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; פָּצְחוּ, רִנָּה.	7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into singing.
14.8 ח  גַּם-בְּרוֹשִׁים שָׂמְחוּ לְךָ, אַרְזֵי לְבָנוֹן; מֵאָז שָׁכַבְתָּ, לֹא-יַעֲלֶה הַכֹּרֵת עָלֵינוּ.	8 Yea, the cypresses rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon: 'Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.'
14.9 ט  שְׁאוֹל, מִתַּחַת רָגְזָה לְךָ--לִקְרַאת בּוֹאֶךָ; עוֹרֵר לְךָ רְפָאִים, כָּל-עַתּוּדֵי אָרֶץ--הֵקִים מִכִּסְאוֹתָם, כֹּל מַלְכֵי גוֹיִם.	9 The nether-world from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; the shades are stirred up for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; all the kings of the nations are raised up from their thrones.
14.10 י  כֻּלָּם יַעֲנוּ, וְיֹאמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ:  גַּם-אַתָּה חֻלֵּיתָ כָמוֹנוּ, אֵלֵינוּ נִמְשָׁלְתָּ.	10 All they do answer and say unto thee: 'Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us?
14.11 יא  הוּרַד שְׁאוֹל גְּאוֹנֶךָ, הֶמְיַת נְבָלֶיךָ; תַּחְתֶּיךָ יֻצַּע רִמָּה, וּמְכַסֶּיךָ תּוֹלֵעָה.	11 Thy pomp is brought down to the nether-world, and the noise of thy psalteries; the maggot is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.'
14.12 יב  אֵיךְ נָפַלְתָּ מִשָּׁמַיִם, הֵילֵל בֶּן-שָׁחַר; נִגְדַּעְתָּ לָאָרֶץ, חוֹלֵשׁ עַל-גּוֹיִם.	12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O day-star, son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground, that didst cast lots over the nations!
14.13 יג  וְאַתָּה אָמַרְתָּ בִלְבָבְךָ, הַשָּׁמַיִם אֶעֱלֶה--מִמַּעַל לְכוֹכְבֵי-אֵל, אָרִים כִּסְאִי; וְאֵשֵׁב בְּהַר-מוֹעֵד, בְּיַרְכְּתֵי צָפוֹן.	13 And thou saidst in thy heart: 'I will ascend into heaven, above the stars of God will I exalt my throne, and I will sit upon the mount of meeting, in the uttermost parts of the north;
14.14 יד  אֶעֱלֶה, עַל-בָּמֳתֵי עָב; אֶדַּמֶּה, לְעֶלְיוֹן.	14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High.'
14.15 טו  אַךְ אֶל-שְׁאוֹל תּוּרָד, אֶל-יַרְכְּתֵי-בוֹר.	15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to the nether-world, to the uttermost parts of the pit.
14.16 טז  רֹאֶיךָ אֵלֶיךָ יַשְׁגִּיחוּ, אֵלֶיךָ יִתְבּוֹנָנוּ:  הֲזֶה הָאִישׁ מַרְגִּיז הָאָרֶץ, מַרְעִישׁ מַמְלָכוֹת.	16 They that saw thee do narrowly look upon thee, they gaze earnestly at thee: 'Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;
14.17 יז  שָׂם תֵּבֵל כַּמִּדְבָּר, וְעָרָיו הָרָס; אֲסִירָיו, לֹא-פָתַח בָּיְתָה.	17 That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?'
14.18 יח  כָּל-מַלְכֵי גוֹיִם, כֻּלָּם--שָׁכְבוּ בְכָבוֹד, אִישׁ בְּבֵיתוֹ.	18 All the kings of the nations, all of them, sleep in glory, every one in his own house.
14.19 יט  וְאַתָּה הָשְׁלַכְתָּ מִקִּבְרְךָ, כְּנֵצֶר נִתְעָב--לְבֻשׁ הֲרֻגִים, מְטֹעֲנֵי חָרֶב; יוֹרְדֵי אֶל-אַבְנֵי-בוֹר, כְּפֶגֶר מוּבָס.	19 But thou art cast forth away from thy grave like an abhorred offshoot, in the raiment of the slain, that are thrust through with the sword, that go down to the pavement of the pit, as a carcass trodden under foot.
14.20 כ  לֹא-תֵחַד אִתָּם בִּקְבוּרָה, כִּי-אַרְצְךָ שִׁחַתָּ עַמְּךָ הָרָגְתָּ; לֹא-יִקָּרֵא לְעוֹלָם, זֶרַע מְרֵעִים.	20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy people; the seed of evil-doers shall not be named for ever.
14.21 כא  הָכִינוּ לְבָנָיו מַטְבֵּחַ, בַּעֲוֺן אֲבוֹתָם; בַּל-יָקֻמוּ וְיָרְשׁוּ אָרֶץ, וּמָלְאוּ פְנֵי-תֵבֵל עָרִים.	21 Prepare ye slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they rise not up, and possess the earth, and fill the face of the world with cities.
14.22 כב  וְקַמְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת; וְהִכְרַתִּי לְבָבֶל שֵׁם וּשְׁאָר, וְנִין וָנֶכֶד--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	22 And I will rise up against them, saith the LORD of hosts, and cut off from Babylon name and remnant, and offshoot and offspring, saith the LORD.
14.23 כג  וְשַׂמְתִּיהָ לְמוֹרַשׁ קִפֹּד, וְאַגְמֵי-מָיִם; וְטֵאטֵאתִיהָ בְּמַטְאֲטֵא הַשְׁמֵד, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {ס}	23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the LORD of hosts. {S}
14.24 כד  נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לֵאמֹר:  אִם-לֹא כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּמִּיתִי, כֵּן הָיָתָה, וְכַאֲשֶׁר יָעַצְתִּי, הִיא תָקוּם.	24 The LORD of hosts hath sworn, saying: Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand,
14.25 כה  לִשְׁבֹּר אַשּׁוּר בְּאַרְצִי, וְעַל-הָרַי אֲבוּסֶנּוּ; וְסָר מֵעֲלֵיהֶם, עֻלּוֹ, וְסֻבֳּלוֹ, מֵעַל שִׁכְמוֹ יָסוּר.	25 That I will break Asshur in My land, and upon My mountains tread him under foot; then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulder.
14.26 כו  זֹאת הָעֵצָה הַיְּעוּצָה, עַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וְזֹאת הַיָּד הַנְּטוּיָה, עַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם.	26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.
14.27 כז  כִּי-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת יָעָץ, וּמִי יָפֵר; וְיָדוֹ הַנְּטוּיָה, וּמִי יְשִׁיבֶנָּה.  {פ}	27 For the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? And His hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? {P}
14.28 כח  בִּשְׁנַת-מוֹת, הַמֶּלֶךְ אָחָז, הָיָה, הַמַּשָּׂא הַזֶּה.	28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.
14.29 כט  אַל-תִּשְׂמְחִי פְלֶשֶׁת כֻּלֵּךְ, כִּי נִשְׁבַּר שֵׁבֶט מַכֵּךְ:  כִּי-מִשֹּׁרֶשׁ נָחָשׁ יֵצֵא צֶפַע, וּפִרְיוֹ שָׂרָף מְעוֹפֵף.	29 Rejoice not, O Philistia, all of thee, because the rod that smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a basilisk, and his fruit shall be a flying serpent.
14.30 ל  וְרָעוּ בְּכוֹרֵי דַלִּים, וְאֶבְיוֹנִים לָבֶטַח יִרְבָּצוּ; וְהֵמַתִּי בָרָעָב שָׁרְשֵׁךְ, וּשְׁאֵרִיתֵךְ יַהֲרֹג.	30 And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root with famine, and thy remnant shall be slain.
14.31 לא  הֵילִילִי שַׁעַר זַעֲקִי-עִיר, נָמוֹג פְּלֶשֶׁת כֻּלֵּךְ:  כִּי מִצָּפוֹן עָשָׁן בָּא, וְאֵין בּוֹדֵד בְּמוֹעָדָיו.	31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; melt away, O Philistia, all of thee; for there cometh a smoke out of the north, and there is no straggler in his ranks.
14.32 לב  וּמַה-יַּעֲנֶה, מַלְאֲכֵי-גוֹי:  כִּי יְהוָה יִסַּד צִיּוֹן, וּבָהּ יֶחֱסוּ עֲנִיֵּי עַמּוֹ.  {פ}	32 What then shall one answer the messengers of the nation? That the LORD hath founded Zion, and in her shall the afflicted of His people take refuge. {P}
15.1 א  מַשָּׂא, מוֹאָב:  כִּי בְּלֵיל שֻׁדַּד עָר מוֹאָב, נִדְמָה--כִּי בְּלֵיל שֻׁדַּד קִיר-מוֹאָב, נִדְמָה.	1 The burden of Moab. For in the night that Ar of Moab is laid waste, he is brought to ruin; for in the night that Kir of Moab is laid waste, he is brought to ruin.
15.2 ב  עָלָה הַבַּיִת וְדִיבֹן הַבָּמוֹת, לְבֶכִי:  עַל-נְבוֹ וְעַל מֵידְבָא, מוֹאָב יְיֵלִיל--בְּכָל-רֹאשָׁיו קָרְחָה, כָּל-זָקָן גְּרוּעָה.	2 He is gone up to Baith, and to Dibon, to the high places, to weep; upon Nebo, and upon Medeba, Moab howleth; on all their heads is baldness, every beard is shaven.
15.3 ג  בְּחוּצֹתָיו, חָגְרוּ שָׂק:  עַל גַּגּוֹתֶיהָ וּבִרְחֹבֹתֶיהָ כֻּלֹּה יְיֵלִיל, יֹרֵד בַּבֶּכִי.	3 In their streets they gird themselves with sackcloth; on their housetops, and in their broad places, every one howleth, weeping profusely.
15.4 ד  וַתִּזְעַק חֶשְׁבּוֹן וְאֶלְעָלֵה, עַד-יַהַץ נִשְׁמַע קוֹלָם; עַל-כֵּן, חֲלֻצֵי מוֹאָב יָרִיעוּ--נַפְשׁוֹ, יָרְעָה לּוֹ.	4 And Heshbon crieth out, and Elealeh; their voice is heard even unto Jahaz; therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud; his soul is faint within him.
15.5 ה  לִבִּי, לְמוֹאָב יִזְעָק, בְּרִיחֶהָ, עַד-צֹעַר עֶגְלַת שְׁלִשִׁיָּה:  כִּי מַעֲלֵה הַלּוּחִית, בִּבְכִי יַעֲלֶה-בּוֹ--כִּי דֶּרֶךְ חוֹרֹנַיִם, זַעֲקַת-שֶׁבֶר יְעֹעֵרוּ.	5 My heart crieth out for Moab; her fugitives reach unto Zoar, a heifer of three years old; for by the ascent of Luhith with weeping they go up; for in the way of Horonaim they raise up a cry of destruction.
15.6 ו  כִּי-מֵי נִמְרִים, מְשַׁמּוֹת יִהְיוּ:  כִּי-יָבֵשׁ חָצִיר כָּלָה דֶשֶׁא, יֶרֶק לֹא הָיָה.	6 For the Waters of Nimrim shall be desolate; for the grass is withered away, the herbage faileth, there is no green thing.
15.7 ז  עַל-כֵּן, יִתְרָה עָשָׂה; וּפְקֻדָּתָם--עַל נַחַל הָעֲרָבִים, יִשָּׂאוּם.	7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.
15.8 ח  כִּי-הִקִּיפָה הַזְּעָקָה, אֶת-גְּבוּל מוֹאָב, עַד-אֶגְלַיִם יִלְלָתָהּ, וּבְאֵר אֵילִים יִלְלָתָהּ.	8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim.
15.9 ט  כִּי מֵי דִימוֹן מָלְאוּ דָם, כִּי-אָשִׁית עַל-דִּימוֹן נוֹסָפוֹת--לִפְלֵיטַת מוֹאָב אַרְיֵה, וְלִשְׁאֵרִית אֲדָמָה.	9 For the waters of Dimon are full of blood; for I will bring yet more upon Dimon, a lion upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.
16.1 א  שִׁלְחוּ-כַר מֹשֵׁל-אֶרֶץ, מִסֶּלַע מִדְבָּרָה, אֶל-הַר, בַּת-צִיּוֹן.	1 Send ye the lambs for the ruler of the land from the crags that are toward the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.
16.2 ב  וְהָיָה כְעוֹף-נוֹדֵד, קֵן מְשֻׁלָּח--תִּהְיֶינָה בְּנוֹת מוֹאָב, מַעְבָּרֹת לְאַרְנוֹן.	2 For it shall be that, as wandering birds, as a scattered nest, so shall the daughters of Moab be at the fords of Arnon.
16.3 ג  הביאו (הָבִיאִי) עֵצָה עֲשׂוּ פְלִילָה, שִׁיתִי כַלַּיִל צִלֵּךְ בְּתוֹךְ צָהֳרָיִם; סַתְּרִי, נִדָּחִים--נֹדֵד, אַל-תְּגַלִּי.	3 'Give counsel, execute justice; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; betray not the fugitive.
16.4 ד  יָגוּרוּ בָךְ נִדָּחַי, מוֹאָב הֱוִי-סֵתֶר לָמוֹ מִפְּנֵי שׁוֹדֵד:  כִּי-אָפֵס הַמֵּץ כָּלָה שֹׁד, תַּמּוּ רֹמֵס מִן-הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}	4 Let mine outcasts dwell with thee; as for Moab, be thou a covert to him from the face of the spoiler.' For the extortion is at an end, spoiling ceaseth, they that trampled down are consumed out of the land; {S}
16.5 ה  וְהוּכַן בַּחֶסֶד כִּסֵּא, וְיָשַׁב עָלָיו בֶּאֱמֶת בְּאֹהֶל דָּוִד; שֹׁפֵט וְדֹרֵשׁ מִשְׁפָּט, וּמְהִר צֶדֶק.	5 And a throne is established through mercy, and there sitteth thereon in truth, in the tent of David, one that judgeth, and seeketh justice, and is ready in righteousness.
16.6 ו  שָׁמַעְנוּ גְאוֹן-מוֹאָב, גֵּא מְאֹד:  גַּאֲוָתוֹ וּגְאוֹנוֹ וְעֶבְרָתוֹ, לֹא-כֵן בַּדָּיו.	6 We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud; even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his arrogancy, his ill-founded boastings.
16.7 ז  לָכֵן, יְיֵלִיל מוֹאָב לְמוֹאָב--כֻּלֹּה יְיֵלִיל:  לַאֲשִׁישֵׁי קִיר-חֲרֶשֶׂת תֶּהְגּוּ, אַךְ-נְכָאִים.	7 Therefore shall Moab wail for Moab, every one shall wail; for the sweet cakes of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn, sorely stricken.
16.8 ח  כִּי שַׁדְמוֹת חֶשְׁבּוֹן אֻמְלָל גֶּפֶן שִׂבְמָה, בַּעֲלֵי גוֹיִם הָלְמוּ שְׂרוּקֶּיהָ--עַד-יַעְזֵר נָגָעוּ, תָּעוּ מִדְבָּר; שְׁלֻחוֹתֶיהָ, נִטְּשׁוּ עָבְרוּ יָם.	8 For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah, whose choice plants did overcome the lords of nations; they reached even unto Jazer, they wandered into the wilderness; her branches were spread abroad, they passed over the sea.
16.9 ט  עַל-כֵּן אֶבְכֶּה בִּבְכִי יַעְזֵר, גֶּפֶן שִׂבְמָה, אֲרַיָּוֶךְ דִּמְעָתִי, חֶשְׁבּוֹן וְאֶלְעָלֵה:  כִּי עַל-קֵיצֵךְ וְעַל-קְצִירֵךְ, הֵידָד נָפָל.	9 Therefore I will weep with the weeping of Jazer for the vine of Sibmah; I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh; for upon thy summer fruits and upon thy harvest the battle shout is fallen.
16.10 י  וְנֶאֱסַף שִׂמְחָה וָגִיל מִן-הַכַּרְמֶל, וּבַכְּרָמִים לֹא-יְרֻנָּן לֹא יְרֹעָע; יַיִן, בַּיְקָבִים לֹא-יִדְרֹךְ הַדֹּרֵךְ--הֵידָד הִשְׁבַּתִּי.	10 And gladness and joy are taken away out of the fruitful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting; no treader shall tread out wine in the presses; I have made the vintage shout to cease.
16.11 יא  עַל-כֵּן מֵעַי לְמוֹאָב, כַּכִּנּוֹר יֶהֱמוּ; וְקִרְבִּי, לְקִיר חָרֶשׂ.	11 Wherefore my heart moaneth like a harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-heres.
16.12 יב  וְהָיָה כִי-נִרְאָה כִּי-נִלְאָה מוֹאָב, עַל-הַבָּמָה; וּבָא אֶל-מִקְדָּשׁוֹ לְהִתְפַּלֵּל, וְלֹא יוּכָל.  {ס}	12 And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab hath wearied himself upon the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail. {S}
16.13 יג  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מוֹאָב--מֵאָז.	13 This is the word that the LORD spoke concerning Moab in time past.
16.14 יד  וְעַתָּה, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, בְּשָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים כִּשְׁנֵי שָׂכִיר, וְנִקְלָה כְּבוֹד מוֹאָב בְּכֹל הֶהָמוֹן הָרָב; וּשְׁאָר מְעַט מִזְעָר, לוֹא כַבִּיר.  {פ}	14 But now the LORD hath spoken, saying: 'Within three years, as the years of a hireling, and the glory of Moab shall wax contemptible for all his great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and without strength.' {P}
17.1 א  מַשָּׂא, דַּמָּשֶׂק:  הִנֵּה דַמֶּשֶׂק מוּסָר מֵעִיר, וְהָיְתָה מְעִי מַפָּלָה.	1 The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.
17.2 ב  עֲזֻבוֹת, עָרֵי עֲרֹעֵר; לַעֲדָרִים תִּהְיֶינָה, וְרָבְצוּ וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד.	2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken; they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
17.3 ג  וְנִשְׁבַּת מִבְצָר מֵאֶפְרַיִם, וּמַמְלָכָה מִדַּמֶּשֶׂק וּשְׁאָר אֲרָם; כִּכְבוֹד בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל יִהְיוּ, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {פ}	3 The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus; and the remnant of Aram shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the LORD of hosts. {P}
17.4 ד  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִדַּל כְּבוֹד יַעֲקֹב; וּמִשְׁמַן בְּשָׂרוֹ, יֵרָזֶה.	4 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.
17.5 ה  וְהָיָה, כֶּאֱסֹף קָצִיר קָמָה, וּזְרֹעוֹ, שִׁבֳּלִים יִקְצוֹר; וְהָיָה כִּמְלַקֵּט שִׁבֳּלִים, בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים.	5 And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the standing corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; yea, it shall be as when one gleaneth ears in the valley of Rephaim.
17.6 ו  וְנִשְׁאַר-בּוֹ עוֹלֵלֹת כְּנֹקֶף זַיִת, שְׁנַיִם שְׁלֹשָׁה גַּרְגְּרִים בְּרֹאשׁ אָמִיר; אַרְבָּעָה חֲמִשָּׁה, בִּסְעִפֶיהָ פֹּרִיָּה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 Yet there shall be left therein gleanings, as at the beating of an olive-tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the branches of the fruitful tree, saith the LORD, the God of Israel.
17.7 ז  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִשְׁעֶה הָאָדָם עַל-עֹשֵׂהוּ; וְעֵינָיו, אֶל-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל תִּרְאֶינָה.	7 In that day shall a man regard his Maker, and his eyes shall look to the Holy One of Israel.
17.8 ח  וְלֹא יִשְׁעֶה, אֶל-הַמִּזְבְּחוֹת מַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו; וַאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ אֶצְבְּעֹתָיו לֹא יִרְאֶה, וְהָאֲשֵׁרִים וְהָחַמָּנִים.  {ס}	8 And he shall not regard the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall he look to that which his fingers have made, either the Asherim, or the sun-images. {S}
17.9 ט  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא יִהְיוּ עָרֵי מָעוּזּוֹ, כַּעֲזוּבַת הַחֹרֶשׁ וְהָאָמִיר, אֲשֶׁר עָזְבוּ, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהָיְתָה, שְׁמָמָה.	9 In that day shall his strong cities be as the forsaken places, which were forsaken from before the children of Israel, after the manner of woods and lofty forests; and it shall be a desolation.
17.10 י  כִּי שָׁכַחַתְּ אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעֵךְ, וְצוּר מָעֻזֵּךְ לֹא זָכָרְתְּ; עַל-כֵּן, תִּטְּעִי נִטְעֵי נַעֲמָנִים, וּזְמֹרַת זָר, תִּזְרָעֶנּוּ.	10 For thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and thou hast not been mindful of the Rock of thy stronghold; therefore thou didst plant plants of pleasantness, and didst set it with slips of a stranger;
17.11 יא  בְּיוֹם נִטְעֵךְ תְּשַׂגְשֵׂגִי, וּבַבֹּקֶר זַרְעֵךְ תַּפְרִיחִי; נֵד קָצִיר בְּיוֹם נַחֲלָה, וּכְאֵב אָנוּשׁ.  {ס}	11 In the day of thy planting thou didst make it to grow, and in the morning thou didst make thy seed to blossom--a heap of boughs in the day of grief and of desperate pain. {S}
17.12 יב  הוֹי, הֲמוֹן עַמִּים רַבִּים, כַּהֲמוֹת יַמִּים, יֶהֱמָיוּן; וּשְׁאוֹן לְאֻמִּים, כִּשְׁאוֹן מַיִם כַּבִּירִים יִשָּׁאוּן.	12 Ah, the uproar of many peoples, that roar like the roaring of the seas; and the rushing of nations, that rush like the rushing of mighty waters!
17.13 יג  לְאֻמִּים, כִּשְׁאוֹן מַיִם רַבִּים יִשָּׁאוּן, וְגָעַר בּוֹ, וְנָס מִמֶּרְחָק; וְרֻדַּף, כְּמֹץ הָרִים לִפְנֵי-רוּחַ, וּכְגַלְגַּל, לִפְנֵי סוּפָה.	13 The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters; but He shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like the whirling dust before the storm.
17.14 יד  לְעֵת עֶרֶב וְהִנֵּה בַלָּהָה, בְּטֶרֶם בֹּקֶר אֵינֶנּוּ; זֶה חֵלֶק שׁוֹסֵינוּ, וְגוֹרָל לְבֹזְזֵינוּ.  {פ}	14 At eventide behold terror; and before the morning they are not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us. {P}
18.1 א  הוֹי אֶרֶץ, צִלְצַל כְּנָפָיִם, אֲשֶׁר מֵעֵבֶר, לְנַהֲרֵי-כוּשׁ.	1 Ah, land of the buzzing of wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia;
18.2 ב  הַשֹּׁלֵחַ בַּיָּם צִירִים, וּבִכְלֵי-גֹמֶא עַל-פְּנֵי-מַיִם, לְכוּ מַלְאָכִים קַלִּים אֶל-גּוֹי מְמֻשָּׁךְ וּמוֹרָט, אֶל-עַם נוֹרָא מִן-הוּא וָהָלְאָה--גּוֹי קַו-קָו וּמְבוּסָה, אֲשֶׁר-בָּזְאוּ נְהָרִים אַרְצוֹ.	2 That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of papyrus upon the waters! Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation tall and of glossy skin, to a people terrible from their beginning onward; a nation that is sturdy and treadeth down, whose land the rivers divide!
18.3 ג  כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי תֵבֵל, וְשֹׁכְנֵי אָרֶץ, כִּנְשֹׂא-נֵס הָרִים תִּרְאוּ, וְכִתְקֹעַ שׁוֹפָר תִּשְׁמָעוּ.  {ס}	3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and ye dwellers on the earth, when an ensign is lifted up on the mountains, see ye; and when the horn is blown, hear ye. {S}
18.4 ד  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה אֵלַי, אשקוטה (אֶשְׁקֳטָה) וְאַבִּיטָה בִמְכוֹנִי, כְּחֹם צַח עֲלֵי-אוֹר, כְּעָב טַל בְּחֹם קָצִיר.	4 For thus hath the LORD said unto me: I will hold Me still, and I will look on in My dwelling-place, like clear heat in sunshine, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
18.5 ה  כִּי-לִפְנֵי קָצִיר כְּתָם-פֶּרַח, וּבֹסֶר גֹּמֵל יִהְיֶה נִצָּה; וְכָרַת הַזַּלְזַלִּים בַּמַּזְמֵרוֹת, וְאֶת-הַנְּטִישׁוֹת הֵסִיר הֵתַז.	5 For before the harvest, when the blossom is over, and the bud becometh a ripening grape, He will cut off the sprigs with pruning-hooks, and the shoots will He take away and lop off.
18.6 ו  יֵעָזְבוּ יַחְדָּו לְעֵיט הָרִים, וּלְבֶהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ; וְקָץ עָלָיו הָעַיִט, וְכָל-בֶּהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ עָלָיו תֶּחֱרָף.  {ס}	6 They shall be left together unto the ravenous birds of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth; and the ravenous birds shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. {S}
18.7 ז  בָּעֵת הַהִיא יוּבַל-שַׁי לַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עַם מְמֻשָּׁךְ וּמוֹרָט, וּמֵעַם נוֹרָא, מִן-הוּא וָהָלְאָה; גּוֹי קַו-קָו וּמְבוּסָה, אֲשֶׁר בָּזְאוּ נְהָרִים אַרְצוֹ, אֶל-מְקוֹם שֵׁם-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הַר-צִיּוֹן.  {פ}	7 In that time shall a present be brought unto the LORD of hosts of a people tall and of glossy skin, and from a people terrible from their beginning onward; a nation that is sturdy and treadeth down, whose land the rivers divide, to the place of the name of the LORD of hosts, the mount Zion. {P}
19.1 א  מַשָּׂא, מִצְרָיִם:  הִנֵּה יְהוָה רֹכֵב עַל-עָב קַל, וּבָא מִצְרַיִם, וְנָעוּ אֱלִילֵי מִצְרַיִם מִפָּנָיו, וּלְבַב מִצְרַיִם יִמַּס בְּקִרְבּוֹ.	1 The burden of Egypt. Behold, the LORD rideth upon a swift cloud, and cometh unto Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at His presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt within it.
19.2 ב  וְסִכְסַכְתִּי מִצְרַיִם בְּמִצְרַיִם, וְנִלְחֲמוּ אִישׁ-בְּאָחִיו וְאִישׁ בְּרֵעֵהוּ, עִיר בְּעִיר, מַמְלָכָה בְּמַמְלָכָה.	2 And I will spur Egypt against Egypt; and they shall fight every one against his brother, and everyone against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.
19.3 ג  וְנָבְקָה רוּחַ-מִצְרַיִם בְּקִרְבּוֹ, וַעֲצָתוֹ אֲבַלֵּעַ; וְדָרְשׁוּ אֶל-הָאֱלִילִים וְאֶל-הָאִטִּים, וְאֶל-הָאֹבוֹת וְאֶל-הַיִּדְּעֹנִים.	3 And the spirit of Egypt shall be made empty within it; and I will make void the counsel thereof; and they shall seek unto the idols, and to the whisperers, and to the ghosts, and to the familiar spirits.
19.4 ד  וְסִכַּרְתִּי, אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, בְּיַד, אֲדֹנִים קָשֶׁה; וּמֶלֶךְ עַז יִמְשָׁל-בָּם, נְאֻם הָאָדוֹן יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	4 And I will give over the Egyptians into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts.
19.5 ה  וְנִשְּׁתוּ-מַיִם, מֵהַיָּם; וְנָהָר, יֶחֱרַב וְיָבֵשׁ.	5 And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be drained dry,
19.6 ו  וְהֶאֶזְנִיחוּ נְהָרוֹת, דָּלְלוּ וְחָרְבוּ יְאֹרֵי מָצוֹר; קָנֶה וָסוּף, קָמֵלוּ.	6 And the rivers shall become foul; the streams of Egypt shall be minished and dried up; the reeds and flags shall wither.
19.7 ז  עָרוֹת עַל-יְאוֹר, עַל-פִּי יְאוֹר; וְכֹל מִזְרַע יְאוֹר, יִיבַשׁ נִדַּף וְאֵינֶנּוּ.	7 The mosses by the Nile, by the brink of the Nile, and all that is sown by the Nile, shall become dry, be driven away, and be no more.
19.8 ח  וְאָנוּ, הַדַּיָּגִים, וְאָבְלוּ, כָּל-מַשְׁלִיכֵי בַיְאוֹר חַכָּה; וּפֹרְשֵׂי מִכְמֹרֶת עַל-פְּנֵי-מַיִם, אֻמְלָלוּ.	8 The fishers also shall lament, and all they that cast angle into the Nile shall mourn, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish.
19.9 ט  וּבֹשׁוּ עֹבְדֵי פִשְׁתִּים, שְׂרִיקוֹת; וְאֹרְגִים, חוֹרָי.	9 Moreover they that work in combed flax, and they that weave cotton, shall be ashamed.
19.10 י  וְהָיוּ שָׁתֹתֶיהָ, מְדֻכָּאִים; כָּל-עֹשֵׂי שֶׂכֶר, אַגְמֵי-נָפֶשׁ.	10 And her foundations shall be crushed, all they that make dams shall be grieved in soul.
19.11 יא  אַךְ-אֱוִלִים, שָׂרֵי צֹעַן, חַכְמֵי יֹעֲצֵי פַרְעֹה, עֵצָה נִבְעָרָה; אֵיךְ תֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-פַּרְעֹה, בֶּן-חֲכָמִים אֲנִי בֶּן-מַלְכֵי-קֶדֶם.	11 The princes of Zoan are utter fools; the wisest counsellors of Pharaoh are a senseless counsel; how can ye say unto Pharaoh: 'I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings'?
19.12 יב  אַיָּם אֵפוֹא חֲכָמֶיךָ, וְיַגִּידוּ נָא לָךְ; וְיֵדְעוּ, מַה-יָּעַץ יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת עַל-מִצְרָיִם.	12 Where are they, then, thy wise men? And let them tell thee now; and let them know what the LORD of hosts hath purposed concerning Egypt.
19.13 יג  נוֹאֲלוּ שָׂרֵי צֹעַן, נִשְּׁאוּ שָׂרֵי נֹף; הִתְעוּ אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, פִּנַּת שְׁבָטֶיהָ.	13 The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have caused Egypt to go astray, that are the corner-stone of her tribes.
19.14 יד  יְהוָה מָסַךְ בְּקִרְבָּהּ, רוּחַ עִוְעִים; וְהִתְעוּ אֶת-מִצְרַיִם בְּכָל-מַעֲשֵׂהוּ, כְּהִתָּעוֹת שִׁכּוֹר בְּקִיאוֹ.	14 The LORD hath mingled within her a spirit of dizziness; and they have caused Egypt to stagger in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.
19.15 טו  וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה לְמִצְרַיִם, מַעֲשֶׂה, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה רֹאשׁ וְזָנָב, כִּפָּה וְאַגְמוֹן.	15 Neither shall there be for Egypt any work, which head or tail, palm-branch or rush, may do.
19.16 טז  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִהְיֶה מִצְרַיִם כַּנָּשִׁים; וְחָרַד וּפָחַד, מִפְּנֵי תְּנוּפַת יַד-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא, מֵנִיף עָלָיו.	16 In that day shall Egypt be like unto women; and it shall tremble and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the LORD of hosts, which He shaketh over it.
19.17 יז  וְהָיְתָה אַדְמַת יְהוּדָה לְמִצְרַיִם, לְחָגָּא, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר יַזְכִּיר אֹתָהּ אֵלָיו, יִפְחָד--מִפְּנֵי, עֲצַת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא, יוֹעֵץ עָלָיו.  {ס}	17 And the land of Judah shall become a terror unto Egypt, whensoever one maketh mention thereof to it; it shall be afraid, because of the purpose of the LORD of hosts, which He purposeth against it. {S}
19.18 יח  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא יִהְיוּ חָמֵשׁ עָרִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מְדַבְּרוֹת שְׂפַת כְּנַעַן, וְנִשְׁבָּעוֹת, לַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת:  עִיר הַהֶרֶס, יֵאָמֵר לְאֶחָת.  {ס}	18 In that day there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt that speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the LORD of hosts; one shall be called the city of destruction. {S}
19.19 יט  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִהְיֶה מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה, בְּתוֹךְ, אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וּמַצֵּבָה אֵצֶל-גְּבוּלָהּ, לַיהוָה.	19 In that day shall there be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the LORD.
19.20 כ  וְהָיָה לְאוֹת וּלְעֵד לַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  כִּי-יִצְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה מִפְּנֵי לֹחֲצִים, וְיִשְׁלַח לָהֶם מוֹשִׁיעַ וָרָב וְהִצִּילָם.	20 And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt; for they shall cry unto the LORD because of the oppressors, and He will send them a saviour, and a defender, who will deliver them.
19.21 כא  וְנוֹדַע יְהוָה לְמִצְרַיִם, וְיָדְעוּ מִצְרַיִם אֶת-יְהוָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וְעָבְדוּ זֶבַח וּמִנְחָה, וְנָדְרוּ-נֵדֶר לַיהוָה וְשִׁלֵּמוּ.	21 And the LORD shall make Himself known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the LORD in that day; yea, they shall worship with sacrifice and offering, and shall vow a vow unto the LORD, and shall perform it.
19.22 כב  וְנָגַף יְהוָה אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, נָגֹף וְרָפוֹא; וְשָׁבוּ, עַד-יְהוָה, וְנֶעְתַּר לָהֶם, וּרְפָאָם.  {ס}	22 And the LORD will smite Egypt, smiting and healing; and they shall return unto the LORD, and He will be entreated of them, and will heal them. {S}
19.23 כג  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, תִּהְיֶה מְסִלָּה מִמִּצְרַיִם אַשּׁוּרָה, וּבָא-אַשּׁוּר בְּמִצְרַיִם, וּמִצְרַיִם בְּאַשּׁוּר; וְעָבְדוּ מִצְרַיִם, אֶת-אַשּׁוּר.  {ס}	23 In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria; and the Egyptians shall worship with the Assyrians. {S}
19.24 כד  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִהְיֶה יִשְׂרָאֵל שְׁלִישִׁיָּה, לְמִצְרַיִם, וּלְאַשּׁוּר:  בְּרָכָה, בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ.	24 In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the earth;
19.25 כה  אֲשֶׁר בֵּרְכוֹ יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לֵאמֹר:  בָּרוּךְ עַמִּי מִצְרַיִם, וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדַי אַשּׁוּר, וְנַחֲלָתִי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	25 for that the LORD of hosts hath blessed him, saying: 'Blessed be Egypt My people and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel Mine inheritance.' {S}
20.1 א  בִּשְׁנַת בֹּא תַרְתָּן, אַשְׁדּוֹדָה, בִּשְׁלֹחַ אֹתוֹ, סַרְגוֹן מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וַיִּלָּחֶם בְּאַשְׁדּוֹד, וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ.	1 In the year that Tartan came into Ashdod, when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him, and he fought against Ashdod and took it;
20.2 ב  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה בְּיַד יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ לֵאמֹר, לֵךְ וּפִתַּחְתָּ הַשַּׂק מֵעַל מָתְנֶיךָ, וְנַעַלְךָ תַחֲלֹץ מֵעַל רַגְלֶךָ; וַיַּעַשׂ כֵּן, הָלֹךְ עָרוֹם וְיָחֵף.  {ס}	2 at that time the LORD spoke by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying: 'Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put thy shoe from off thy foot.' And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. {S}
20.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ עַבְדִּי יְשַׁעְיָהוּ עָרוֹם וְיָחֵף--שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים אוֹת וּמוֹפֵת, עַל-מִצְרַיִם וְעַל-כּוּשׁ.	3 And the LORD said: 'Like as My servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot to be for three years a sign and a wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia,
20.4 ד  כֵּן יִנְהַג מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֶת-שְׁבִי מִצְרַיִם וְאֶת-גָּלוּת כּוּשׁ, נְעָרִים וּזְקֵנִים--עָרוֹם וְיָחֵף; וַחֲשׂוּפַי שֵׁת, עֶרְוַת מִצְרָיִם.	4 so shall the king of Assyria lead away the captives of Egypt, and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.
20.5 ה  וְחַתּוּ, וָבֹשׁוּ--מִכּוּשׁ, מַבָּטָם, וּמִן-מִצְרַיִם, תִּפְאַרְתָּם.	5 And they shall be dismayed and ashamed, because of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory.
20.6 ו  וְאָמַר יֹשֵׁב הָאִי הַזֶּה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, הִנֵּה-כֹה מַבָּטֵנוּ אֲשֶׁר-נַסְנוּ שָׁם לְעֶזְרָה, לְהִנָּצֵל מִפְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וְאֵיךְ, נִמָּלֵט אֲנָחְנוּ.  {פ}	6 And the inhabitant of this coast-land shall say in that day: Behold, such is our expectation, whither we fled for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria; and how shall we escape?' {P}
21.1 א  מַשָּׂא, מִדְבַּר-יָם:  כְּסוּפוֹת בַּנֶּגֶב, לַחֲלֹף, מִמִּדְבָּר בָּא, מֵאֶרֶץ נוֹרָאָה.	1 The burden of the wilderness of the sea. As whirlwinds in the South sweeping on, it cometh from the wilderness, from a dreadful land.
21.2 ב  חָזוּת קָשָׁה, הֻגַּד-לִי:  הַבּוֹגֵד בּוֹגֵד, וְהַשּׁוֹדֵד שׁוֹדֵד, עֲלִי עֵילָם צוּרִי מָדַי, כָּל-אַנְחָתָה הִשְׁבַּתִּי.	2 A grievous vision is declared unto me: 'The treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam! besiege, O Media! All the sighing thereof have I made to cease.'
21.3 ג  עַל-כֵּן, מָלְאוּ מָתְנַי חַלְחָלָה--צִירִים אֲחָזוּנִי, כְּצִירֵי יוֹלֵדָה; נַעֲוֵיתִי מִשְּׁמֹעַ, נִבְהַלְתִּי מֵרְאוֹת.	3 Therefore are my loins filled with convulsion; pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman in travail; I am bent so that I cannot hear; I am affrighted so that I cannot see.
21.4 ד  תָּעָה לְבָבִי, פַּלָּצוּת בִּעֲתָתְנִי; אֵת נֶשֶׁף חִשְׁקִי, שָׂם לִי לַחֲרָדָה.	4 My heart is bewildered, terror hath overwhelmed me; the twilight that I longed for hath been turned for me into trembling.
21.5 ה  עָרֹךְ הַשֻּׁלְחָן צָפֹה הַצָּפִית, אָכוֹל שָׁתֹה; קוּמוּ הַשָּׂרִים, מִשְׁחוּ מָגֵן.  {ס}	5 They prepare the table, they light the lamps, they eat, they drink--'Rise up, ye princes, anoint the shield.' {S}
21.6 ו  כִּי כֹה אָמַר אֵלַי, אֲדֹנָי:  לֵךְ הַעֲמֵד הַמְצַפֶּה, אֲשֶׁר יִרְאֶה יַגִּיד.	6 For thus hath the Lord said unto me: Go, set a watchman; let him declare what he seeth!
21.7 ז  וְרָאָה רֶכֶב, צֶמֶד פָּרָשִׁים--רֶכֶב חֲמוֹר, רֶכֶב גָּמָל; וְהִקְשִׁיב קֶשֶׁב, רַב-קָשֶׁב.	7 And when he seeth a troop, horsemen by pairs, a troop of asses, a troop of camels, he shall hearken diligently with much heed.
21.8 ח  וַיִּקְרָא, אַרְיֵה--עַל-מִצְפֶּה אֲדֹנָי, אָנֹכִי עֹמֵד תָּמִיד יוֹמָם, וְעַל-מִשְׁמַרְתִּי, אָנֹכִי נִצָּב כָּל-הַלֵּילוֹת.	8 And he cried as a lion: 'Upon the watch-tower, O Lord, I stand continually in the daytime, and I am set in my ward all the nights.'
21.9 ט  וְהִנֵּה-זֶה בָא רֶכֶב אִישׁ, צֶמֶד פָּרָשִׁים; וַיַּעַן וַיֹּאמֶר, נָפְלָה נָפְלָה בָּבֶל, וְכָל-פְּסִילֵי אֱלֹהֶיהָ, שִׁבַּר לָאָרֶץ.	9 And, behold, there came a troop of men, horsemen by pairs. And he spoke and said: 'Fallen, fallen is Babylon; and all the graven images of her gods are broken unto the ground.'
21.10 י  מְדֻשָׁתִי, וּבֶן-גָּרְנִי:  אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתִּי, מֵאֵת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--הִגַּדְתִּי לָכֶם.  {פ}	10 O thou my threshing, and the winnowing of my floor, that which I have heard from the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you. {P}
21.11 יא  מַשָּׂא, דּוּמָה:  אֵלַי, קֹרֵא מִשֵּׂעִיר, שֹׁמֵר מַה-מִּלַּיְלָה, שֹׁמֵר מַה-מִּלֵּיל.	11 The burden of Dumah. One calleth unto me out of Seir: 'Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?'
21.12 יב  אָמַר שֹׁמֵר, אָתָה בֹקֶר וְגַם-לָיְלָה; אִם-תִּבְעָיוּן בְּעָיוּ, שֻׁבוּ אֵתָיוּ.  {פ}	12 The watchman said: 'The morning cometh, and also the night--if ye will inquire, inquire ye; return, come.' {P}
21.13 יג  מַשָּׂא, בַּעְרָב:  בַּיַּעַר בַּעְרַב תָּלִינוּ, אֹרְחוֹת דְּדָנִים.	13 The burden upon Arabia. In the thickets in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye caravans of Dedanites.
21.14 יד  לִקְרַאת צָמֵא, הֵתָיוּ מָיִם; יֹשְׁבֵי אֶרֶץ תֵּימָא, בְּלַחְמוֹ קִדְּמוּ נֹדֵד.	14 Unto him that is thirsty bring ye water! The inhabitants of the land of Tema did meet the fugitive with his bread.
21.15 טו  כִּי-מִפְּנֵי חֲרָבוֹת, נָדָדוּ; מִפְּנֵי חֶרֶב נְטוּשָׁה, וּמִפְּנֵי קֶשֶׁת דְּרוּכָה, וּמִפְּנֵי, כֹּבֶד מִלְחָמָה.  {ס}	15 For they fled away from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war. {S}
21.16 טז  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי, אֵלָי:  בְּעוֹד שָׁנָה כִּשְׁנֵי שָׂכִיר, וְכָלָה כָּל-כְּבוֹד קֵדָר.	16 For thus hath the Lord said unto me: 'Within a year, according to the years of a hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail;
21.17 יז  וּשְׁאָר מִסְפַּר-קֶשֶׁת גִּבּוֹרֵי בְנֵי-קֵדָר, יִמְעָטוּ:  כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, דִּבֵּר.  {ס}	17 and the residue of the number of the archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished; for the LORD, the God of Israel, hath spoken it.' {S}
22.1 א  מַשָּׂא, גֵּיא חִזָּיוֹן:  מַה-לָּךְ אֵפוֹא, כִּי-עָלִית כֻּלָּךְ לַגַּגּוֹת.	1 The burden concerning the Valley of Vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops,
22.2 ב  תְּשֻׁאוֹת מְלֵאָה, עִיר הוֹמִיָּה--קִרְיָה, עַלִּיזָה; חֲלָלַיִךְ לֹא חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב, וְלֹא מֵתֵי מִלְחָמָה.	2 Thou that art full of uproar, a tumultuous city, a joyous town? Thy slain are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.
22.3 ג  כָּל-קְצִינַיִךְ נָדְדוּ-יַחַד, מִקֶּשֶׁת אֻסָּרוּ; כָּל-נִמְצָאַיִךְ אֻסְּרוּ יַחְדָּו, מֵרָחוֹק בָּרָחוּ.	3 All thy rulers are fled together, without the bow they are bound; all that are found of thee are bound together, they are fled afar off.
22.4 ד  עַל-כֵּן אָמַרְתִּי שְׁעוּ מִנִּי, אֲמָרֵר בַּבֶּכִי; אַל-תָּאִיצוּ לְנַחֲמֵנִי, עַל-שֹׁד בַּת-עַמִּי.	4 Therefore said I: 'Look away from me, I will weep bitterly; strain not to comfort me, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.'
22.5 ה  כִּי יוֹם מְהוּמָה וּמְבוּסָה וּמְבוּכָה, לַאדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת--בְּגֵי חִזָּיוֹן; מְקַרְקַר קִר, וְשׁוֹעַ אֶל-הָהָר.	5 For it is a day of trouble, and of trampling, and of perplexity, from the Lord, the GOD of hosts, in the Valley of Vision; Kir shouting, and Shoa at the mount.
22.6 ו  וְעֵילָם נָשָׂא אַשְׁפָּה, בְּרֶכֶב אָדָם פָּרָשִׁים; וְקִיר עֵרָה, מָגֵן.	6 And Elam bore the quiver, with troops of men, even horsemen; and Kir uncovered the shield.
22.7 ז  וַיְהִי מִבְחַר-עֲמָקַיִךְ, מָלְאוּ רָכֶב; וְהַפָּרָשִׁים, שֹׁת שָׁתוּ הַשָּׁעְרָה.	7 And it came to pass, when thy choicest valleys were full of chariots, and the horsemen set themselves in array at the gate,
22.8 ח  וַיְגַל, אֵת מָסַךְ יְהוּדָה; וַתַּבֵּט בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֶל-נֶשֶׁק בֵּית הַיָּעַר.	8 And the covering of Judah was laid bare, that thou didst look in that day to the armour in the house of the forest.
22.9 ט  וְאֵת בְּקִיעֵי עִיר-דָּוִד רְאִיתֶם, כִּי-רָבּוּ; וַתְּקַבְּצוּ, אֶת-מֵי הַבְּרֵכָה הַתַּחְתּוֹנָה.	9 And ye saw the breaches of the city of David, that they were many; and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.
22.10 י  וְאֶת-בָּתֵּי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, סְפַרְתֶּם; וַתִּתְצוּ, הַבָּתִּים, לְבַצֵּר, הַחוֹמָה.	10 And ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and ye broke down the houses to fortify the wall;
22.11 יא  וּמִקְוָה עֲשִׂיתֶם, בֵּין הַחֹמֹתַיִם, לְמֵי, הַבְּרֵכָה הַיְשָׁנָה; וְלֹא הִבַּטְתֶּם אֶל-עֹשֶׂיהָ, וְיֹצְרָהּ מֵרָחוֹק לֹא רְאִיתֶם.	11 ye made also a basin between the two walls for the water of the old pool--but ye looked not unto Him that had done this, neither had ye respect unto Him that fashioned it long ago.
22.12 יב  וַיִּקְרָא, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת--בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא:  לִבְכִי, וּלְמִסְפֵּד, וּלְקָרְחָה, וְלַחֲגֹר שָׂק.	12 And in that day did the Lord, the GOD of hosts, call to weeping, and to lamentation, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth;
22.13 יג  וְהִנֵּה שָׂשׂוֹן וְשִׂמְחָה, הָרֹג בָּקָר וְשָׁחֹט צֹאן, אָכֹל בָּשָׂר, וְשָׁתוֹת יָיִן; אָכוֹל וְשָׁתוֹ, כִּי מָחָר נָמוּת.	13 And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine--'Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die!'
22.14 יד  וְנִגְלָה בְאָזְנָי, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת:  אִם-יְכֻפַּר הֶעָוֺן הַזֶּה לָכֶם, עַד-תְּמֻתוּן, אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, צְבָאוֹת.  {פ}	14 And the LORD of hosts revealed Himself in mine ears: Surely this iniquity shall not be expiated by you till ye die, saith the Lord, the GOD of hosts. {P}
22.15 טו  כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, צְבָאוֹת:  לֶךְ-בֹּא אֶל-הַסֹּכֵן הַזֶּה, עַל-שֶׁבְנָא אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַבָּיִת.	15 Thus saith the Lord, the GOD of hosts: Go, get thee unto this steward, even unto Shebna, who is over the house:
22.16 טז  מַה-לְּךָ פֹה וּמִי לְךָ פֹה, כִּי-חָצַבְתָּ לְּךָ פֹּה קָבֶר; חֹצְבִי מָרוֹם קִבְרוֹ, חֹקְקִי בַסֶּלַע מִשְׁכָּן לוֹ.	16 What hast thou here, and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out here a sepulchre, thou that hewest thee out a sepulchre on high, and gravest a habitation for thyself in the rock?
22.17 יז  הִנֵּה יְהוָה מְטַלְטֶלְךָ, טַלְטֵלָה גָּבֶר; וְעֹטְךָ, עָטֹה.	17 Behold, the LORD will hurl thee up and down with a man's throw; yea, He will wind thee round and round;
22.18 יח  צָנוֹף יִצְנָפְךָ, צְנֵפָה, כַּדּוּר, אֶל-אֶרֶץ רַחֲבַת יָדָיִם; שָׁמָּה תָמוּת, וְשָׁמָּה מַרְכְּבוֹת כְּבוֹדֶךָ--קְלוֹן, בֵּית אֲדֹנֶיךָ.	18 He will violently roll and toss thee like a ball into a large country; there shalt thou die, and there shall be the chariots of thy glory, thou shame of the lord's house.
22.19 יט  וַהֲדַפְתִּיךָ, מִמַּצָּבֶךָ; וּמִמַּעֲמָדְךָ, יֶהֶרְסֶךָ.	19 And I will thrust thee from thy post, and from thy station shalt thou be pulled down.
22.20 כ  וְהָיָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וְקָרָאתִי לְעַבְדִּי, לְאֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּהוּ.	20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah;
22.21 כא  וְהִלְבַּשְׁתִּיו כֻּתָּנְתֶּךָ, וְאַבְנֵטְךָ אֲחַזְּקֶנּוּ, וּמֶמְשַׁלְתְּךָ, אֶתֵּן בְּיָדוֹ; וְהָיָה לְאָב לְיוֹשֵׁב יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּלְבֵית יְהוּדָה.	21 And I will clothe him with thy robe, and bind him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand; and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.
22.22 כב  וְנָתַתִּי מַפְתֵּחַ בֵּית-דָּוִד, עַל-שִׁכְמוֹ; וּפָתַח וְאֵין סֹגֵר, וְסָגַר וְאֵין פֹּתֵחַ.	22 And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; and he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.
22.23 כג  וּתְקַעְתִּיו יָתֵד, בְּמָקוֹם נֶאֱמָן; וְהָיָה לְכִסֵּא כָבוֹד, לְבֵית אָבִיו.	23 And I will fasten him as a peg in a sure place; and he shall be for a throne of honour to his father's house.
22.24 כד  וְתָלוּ עָלָיו כֹּל כְּבוֹד בֵּית-אָבִיו, הַצֶּאֱצָאִים וְהַצְּפִעוֹת, כֹּל, כְּלֵי הַקָּטָן--מִכְּלֵי, הָאַגָּנוֹת, וְעַד, כָּל-כְּלֵי הַנְּבָלִים.	24 And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups even to all the vessels of flagons.
22.25 כה  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, תָּמוּשׁ הַיָּתֵד, הַתְּקוּעָה בְּמָקוֹם נֶאֱמָן; וְנִגְדְּעָה וְנָפְלָה, וְנִכְרַת הַמַּשָּׂא אֲשֶׁר-עָלֶיהָ--כִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֵּר.  {פ}	25 In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shall the peg that was fastened in a sure place give way; and it shall be hewn down, and fall, and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off; for the LORD hath spoken it. {P}
23.1 א  מַשָּׂא, צֹר:  הֵילִילוּ אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ, כִּי-שֻׁדַּד מִבַּיִת מִבּוֹא, מֵאֶרֶץ כִּתִּים, נִגְלָה-לָמוֹ.	1 The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in; from the land of Kittim it is revealed to them.
23.2 ב  דֹּמּוּ, יֹשְׁבֵי אִי; סֹחֵר צִידוֹן עֹבֵר יָם, מִלְאוּךְ.	2 Be still, ye inhabitants of the coast-land; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.
23.3 ג  וּבְמַיִם רַבִּים זֶרַע שִׁחֹר, קְצִיר יְאוֹר תְּבוּאָתָהּ; וַתְּהִי, סְחַר גּוֹיִם.	3 And on great waters the seed of Shihor, the harvest of the Nile, was her revenue; and she was the mart of nations.
23.4 ד  בּוֹשִׁי צִידוֹן--כִּי-אָמַר יָם, מָעוֹז הַיָּם לֵאמֹר:  לֹא-חַלְתִּי וְלֹא-יָלַדְתִּי, וְלֹא גִדַּלְתִּי בַּחוּרִים--רוֹמַמְתִּי בְתוּלוֹת.	4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon; for the sea hath spoken, the stronghold of the sea, saying: 'I have not travailed, nor brought forth, neither have I reared young men, nor brought up virgins.'
23.5 ה  כַּאֲשֶׁר-שֵׁמַע, לְמִצְרָיִם, יָחִילוּ, כְּשֵׁמַע צֹר.	5 When the report cometh to Egypt, they shall be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.
23.6 ו  עִבְרוּ, תַּרְשִׁישָׁה; הֵילִילוּ, יֹשְׁבֵי אִי.	6 Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the coast-land.
23.7 ז  הֲזֹאת לָכֶם, עַלִּיזָה; מִימֵי-קֶדֶם קַדְמָתָהּ יֹבִלוּהָ רַגְלֶיהָ, מֵרָחוֹק לָגוּר.	7 Is this your joyous city, whose feet in antiquity, in ancient days, carried her afar off to sojourn?
23.8 ח  מִי יָעַץ זֹאת, עַל-צֹר הַמַּעֲטִירָה, אֲשֶׁר סֹחֲרֶיהָ שָׂרִים, כִּנְעָנֶיהָ נִכְבַּדֵּי-אָרֶץ.	8 Who hath devised this against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?
23.9 ט  יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, יְעָצָהּ--לְחַלֵּל גְּאוֹן כָּל-צְבִי, לְהָקֵל כָּל-נִכְבַּדֵּי-אָרֶץ.	9 The LORD of hosts hath devised it, to pollute the pride of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.
23.10 י  עִבְרִי אַרְצֵךְ, כַּיְאֹר; בַּת-תַּרְשִׁישׁ, אֵין מֵזַח עוֹד.	10 Overflow thy land as the Nile, O daughter of Tarshish! there is no girdle any more.
23.11 יא  יָדוֹ נָטָה עַל-הַיָּם, הִרְגִּיז מַמְלָכוֹת; יְהוָה צִוָּה אֶל-כְּנַעַן, לַשְׁמִד מָעֻזְנֶיהָ.	11 He hath stretched out His hand over the sea, He hath shaken the kingdoms; the LORD hath given commandment concerning Canaan, to destroy the strongholds thereof;
23.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא-תוֹסִיפִי עוֹד לַעְלוֹז; הַמְעֻשָּׁקָה בְּתוּלַת בַּת-צִידוֹן, כתיים (כִּתִּים) קוּמִי עֲבֹרִי--גַּם-שָׁם, לֹא-יָנוּחַ לָךְ.	12 And He said: 'Thou shalt no more rejoice.' O thou oppressed virgin daughter of Zidon, arise, pass over to Kittim; even there shalt thou have no rest.
23.13 יג  הֵן אֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים, זֶה הָעָם לֹא הָיָה--אַשּׁוּר, יְסָדָהּ לְצִיִּים; הֵקִימוּ בחיניו (בַחוּנָיו), עוֹרְרוּ אַרְמְנוֹתֶיהָ--שָׂמָהּ, לְמַפֵּלָה.	13 Behold, the land of the Chaldeans--this is the people that was not, when Asshur founded it for shipmen--they set up their towers, they overthrew the palaces thereof; it is made a ruin.
23.14 יד  הֵילִילוּ, אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ:  כִּי שֻׁדַּד, מָעֻזְּכֶן.  {ס}	14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for your stronghold is laid waste. {S}
23.15 טו  וְהָיָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וְנִשְׁכַּחַת צֹר שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה, כִּימֵי מֶלֶךְ אֶחָד; מִקֵּץ שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה, יִהְיֶה לְצֹר, כְּשִׁירַת, הַזּוֹנָה.	15 And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king; after the end of seventy years it shall fare with Tyre as in the song of the harlot:
23.16 טז  קְחִי כִנּוֹר סֹבִּי עִיר, זוֹנָה נִשְׁכָּחָה; הֵיטִיבִי נַגֵּן הַרְבִּי-שִׁיר, לְמַעַן תִּזָּכֵרִי.	16 Take a harp, go about the city, thou harlot long forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.
23.17 יז  וְהָיָה מִקֵּץ שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה, יִפְקֹד יְהוָה אֶת-צֹר, וְשָׁבָה, לְאֶתְנַנָּה; וְזָנְתָה אֶת-כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.	17 And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the LORD will remember Tyre, and she shall return to her hire, and shall have commerce with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.
23.18 יח  וְהָיָה סַחְרָהּ וְאֶתְנַנָּהּ, קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה--לֹא יֵאָצֵר, וְלֹא יֵחָסֵן:  כִּי לַיֹּשְׁבִים לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, יִהְיֶה סַחְרָהּ, לֶאֱכֹל לְשָׂבְעָה, וְלִמְכַסֶּה עָתִיק.  {פ}	18 And her gain and her hire shall be holiness to the LORD; it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her gain shall be for them that dwell before the LORD, to eat their fill, and for stately clothing. {P}
24.1 א  הִנֵּה יְהוָה בּוֹקֵק הָאָרֶץ, וּבוֹלְקָהּ; וְעִוָּה פָנֶיהָ, וְהֵפִיץ יֹשְׁבֶיהָ.	1 Behold, the LORD maketh the earth empty and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.
24.2 ב  וְהָיָה כָעָם, כַּכֹּהֵן, כַּעֶבֶד כַּאדֹנָיו, כַּשִּׁפְחָה כַּגְּבִרְתָּהּ; כַּקּוֹנֶה, כַּמּוֹכֵר, כַּמַּלְוֶה כַּלֹּוֶה, כַּנֹּשֶׁה כַּאֲשֶׁר נֹשֶׁא בוֹ.	2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the creditor, so with the debtor.
24.3 ג  הִבּוֹק תִּבּוֹק הָאָרֶץ, וְהִבּוֹז תִּבֹּז:  כִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֶּר אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	3 The earth shall be utterly emptied, and clean despoiled; for the LORD hath spoken this word.
24.4 ד  אָבְלָה נָבְלָה הָאָרֶץ, אֻמְלְלָה נָבְלָה תֵּבֵל; אֻמְלָלוּ, מְרוֹם עַם-הָאָרֶץ.	4 The earth fainteth and fadeth away, the world faileth and fadeth away, the lofty people of the earth do fail.
24.5 ה  וְהָאָרֶץ חָנְפָה, תַּחַת יֹשְׁבֶיהָ:  כִּי-עָבְרוּ תוֹרֹת חָלְפוּ חֹק, הֵפֵרוּ בְּרִית עוֹלָם.	5 The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, violated the statute, broken the everlasting covenant.
24.6 ו  עַל-כֵּן, אָלָה אָכְלָה אֶרֶץ, וַיֶּאְשְׁמוּ, יֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ; עַל-כֵּן, חָרוּ יֹשְׁבֵי אֶרֶץ, וְנִשְׁאַר אֱנוֹשׁ, מִזְעָר.	6 Therefore hath a curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are found guilty; therefore the inhabitants of the earth waste away, and men are left few.
24.7 ז  אָבַל תִּירוֹשׁ, אֻמְלְלָה-גָפֶן; נֶאֶנְחוּ, כָּל-שִׂמְחֵי-לֵב.	7 The new wine faileth, the vine fadeth; all the merry-hearted do sigh.
24.8 ח  שָׁבַת מְשׂוֹשׂ תֻּפִּים, חָדַל שְׁאוֹן עַלִּיזִים; שָׁבַת, מְשׂוֹשׂ כִּנּוֹר.	8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.
24.9 ט  בַּשִּׁיר, לֹא יִשְׁתּוּ-יָיִן; יֵמַר שֵׁכָר, לְשֹׁתָיו.	9 They drink not wine with a song; strong drink is bitter to them that drink it.
24.10 י  נִשְׁבְּרָה, קִרְיַת-תֹּהוּ; סֻגַּר כָּל-בַּיִת, מִבּוֹא.	10 Broken down is the city of wasteness; every house is shut up, that none may come in.
24.11 יא  צְוָחָה עַל-הַיַּיִן, בַּחוּצוֹת; עָרְבָה, כָּל-שִׂמְחָה, גָּלָה, מְשׂוֹשׂ הָאָרֶץ.	11 There is a crying in the streets amidst the wine; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.
24.12 יב  נִשְׁאַר בָּעִיר, שַׁמָּה; וּשְׁאִיָּה, יֻכַּת-שָׁעַר.	12 In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten unto ruin.
24.13 יג  כִּי כֹה יִהְיֶה בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ, בְּתוֹךְ הָעַמִּים, כְּנֹקֶף זַיִת, כְּעוֹלֵלֹת אִם-כָּלָה בָצִיר.	13 For thus shall it be in the midst of the earth, among the peoples, as at the beating of an olive-tree, as at the gleanings when the vintage is done.
24.14 יד  הֵמָּה יִשְׂאוּ קוֹלָם, יָרֹנּוּ; בִּגְאוֹן יְהוָה, צָהֲלוּ מִיָּם.	14 Those yonder lift up their voice, they sing for joy; for the majesty of the LORD they shout from the sea:
24.15 טו  עַל-כֵּן בָּאֻרִים, כַּבְּדוּ יְהוָה; בְּאִיֵּי הַיָּם, שֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	15 'Therefore glorify ye the LORD in the regions of light, even the name of the LORD, the God of Israel, in the isles of the sea.' {S}
24.16 טז  מִכְּנַף הָאָרֶץ זְמִרֹת שָׁמַעְנוּ, צְבִי לַצַּדִּיק, וָאֹמַר רָזִי-לִי רָזִי-לִי, אוֹי לִי; בֹּגְדִים בָּגָדוּ, וּבֶגֶד בּוֹגְדִים בָּגָדוּ.	16 From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs: 'Glory to the righteous.' But I say: I waste away, I waste away, woe is me! The treacherous deal treacherously; yea, the treacherous deal very treacherously.
24.17 יז  פַּחַד וָפַחַת, וָפָח; עָלֶיךָ, יוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ.	17 Terror, and the pit, and the trap, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.
24.18 יח  וְהָיָה הַנָּס מִקּוֹל הַפַּחַד, יִפֹּל אֶל-הַפַּחַת, וְהָעוֹלֶה מִתּוֹךְ הַפַּחַת, יִלָּכֵד בַּפָּח:  כִּי-אֲרֻבּוֹת מִמָּרוֹם נִפְתָּחוּ, וַיִּרְעֲשׁוּ מוֹסְדֵי אָרֶץ.	18 And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the terror shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the trap; for the windows on high are opened, and the foundations of the earth do shake;
24.19 יט  רֹעָה הִתְרֹעֲעָה, הָאָרֶץ; פּוֹר הִתְפּוֹרְרָה אֶרֶץ, מוֹט הִתְמוֹטְטָה אָרֶץ.	19 The earth is broken, broken down, the earth is crumbled in pieces, the earth trembleth and tottereth;
24.20 כ  נוֹעַ תָּנוּעַ אֶרֶץ כַּשִּׁכּוֹר, וְהִתְנוֹדְדָה כַּמְּלוּנָה; וְכָבַד עָלֶיהָ פִּשְׁעָהּ, וְנָפְלָה וְלֹא-תֹסִיף קוּם.  {ס}	20 The earth reeleth to and fro like a drunken man, and swayeth to and fro as a lodge; and the transgression thereof is heavy upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again. {S}
24.21 כא  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִפְקֹד יְהוָה עַל-צְבָא הַמָּרוֹם בַּמָּרוֹם; וְעַל-מַלְכֵי הָאֲדָמָה, עַל-הָאֲדָמָה.	21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD will punish the host of the high heaven on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth.
24.22 כב  וְאֻסְּפוּ אֲסֵפָה אַסִּיר עַל-בּוֹר, וְסֻגְּרוּ עַל-מַסְגֵּר; וּמֵרֹב יָמִים, יִפָּקֵדוּ.	22 And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the dungeon, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be punished.
24.23 כג  וְחָפְרָה הַלְּבָנָה, וּבוֹשָׁה הַחַמָּה:  כִּי-מָלַךְ יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, בְּהַר צִיּוֹן וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם, וְנֶגֶד זְקֵנָיו, כָּבוֹד.  {פ}	23 Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed; for the LORD of hosts will reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before His elders shall be Glory. {P}
25.1 א  יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי, אַתָּה--אֲרוֹמִמְךָ אוֹדֶה שִׁמְךָ, כִּי עָשִׂיתָ פֶּלֶא:  עֵצוֹת מֵרָחֹק, אֱמוּנָה אֹמֶן.	1 O LORD, Thou art my God, I will exalt Thee, I will praise Thy name, for Thou hast done wonderful things; even counsels of old, in faithfulness and truth.
25.2 ב  כִּי שַׂמְתָּ מֵעִיר לַגָּל, קִרְיָה בְצוּרָה לְמַפֵּלָה; אַרְמוֹן זָרִים מֵעִיר, לְעוֹלָם לֹא יִבָּנֶה.	2 For Thou hast made of a city a heap, of a fortified city a ruin; a castle of strangers to be no city, it shall never be built.
25.3 ג  עַל-כֵּן, יְכַבְּדוּךָ עַם-עָז; קִרְיַת גּוֹיִם עָרִיצִים, יִירָאוּךָ.	3 Therefore shall the strong people glorify Thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear Thee.
25.4 ד  כִּי-הָיִיתָ מָעוֹז לַדָּל מָעוֹז לָאֶבְיוֹן, בַּצַּר-לוֹ:  מַחְסֶה מִזֶּרֶם צֵל מֵחֹרֶב, כִּי רוּחַ עָרִיצִים כְּזֶרֶם קִיר.	4 For Thou hast been a stronghold to the poor, a stronghold to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat; for the blast of the terrible ones was as a storm against the wall.
25.5 ה  כְּחֹרֶב בְּצָיוֹן, שְׁאוֹן זָרִים תַּכְנִיעַ; חֹרֶב בְּצֵל עָב, זְמִיר עָרִיצִים יַעֲנֶה.  {פ}	5 As the heat in a dry place, Thou didst subdue the noise of strangers; as the heat by the shadow of a cloud, the song of the terrible ones was brought low. {P}
25.6 ו  וְעָשָׂה יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת לְכָל-הָעַמִּים, בָּהָר הַזֶּה, מִשְׁתֵּה שְׁמָנִים, מִשְׁתֵּה שְׁמָרִים:  שְׁמָנִים, מְמֻחָיִם, שְׁמָרִים, מְזֻקָּקִים.	6 And in this mountain will the LORD of hosts make unto all peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.
25.7 ז  וּבִלַּע בָּהָר הַזֶּה, פְּנֵי-הַלּוֹט הַלּוֹט עַל-כָּל-הָעַמִּים; וְהַמַּסֵּכָה הַנְּסוּכָה, עַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם.	7 And He will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering that is cast over all peoples, and the veil that is spread over all nations.
25.8 ח  בִּלַּע הַמָּוֶת לָנֶצַח, וּמָחָה אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה דִּמְעָה מֵעַל כָּל-פָּנִים; וְחֶרְפַּת עַמּוֹ, יָסִיר מֵעַל כָּל-הָאָרֶץ--כִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֵּר.  {פ}	8 He will swallow up death for ever; and the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the reproach of His people will He take away from off all the earth; for the LORD hath spoken it. {P}
25.9 ט  וְאָמַר בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, הִנֵּה אֱלֹהֵינוּ זֶה קִוִּינוּ לוֹ וְיוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ; זֶה יְהוָה קִוִּינוּ לוֹ, נָגִילָה וְנִשְׂמְחָה בִּישׁוּעָתוֹ.	9 And it shall be said in that day: 'Lo, this is our God, for whom we waited, that He might save us; this is the LORD, for whom we waited, we will be glad and rejoice in His salvation.'
25.10 י  כִּי-תָנוּחַ יַד-יְהוָה, בָּהָר הַזֶּה--וְנָדוֹשׁ מוֹאָב תַּחְתָּיו, כְּהִדּוּשׁ מַתְבֵּן במי (בְּמוֹ) מַדְמֵנָה.	10 For in this mountain will the hand of the LORD rest, and Moab shall be trodden down in his place, even as straw is trodden down in the dunghill.
25.11 יא  וּפֵרַשׂ יָדָיו בְּקִרְבּוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר יְפָרֵשׂ הַשֹּׂחֶה לִשְׂחוֹת; וְהִשְׁפִּיל, גַּאֲוָתוֹ, עִם, אָרְבּוֹת יָדָיו.	11 And when he shall spread forth his hands in the midst thereof, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim, his pride shall be brought down together with the cunning of his hands.
25.12 יב  וּמִבְצַר מִשְׂגַּב חוֹמֹתֶיךָ, הֵשַׁח הִשְׁפִּיל הִגִּיעַ לָאָרֶץ--עַד-עָפָר.  {ס}	12 And the high fortress of thy walls will He bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust. {S}
26.1 א  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יוּשַׁר הַשִּׁיר-הַזֶּה בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה; עִיר עָז-לָנוּ, יְשׁוּעָה יָשִׁית חוֹמוֹת וָחֵל.	1 In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: We have a strong city; walls and bulwarks doth He appoint for salvation.
26.2 ב  פִּתְחוּ, שְׁעָרִים; וְיָבֹא גוֹי-צַדִּיק, שֹׁמֵר אֱמֻנִים.	2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation that keepeth faithfulness may enter in.
26.3 ג  יֵצֶר סָמוּךְ, תִּצֹּר שָׁלוֹם שָׁלוֹם:  כִּי בְךָ, בָּטוּחַ.	3 The mind stayed on Thee Thou keepest in perfect peace; because it trusteth in Thee.
26.4 ד  בִּטְחוּ בַיהוָה, עֲדֵי-עַד:  כִּי בְּיָהּ יְהוָה, צוּר עוֹלָמִים.	4 Trust ye in the LORD for ever, for the LORD is GOD, an everlasting Rock.
26.5 ה  כִּי הֵשַׁח יֹשְׁבֵי מָרוֹם, קִרְיָה נִשְׂגָּבָה; יַשְׁפִּילֶנָּה יַשְׁפִּילָהּ עַד-אֶרֶץ, יַגִּיעֶנָּה עַד-עָפָר.	5 For He hath brought down them that dwell on high, the lofty city, laying it low, laying it low even to the ground, bringing it even to the dust.
26.6 ו  תִּרְמְסֶנָּה, רָגֶל; רַגְלֵי עָנִי, פַּעֲמֵי דַלִּים.	6 The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.
26.7 ז  אֹרַח לַצַּדִּיק, מֵישָׁרִים:  יָשָׁר, מַעְגַּל צַדִּיק תְּפַלֵּס.	7 The way of the just is straight; Thou, Most Upright, makest plain the path of the just.
26.8 ח  אַף אֹרַח מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ יְהוָה, קִוִּינוּךָ--לְשִׁמְךָ וּלְזִכְרְךָ, תַּאֲוַת-נָפֶשׁ.	8 Yea, in the way of Thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited for Thee; to Thy name and to Thy memorial is the desire of our soul.
26.9 ט  נַפְשִׁי אִוִּיתִךָ בַּלַּיְלָה, אַף-רוּחִי בְקִרְבִּי אֲשַׁחֲרֶךָּ:  כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ, לָאָרֶץ--צֶדֶק לָמְדוּ, יֹשְׁבֵי תֵבֵל.	9 With my soul have I desired Thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me have I sought Thee earnestly; for when Thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.
26.10 י  יֻחַן רָשָׁע בַּל-לָמַד צֶדֶק, בְּאֶרֶץ נְכֹחוֹת יְעַוֵּל; וּבַל-יִרְאֶה, גֵּאוּת יְהוָה.  {פ}	10 Let favour be shown to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness; in the land of uprightness will he deal wrongfully, and will not behold the majesty of the LORD. {P}
26.11 יא  יְהוָה רָמָה יָדְךָ, בַּל-יֶחֱזָיוּן:  יֶחֱזוּ וְיֵבֹשׁוּ קִנְאַת-עָם, אַף-אֵשׁ צָרֶיךָ תֹאכְלֵם.  {ס}	11 LORD, Thy hand was lifted up, yet they see not; they shall see with shame Thy zeal for the people; yea, fire shall devour Thine adversaries. {S}
26.12 יב  יְהוָה, תִּשְׁפֹּת שָׁלוֹם לָנוּ:  כִּי גַּם כָּל-מַעֲשֵׂינוּ, פָּעַלְתָּ לָּנוּ.  {ס}	12 LORD, Thou wilt establish peace for us; for Thou hast indeed wrought all our works for us. {S}
26.13 יג  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, בְּעָלוּנוּ אֲדֹנִים זוּלָתֶךָ; לְבַד-בְּךָ, נַזְכִּיר שְׁמֶךָ.	13 O LORD our God, other lords beside Thee have had dominion over us; but by Thee only do we make mention of Thy name.
26.14 יד  מֵתִים, בַּל-יִחְיוּ--רְפָאִים, בַּל-יָקֻמוּ; לָכֵן פָּקַדְתָּ וַתַּשְׁמִידֵם, וַתְּאַבֵּד כָּל-זֵכֶר לָמוֹ.	14 The dead live not, the shades rise not; to that end hast Thou punished and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.
26.15 טו  יָסַפְתָּ לַגּוֹי יְהוָה, יָסַפְתָּ לַגּוֹי נִכְבָּדְתָּ; רִחַקְתָּ, כָּל-קַצְוֵי-אָרֶץ.  {פ}	15 Thou hast gotten Thee honour with the nations, O LORD, yea, exceeding great honour with the nations; Thou art honoured unto the farthest ends of the earth. {P}
26.16 טז  יְהוָה, בַּצַּר פְּקָדוּךָ; צָקוּן לַחַשׁ, מוּסָרְךָ לָמוֹ.	16 LORD, in trouble have they sought Thee, silently they poured out a prayer when Thy chastening was upon them.
26.17 יז  כְּמוֹ הָרָה תַּקְרִיב לָלֶדֶת, תָּחִיל תִּזְעַק בַּחֲבָלֶיהָ--כֵּן הָיִינוּ מִפָּנֶיךָ, יְהוָה.	17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been at Thy presence, O LORD.
26.18 יח  הָרִינוּ חַלְנוּ, כְּמוֹ יָלַדְנוּ רוּחַ; יְשׁוּעֹת בַּל-נַעֲשֶׂה אֶרֶץ, וּבַל-יִפְּלוּ יֹשְׁבֵי תֵבֵל.	18 We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the land; neither are the inhabitants of the world come to life.
26.19 יט  יִחְיוּ מֵתֶיךָ, נְבֵלָתִי יְקוּמוּן; הָקִיצוּ וְרַנְּנוּ שֹׁכְנֵי עָפָר, כִּי טַל אוֹרֹת טַלֶּךָ, וָאָרֶץ, רְפָאִים תַּפִּיל.  {פ}	19 Thy dead shall live, my dead bodies shall arise--awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust--for Thy dew is as the dew of light, and the earth shall bring to life the shades. {P}
26.20 כ  לֵךְ עַמִּי בֹּא בַחֲדָרֶיךָ, וּסְגֹר דלתיך (דְּלָתְךָ) בַּעֲדֶךָ; חֲבִי כִמְעַט-רֶגַע, עַד-יעבור- (יַעֲבָר-) זָעַם.	20 Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.
26.21 כא  כִּי-הִנֵּה יְהוָה יֹצֵא מִמְּקוֹמוֹ, לִפְקֹד עֲוֺן יֹשֵׁב-הָאָרֶץ עָלָיו; וְגִלְּתָה הָאָרֶץ אֶת-דָּמֶיהָ, וְלֹא-תְכַסֶּה עוֹד עַל-הֲרוּגֶיהָ.  {פ}	21 For, behold, the LORD cometh forth out of His place to visit upon the inhabitants of the earth their iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. {P}
27.1 א  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא יִפְקֹד יְהוָה בְּחַרְבּוֹ הַקָּשָׁה וְהַגְּדוֹלָה וְהַחֲזָקָה, עַל לִוְיָתָן נָחָשׁ בָּרִחַ, וְעַל לִוְיָתָן, נָחָשׁ עֲקַלָּתוֹן; וְהָרַג אֶת-הַתַּנִּין, אֲשֶׁר בַּיָּם.  {ס}	1 In that day the LORD with His sore and great and strong sword will punish leviathan the slant serpent, and leviathan the tortuous serpent; and He will slay the dragon that is in the sea. {S}
27.2 ב  בַּיּוֹם, הַהוּא, כֶּרֶם חֶמֶר, עַנּוּ-לָהּ.	2 In that day sing ye of her: 'A vineyard of foaming wine!'
27.3 ג  אֲנִי יְהוָה נֹצְרָהּ, לִרְגָעִים אַשְׁקֶנָּה:  פֶּן יִפְקֹד עָלֶיהָ, לַיְלָה וָיוֹם אֶצֳּרֶנָּה.	3 I the LORD do guard it, I water it every moment; lest Mine anger visit it, I guard it night and day.
27.4 ד  חֵמָה, אֵין לִי:  מִי-יִתְּנֵנִי שָׁמִיר שַׁיִת, בַּמִּלְחָמָה--אֶפְשְׂעָה בָהּ, אֲצִיתֶנָּה יָּחַד.	4 Fury is not in Me; would that I were as the briers and thorns in flame! I would with one step burn it altogether.
27.5 ה  אוֹ יַחֲזֵק בְּמָעוּזִּי, יַעֲשֶׂה שָׁלוֹם לִי; שָׁלוֹם, יַעֲשֶׂה-לִּי.	5 Or else let him take hold of My strength, that he may make peace with Me; yea, let him make peace with Me.
27.6 ו  הַבָּאִים יַשְׁרֵשׁ יַעֲקֹב, יָצִיץ וּפָרַח יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּמָלְאוּ פְנֵי-תֵבֵל, תְּנוּבָה.  {פ}	6 In days to come shall Jacob take root, Israel shall blossom and bud; and the face of the world shall be filled with fruitage. {P}
27.7 ז  הַכְּמַכַּת מַכֵּהוּ, הִכָּהוּ:  אִם-כְּהֶרֶג הֲרֻגָיו, הֹרָג.	7 Hath He smitten him as He smote those that smote him? Or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that were slain by Him?
27.8 ח  בְּסַאסְּאָה, בְּשַׁלְחָהּ תְּרִיבֶנָּה; הָגָה בְּרוּחוֹ הַקָּשָׁה, בְּיוֹם קָדִים.	8 In full measure, when Thou sendest her away, Thou dost contend with her; He hath removed her with His rough blast in the day of the east wind.
27.9 ט  לָכֵן, בְּזֹאת יְכֻפַּר עֲוֺן-יַעֲקֹב, וְזֶה, כָּל-פְּרִי הָסִר חַטָּאתוֹ:  בְּשׂוּמוֹ כָּל-אַבְנֵי מִזְבֵּחַ, כְּאַבְנֵי-גִר מְנֻפָּצוֹת, לֹא-יָקֻמוּ אֲשֵׁרִים, וְחַמָּנִים.	9 Therefore by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be expiated, and this is all the fruit of taking away his sin: when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in pieces, so that the Asherim and the sun-images shall rise no more.
27.10 י  כִּי עִיר בְּצוּרָה, בָּדָד, נָוֶה, מְשֻׁלָּח וְנֶעֱזָב כַּמִּדְבָּר; שָׁם יִרְעֶה עֵגֶל וְשָׁם יִרְבָּץ, וְכִלָּה סְעִפֶיהָ.	10 For the fortified city is solitary, a habitation abandoned and forsaken, like the wilderness; there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.
27.11 יא  בִּיבֹשׁ קְצִירָהּ, תִּשָּׁבַרְנָה, נָשִׁים, בָּאוֹת מְאִירוֹת אוֹתָהּ:  כִּי לֹא עַם-בִּינוֹת, הוּא--עַל-כֵּן לֹא-יְרַחֲמֶנּוּ עֹשֵׂהוּ, וְיֹצְרוֹ לֹא יְחֻנֶּנּוּ.  {פ}	11 When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off; the women shall come, and set them on fire; for it is a people of no understanding; therefore He that made them will not have compassion upon them, and He that formed them will not be gracious unto them. {P}
27.12 יב  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יַחְבֹּט יְהוָה מִשִּׁבֹּלֶת הַנָּהָר עַד-נַחַל מִצְרָיִם; וְאַתֶּם תְּלֻקְּטוּ לְאַחַד אֶחָד, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	12 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD will beat off [His fruit] from the flood of the River unto the Brook of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel. {P}
27.13 יג  וְהָיָה בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִתָּקַע בְּשׁוֹפָר גָּדוֹל, וּבָאוּ הָאֹבְדִים בְּאֶרֶץ אַשּׁוּר, וְהַנִּדָּחִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַיהוָה בְּהַר הַקֹּדֶשׁ, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great horn shall be blown; and they shall come that were lost in the land of Assyria, and they that were dispersed in the land of Egypt; and they shall worship the LORD in the holy mountain at Jerusalem. {P}
28.1 א  הוֹי, עֲטֶרֶת גֵּאוּת שִׁכֹּרֵי אֶפְרַיִם, וְצִיץ נֹבֵל, צְבִי תִפְאַרְתּוֹ--אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ גֵּיא-שְׁמָנִים, הֲלוּמֵי יָיִן.	1 Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim, and to the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley of them that are smitten down with wine!
28.2 ב  הִנֵּה חָזָק וְאַמִּץ לַאדֹנָי, כְּזֶרֶם בָּרָד שַׂעַר קָטֶב; כְּזֶרֶם מַיִם כַּבִּירִים שֹׁטְפִים, הִנִּיחַ לָאָרֶץ--בְּיָד.	2 Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, as a storm of hail, a tempest of destruction, as a storm of mighty waters overflowing, that casteth down to the earth with violence.
28.3 ג  בְּרַגְלַיִם, תֵּרָמַסְנָה; עֲטֶרֶת גֵּאוּת, שִׁכּוֹרֵי אֶפְרָיִם.	3 The crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot;
28.4 ד  וְהָיְתָה צִיצַת נֹבֵל, צְבִי תִפְאַרְתּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-רֹאשׁ, גֵּיא שְׁמָנִים--כְּבִכּוּרָהּ, בְּטֶרֶם קַיִץ, אֲשֶׁר יִרְאֶה הָרֹאֶה אוֹתָהּ, בְּעוֹדָהּ בְּכַפּוֹ יִבְלָעֶנָּה.  {ס}	4 And the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be as the first-ripe fig before the summer, which when one looketh upon it, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up. {S}
28.5 ה  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִהְיֶה יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לַעֲטֶרֶת צְבִי, וְלִצְפִירַת תִּפְאָרָה--לִשְׁאָר, עַמּוֹ.	5 In that day shall the LORD of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of His people;
28.6 ו  וּלְרוּחַ, מִשְׁפָּט--לַיּוֹשֵׁב, עַל-הַמִּשְׁפָּט, וְלִגְבוּרָה, מְשִׁיבֵי מִלְחָמָה שָׁעְרָה.  {ס}	6 And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn back the battle at the gate. {S}
28.7 ז  וְגַם-אֵלֶּה בַּיַּיִן שָׁגוּ, וּבַשֵּׁכָר תָּעוּ:  כֹּהֵן וְנָבִיא שָׁגוּ בַשֵּׁכָר נִבְלְעוּ מִן-הַיַּיִן, תָּעוּ מִן-הַשֵּׁכָר, שָׁגוּ בָּרֹאֶה, פָּקוּ פְּלִילִיָּה.	7 But these also reel through wine, and stagger through strong drink; the priest and the prophet reel through strong drink, they are confused because of wine, they stagger because of strong drink; they reel in vision, they totter in judgment.
28.8 ח  כִּי כָּל-שֻׁלְחָנוֹת, מָלְאוּ קִיא צֹאָה, בְּלִי, מָקוֹם.  {פ}	8 For all tables are full of filthy vomit, and no place is clean. {P}
28.9 ט  אֶת-מִי יוֹרֶה דֵעָה, וְאֶת-מִי יָבִין שְׁמוּעָה--גְּמוּלֵי, מֵחָלָב, עַתִּיקֵי, מִשָּׁדָיִם.	9 Whom shall one teach knowledge? And whom shall one make to understand the message? Them that are weaned from the milk, them that are drawn from the breasts?
28.10 י  כִּי צַו לָצָו צַו לָצָו, קַו לָקָו קַו לָקָו--זְעֵיר שָׁם, זְעֵיר שָׁם.	10 For it is precept by precept, precept by precept, line by line, line by line; here a little, there a little.
28.11 יא  כִּי בְּלַעֲגֵי שָׂפָה, וּבְלָשׁוֹן אַחֶרֶת, יְדַבֵּר, אֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה.	11 For with stammering lips and with a strange tongue shall it be spoken to this people;
28.12 יב  אֲשֶׁר אָמַר אֲלֵיהֶם, זֹאת הַמְּנוּחָה הָנִיחוּ לֶעָיֵף, וְזֹאת, הַמַּרְגֵּעָה; וְלֹא אָבוּא, שְׁמוֹעַ.	12 To whom it was said: 'This is the rest, give ye rest to the weary; and this is the refreshing'; yet they would not hear.
28.13 יג  וְהָיָה לָהֶם דְּבַר-יְהוָה, צַו לָצָו צַו לָצָו קַו לָקָו קַו לָקָו, זְעֵיר שָׁם, זְעֵיר שָׁם--לְמַעַן יֵלְכוּ וְכָשְׁלוּ אָחוֹר, וְנִשְׁבָּרוּ, וְנוֹקְשׁוּ, וְנִלְכָּדוּ.  {פ}	13 And so the word of the LORD is unto them precept by precept, precept by precept, line by line, line by line; here a little, there a little; that they may go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken. {P}
28.14 יד  לָכֵן שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, אַנְשֵׁי לָצוֹן--מֹשְׁלֵי הָעָם הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	14 Wherefore hear the word of the LORD, ye scoffers, the ballad-mongers of this people which is in Jerusalem:
28.15 טו  כִּי אֲמַרְתֶּם, כָּרַתְנוּ בְרִית אֶת-מָוֶת, וְעִם-שְׁאוֹל, עָשִׂינוּ חֹזֶה; שיט (שׁוֹט) שׁוֹטֵף כִּי-עבר (יַעֲבֹר) לֹא יְבוֹאֵנוּ, כִּי שַׂמְנוּ כָזָב מַחְסֵנוּ וּבַשֶּׁקֶר נִסְתָּרְנוּ.  {פ}	15 Because ye have said: 'We have made a covenant with death, and with the nether-world are we at agreement; when the scouring scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and in falsehood have we hid ourselves'; {P}
28.16 טז  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנְנִי יִסַּד בְּצִיּוֹן, אָבֶן; אֶבֶן בֹּחַן פִּנַּת יִקְרַת, מוּסָד מוּסָּד--הַמַּאֲמִין, לֹא יָחִישׁ.	16 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a costly corner-stone of sure foundation; he that believeth shall not make haste.
28.17 יז  וְשַׂמְתִּי מִשְׁפָּט לְקָו, וּצְדָקָה לְמִשְׁקָלֶת; וְיָעָה בָרָד מַחְסֵה כָזָב, וְסֵתֶר מַיִם יִשְׁטֹפוּ.  {ס}	17 And I will make justice the line, and righteousness the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-place. {S}
28.18 יח  וְכֻפַּר בְּרִיתְכֶם אֶת-מָוֶת, וְחָזוּתְכֶם אֶת-שְׁאוֹל לֹא תָקוּם; שׁוֹט שׁוֹטֵף כִּי יַעֲבֹר, וִהְיִיתֶם לוֹ לְמִרְמָס.	18 And your covenant with death shall be disannulled and your agreement with the nether-world shall not stand; when the scouring scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it,
28.19 יט  מִדֵּי עָבְרוֹ יִקַּח אֶתְכֶם, כִּי-בַבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר יַעֲבֹר בַּיּוֹם וּבַלָּיְלָה; וְהָיָה רַק-זְוָעָה, הָבִין שְׁמוּעָה.	19 As often as it passeth through, it shall take you; for morning by morning shall it pass through, by day and by night; and it shall be sheer terror to understand the message.
28.20 כ  כִּי-קָצַר הַמַּצָּע, מֵהִשְׂתָּרֵעַ; וְהַמַּסֵּכָה צָרָה, כְּהִתְכַּנֵּס.	20 For the bed is too short for a man to stretch himself; and the covering too narrow when he gathereth himself up.
28.21 כא  כִּי כְהַר-פְּרָצִים יָקוּם יְהוָה, כְּעֵמֶק בְּגִבְעוֹן יִרְגָּז--לַעֲשׂוֹת מַעֲשֵׂהוּ, זָר מַעֲשֵׂהוּ, וְלַעֲבֹד עֲבֹדָתוֹ, נָכְרִיָּה עֲבֹדָתוֹ.	21 For the LORD will rise up as in mount Perazim, He will be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon; that He may do His work, strange is His work, and bring to pass His act, strange is His act.
28.22 כב  וְעַתָּה, אַל-תִּתְלוֹצָצוּ, פֶּן-יֶחְזְקוּ, מוֹסְרֵיכֶם:  כִּי-כָלָה וְנֶחֱרָצָה שָׁמַעְתִּי, מֵאֵת אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת--עַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	22 Now therefore be ye not scoffers, lest your bands be made strong; for an extermination wholly determined have I heard from the Lord, the GOD of hosts, upon the whole land. {P}
28.23 כג  הַאֲזִינוּ וְשִׁמְעוּ, קוֹלִי; הַקְשִׁיבוּ וְשִׁמְעוּ, אִמְרָתִי.	23 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; attend, and hear my speech.
28.24 כד  הֲכֹל הַיּוֹם, יַחֲרֹשׁ הַחֹרֵשׁ לִזְרֹעַ; יְפַתַּח וִישַׂדֵּד, אַדְמָתוֹ.	24 Is the plowman never done with plowing to sow, with the opening and harrowing of his ground?
28.25 כה  הֲלוֹא אִם-שִׁוָּה פָנֶיהָ, וְהֵפִיץ קֶצַח וְכַמֹּן יִזְרֹק; וְשָׂם חִטָּה שׂוֹרָה וּשְׂעֹרָה נִסְמָן, וְכֻסֶּמֶת גְּבֻלָתוֹ.	25 When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the black cummin, and scatter the cummin, and put in the wheat in rows and the barley in the appointed place and the spelt in the border thereof?
28.26 כו  וְיִסְּרוֹ לַמִּשְׁפָּט, אֱלֹהָיו יוֹרֶנּוּ.	26 For He doth instruct him aright; his God doth teach him.
28.27 כז  כִּי לֹא בֶחָרוּץ, יוּדַשׁ קֶצַח, וְאוֹפַן עֲגָלָה, עַל-כַּמֹּן יוּסָּב:  כִּי בַמַּטֶּה יֵחָבֶט קֶצַח, וְכַמֹּן בַּשָּׁבֶט.	27 For the black cummin is not threshed with a threshing-sledge, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the black cummin is beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.
28.28 כח  לֶחֶם יוּדָק, כִּי לֹא לָנֶצַח אָדוֹשׁ יְדוּשֶׁנּוּ; וְהָמַם גִּלְגַּל עֶגְלָתוֹ וּפָרָשָׁיו, לֹא יְדֻקֶּנּוּ.	28 Is bread corn crushed? Nay, he will not ever be threshing it; and though the roller of his wagon and its sharp edges move noisily, he doth not crush it.
28.29 כט  גַּם-זֹאת, מֵעִם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת יָצָאָה:  הִפְלִא עֵצָה, הִגְדִּיל תּוּשִׁיָּה.  {פ}	29 This also cometh forth from the LORD of hosts: Wonderful is His counsel, and great His wisdom. {P}
29.1 א  הוֹי אֲרִיאֵל אֲרִיאֵל, קִרְיַת חָנָה דָוִד; סְפוּ שָׁנָה עַל-שָׁנָה, חַגִּים יִנְקֹפוּ.	1 Ah, Ariel, Ariel, the city where David encamped! Add ye year to year, let the feasts come round!
29.2 ב  וַהֲצִיקוֹתִי, לַאֲרִיאֵל; וְהָיְתָה תַאֲנִיָּה וַאֲנִיָּה, וְהָיְתָה לִּי כַּאֲרִיאֵל.	2 Then will I distress Ariel, and there shall be mourning and moaning; and she shall be unto Me as a hearth of God.
29.3 ג  וְחָנִיתִי כַדּוּר, עָלָיִךְ; וְצַרְתִּי עָלַיִךְ מֻצָּב, וַהֲקִימֹתִי עָלַיִךְ מְצֻרֹת.	3 And I will encamp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mound, and I will raise siege works against thee.
29.4 ד  וְשָׁפַלְתְּ מֵאֶרֶץ תְּדַבֵּרִי, וּמֵעָפָר תִּשַּׁח אִמְרָתֵךְ; וְהָיָה כְּאוֹב מֵאֶרֶץ, קוֹלֵךְ, וּמֵעָפָר, אִמְרָתֵךְ תְּצַפְצֵף.	4 And brought down thou shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust; and thy voice shall be as of a ghost out of the ground, and thy speech shall chirp out of the dust.
29.5 ה  וְהָיָה כְּאָבָק דַּק, הֲמוֹן זָרָיִךְ; וּכְמֹץ עֹבֵר הֲמוֹן עָרִיצִים, וְהָיָה לְפֶתַע פִּתְאֹם.	5 But the multitude of thy foes shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones as chaff that passeth away; yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly--
29.6 ו  מֵעִם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת תִּפָּקֵד, בְּרַעַם וּבְרַעַשׁ וְקוֹל גָּדוֹל; סוּפָה, וּסְעָרָה, וְלַהַב, אֵשׁ אוֹכֵלָה.	6 There shall be a visitation from the LORD of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with whirlwind and tempest, and the flame of a devouring fire.
29.7 ז  וְהָיָה, כַּחֲלוֹם חֲזוֹן לַיְלָה, הֲמוֹן כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, הַצֹּבְאִים עַל-אֲרִיאֵל; וְכָל-צֹבֶיהָ, וּמְצֹדָתָהּ, וְהַמְּצִיקִים, לָהּ.	7 And the multitude of all the nations that war against Ariel, even all that war against her, and the bulwarks about her, and they that distress her, shall be as a dream, a vision of the night.
29.8 ח  וְהָיָה כַּאֲשֶׁר יַחֲלֹם הָרָעֵב וְהִנֵּה אוֹכֵל, וְהֵקִיץ וְרֵיקָה נַפְשׁוֹ, וְכַאֲשֶׁר יַחֲלֹם הַצָּמֵא וְהִנֵּה שֹׁתֶה, וְהֵקִיץ וְהִנֵּה עָיֵף וְנַפְשׁוֹ שׁוֹקֵקָה--כֵּן יִהְיֶה, הֲמוֹן כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, הַצֹּבְאִים, עַל-הַר צִיּוֹן.  {פ}	8 And it shall be as when a hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth, but he awaketh, and his soul is empty; or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh, but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite--so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount Zion. {P}
29.9 ט  הִתְמַהְמְהוּ וּתְמָהוּ, הִשְׁתַּעַשְׁעוּ וָשֹׁעוּ; שָׁכְרוּ וְלֹא-יַיִן, נָעוּ וְלֹא שֵׁכָר.	9 Stupefy yourselves, and be stupid! Blind yourselves, and be blind! ye that are drunken, but not with wine, that stagger, but not with strong drink.
29.10 י  כִּי-נָסַךְ עֲלֵיכֶם יְהוָה רוּחַ תַּרְדֵּמָה, וַיְעַצֵּם אֶת-עֵינֵיכֶם:  אֶת-הַנְּבִיאִים וְאֶת-רָאשֵׁיכֶם הַחֹזִים, כִּסָּה.	10 For the LORD hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes; the prophets, and your heads, the seers, hath He covered.
29.11 יא  וַתְּהִי לָכֶם חָזוּת הַכֹּל, כְּדִבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר הֶחָתוּם, אֲשֶׁר-יִתְּנוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-יוֹדֵעַ הספר (סֵפֶר) לֵאמֹר, קְרָא נָא-זֶה; וְאָמַר לֹא אוּכַל, כִּי חָתוּם הוּא.	11 And the vision of all this is become unto you as the words of a writing that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying: 'Read this, I pray thee'; and he saith: 'I cannot, for it is sealed';
29.12 יב  וְנִתַּן הַסֵּפֶר, עַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדַע סֵפֶר לֵאמֹר--קְרָא נָא-זֶה; וְאָמַר, לֹא יָדַעְתִּי סֵפֶר.  {ס}	12 and the writing is delivered to him that is not learned, saying: 'Read this, I pray thee'; and he saith: 'I am not learned.' {S}
29.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲדֹנָי, יַעַן כִּי נִגַּשׁ הָעָם הַזֶּה, בְּפִיו וּבִשְׂפָתָיו כִּבְּדוּנִי, וְלִבּוֹ רִחַק מִמֶּנִּי--וַתְּהִי יִרְאָתָם אֹתִי, מִצְוַת אֲנָשִׁים מְלֻמָּדָה.	13 And the Lord said: Forasmuch as this people draw near, and with their mouth and with their lips do honour Me, but have removed their heart far from Me, and their fear of Me is a commandment of men learned by rote;
29.14 יד  לָכֵן, הִנְנִי יוֹסִף לְהַפְלִיא אֶת-הָעָם-הַזֶּה--הַפְלֵא וָפֶלֶא; וְאָבְדָה חָכְמַת חֲכָמָיו, וּבִינַת נְבֹנָיו תִּסְתַּתָּר.  {ס}	14 Therefore, behold, I will again do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder; and the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the prudence of their prudent men shall be hid. {S}
29.15 טו  הוֹי הַמַּעֲמִיקִים מֵיְהוָה, לַסְתִּר עֵצָה; וְהָיָה בְמַחְשָׁךְ, מַעֲשֵׂיהֶם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מִי רֹאֵנוּ וּמִי יֹדְעֵנוּ.	15 Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the LORD, and their works are in the dark, and they say: 'Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?'
29.16 טז  הַפְכְּכֶם--אִם-כְּחֹמֶר הַיֹּצֵר, יֵחָשֵׁב:  כִּי-יֹאמַר מַעֲשֶׂה לְעֹשֵׂהוּ לֹא עָשָׂנִי, וְיֵצֶר אָמַר לְיֹצְרוֹ לֹא הֵבִין.	16 O your perversity! Shall the potter be esteemed as clay; that the thing made should say of him that made it: 'He made me not'; or the thing framed say of him that framed it: 'He hath no understanding?'
29.17 יז  הֲלוֹא-עוֹד מְעַט מִזְעָר, וְשָׁב לְבָנוֹן לַכַּרְמֶל; וְהַכַּרְמֶל, לַיַּעַר יֵחָשֵׁב.	17 Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?
29.18 יח  וְשָׁמְעוּ בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא הַחֵרְשִׁים, דִּבְרֵי-סֵפֶר; וּמֵאֹפֶל וּמֵחֹשֶׁךְ, עֵינֵי עִוְרִים תִּרְאֶינָה.	18 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of a book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness.
29.19 יט  וְיָסְפוּ עֲנָוִים בַּיהוָה, שִׂמְחָה; וְאֶבְיוֹנֵי אָדָם, בִּקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל יָגִילוּ.	19 The humble also shall increase their joy in the LORD, and the neediest among men shall exult in the Holy One of Israel.
29.20 כ  כִּי-אָפֵס עָרִיץ, וְכָלָה לֵץ; וְנִכְרְתוּ, כָּל-שֹׁקְדֵי אָוֶן.	20 For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner ceaseth, and all they that watch for iniquity are cut off;
29.21 כא  מַחֲטִיאֵי אָדָם בְּדָבָר, וְלַמּוֹכִיחַ בַּשַּׁעַר יְקֹשׁוּן; וַיַּטּוּ בַתֹּהוּ, צַדִּיק.  {פ}	21 That make a man an offender by words, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just with a thing of nought. {P}
29.22 כב  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֶל-בֵּית יַעֲקֹב, אֲשֶׁר פָּדָה, אֶת-אַבְרָהָם:  לֹא-עַתָּה יֵבוֹשׁ יַעֲקֹב, וְלֹא עַתָּה פָּנָיו יֶחֱוָרוּ.	22 Therefore thus saith the LORD, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale;
29.23 כג  כִּי בִרְאֹתוֹ יְלָדָיו מַעֲשֵׂה יָדַי, בְּקִרְבּוֹ--יַקְדִּישׁוּ שְׁמִי; וְהִקְדִּישׁוּ אֶת-קְדוֹשׁ יַעֲקֹב, וְאֶת-אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל יַעֲרִיצוּ.	23 When he seeth his children, the work of My hands, in the midst of him, that they sanctify My name; yea, they shall sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall stand in awe of the God of Israel.
29.24 כד  וְיָדְעוּ תֹעֵי-רוּחַ, בִּינָה; וְרוֹגְנִים, יִלְמְדוּ-לֶקַח.  {ס}	24 They also that err in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmur shall learn instruction. {S}
30.1 א  הוֹי בָּנִים סוֹרְרִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת עֵצָה וְלֹא מִנִּי, וְלִנְסֹךְ מַסֵּכָה וְלֹא רוּחִי--לְמַעַן סְפוֹת חַטָּאת, עַל-חַטָּאת.	1 Woe to the rebellious children, saith the LORD, that take counsel, but not of Me; and that form projects, but not of My spirit, that they may add sin to sin;
30.2 ב  הַהֹלְכִים לָרֶדֶת מִצְרַיִם, וּפִי לֹא שָׁאָלוּ; לָעוֹז בְּמָעוֹז פַּרְעֹה, וְלַחְסוֹת בְּצֵל מִצְרָיִם.	2 That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at My mouth; to take refuge in the stronghold of Pharaoh, and to take shelter in the shadow of Egypt!
30.3 ג  וְהָיָה לָכֶם מָעוֹז פַּרְעֹה, לְבֹשֶׁת; וְהֶחָסוּת בְּצֵל-מִצְרַיִם, לִכְלִמָּה.	3 Therefore shall the stronghold of Pharaoh turn to your shame, and the shelter in the shadow of Egypt to your confusion.
30.4 ד  כִּי-הָיוּ בְצֹעַן, שָׂרָיו; וּמַלְאָכָיו, חָנֵס יַגִּיעוּ.	4 For his princes are at Zoan, and his ambassadors are come to Hanes.
30.5 ה  כֹּל הֹבִאישׁ, עַל-עַם לֹא-יוֹעִילוּ לָמוֹ:  לֹא לְעֵזֶר וְלֹא לְהוֹעִיל, כִּי לְבֹשֶׁת וְגַם-לְחֶרְפָּה.  {ס}	5 They shall all be ashamed of a people that cannot profit them, that are not a help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach. {S}
30.6 ו  מַשָּׂא, בַּהֲמוֹת נֶגֶב:  בְּאֶרֶץ צָרָה וְצוּקָה לָבִיא וָלַיִשׁ מֵהֶם, אֶפְעֶה וְשָׂרָף מְעוֹפֵף, יִשְׂאוּ עַל-כֶּתֶף עֲיָרִים חֵילֵהֶם וְעַל-דַּבֶּשֶׁת גְּמַלִּים אוֹצְרֹתָם, עַל-עַם לֹא יוֹעִילוּ.	6 The burden of the beasts of the South. Through the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the lioness and the lion, the viper and flying serpent, they carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the humps of camels, to a people that shall not profit them.
30.7 ז  וּמִצְרַיִם, הֶבֶל וָרִיק יַעְזֹרוּ; לָכֵן קָרָאתִי לָזֹאת, רַהַב הֵם שָׁבֶת.	7 For Egypt helpeth in vain, and to no purpose; therefore have I called her arrogancy that sitteth still.
30.8 ח  עַתָּה, בּוֹא כָתְבָהּ עַל-לוּחַ אִתָּם--וְעַל-סֵפֶר חֻקָּהּ; וּתְהִי לְיוֹם אַחֲרוֹן, לָעַד עַד-עוֹלָם.	8 Now go, write it before them on a tablet, and inscribe it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever.
30.9 ט  כִּי עַם מְרִי הוּא, בָּנִים כֶּחָשִׁים; בָּנִים, לֹא-אָבוּ שְׁמוֹעַ תּוֹרַת יְהוָה.	9 For it is a rebellious people, lying children, children that refuse to hear the teaching of the LORD;
30.10 י  אֲשֶׁר אָמְרוּ לָרֹאִים, לֹא תִרְאוּ, וְלַחֹזִים, לֹא תֶחֱזוּ-לָנוּ נְכֹחוֹת; דַּבְּרוּ-לָנוּ חֲלָקוֹת, חֲזוּ מַהֲתַלּוֹת.	10 That say to the seers: 'See not,' and to the prophets: 'Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy delusions;
30.11 יא  סוּרוּ, מִנֵּי-דֶרֶךְ, הַטּוּ, מִנֵּי-אֹרַח; הַשְׁבִּיתוּ מִפָּנֵינוּ, אֶת-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	11 Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.' {S}
30.12 יב  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, יַעַן מָאָסְכֶם, בַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַתִּבְטְחוּ בְּעֹשֶׁק וְנָלוֹז, וַתִּשָּׁעֲנוּ עָלָיו.	12 Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel: because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon;
30.13 יג  לָכֵן, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם הֶעָוֺן הַזֶּה, כְּפֶרֶץ נֹפֵל, נִבְעֶה בְּחוֹמָה נִשְׂגָּבָה--אֲשֶׁר-פִּתְאֹם לְפֶתַע, יָבוֹא שִׁבְרָהּ.	13 Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant.
30.14 יד  וּשְׁבָרָהּ כְּשֵׁבֶר נֵבֶל יוֹצְרִים, כָּתוּת--לֹא יַחְמֹל; וְלֹא-יִמָּצֵא בִמְכִתָּתוֹ, חֶרֶשׂ, לַחְתּוֹת אֵשׁ מִיָּקוּד, וְלַחְשֹׂף מַיִם מִגֶּבֶא.  {ס}	14 And He shall break it as a potter's vessel is broken, breaking it in pieces without sparing; so that there shall not be found among the pieces thereof a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water out of the cistern. {S}
30.15 טו  כִּי כֹה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּשׁוּבָה וָנַחַת תִּוָּשֵׁעוּן--בְּהַשְׁקֵט וּבְבִטְחָה, תִּהְיֶה גְּבוּרַתְכֶם; וְלֹא, אֲבִיתֶם.	15 For thus said the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel: in sitting still and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength; and ye would not.
30.16 טז  וַתֹּאמְרוּ לֹא-כִי עַל-סוּס נָנוּס, עַל-כֵּן תְּנוּסוּן; וְעַל-קַל נִרְכָּב, עַל-כֵּן יִקַּלּוּ רֹדְפֵיכֶם.	16 But ye said: 'No, for we will flee upon horses'; therefore shall ye flee; and: 'We will ride upon the swift'; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.
30.17 יז  אֶלֶף אֶחָד, מִפְּנֵי גַּעֲרַת אֶחָד--מִפְּנֵי גַּעֲרַת חֲמִשָּׁה, תָּנֻסוּ:  עַד אִם-נוֹתַרְתֶּם, כַּתֹּרֶן עַל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר, וְכַנֵּס, עַל-הַגִּבְעָה.	17 One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one, at the rebuke of five shall ye flee; till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on a hill.
30.18 יח  וְלָכֵן יְחַכֶּה יְהוָה, לַחֲנַנְכֶם, וְלָכֵן יָרוּם, לְרַחֶמְכֶם:  כִּי-אֱלֹהֵי מִשְׁפָּט יְהוָה, אַשְׁרֵי כָּל-חוֹכֵי לוֹ.  {פ}	18 And therefore will the LORD wait, that He may be gracious unto you, and therefore will He be exalted, that He may have compassion upon you; for the LORD is a God of justice, happy are all they that wait for Him. {P}
30.19 יט  כִּי-עַם בְּצִיּוֹן יֵשֵׁב, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; בָּכוֹ לֹא-תִבְכֶּה, חָנוֹן יָחְנְךָ לְקוֹל זַעֲקֶךָ--כְּשָׁמְעָתוֹ, עָנָךְ.	19 For, O people that dwellest in Zion at Jerusalem, thou shalt weep no more; He will surely be gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry, when He shall hear, He will answer thee.
30.20 כ  וְנָתַן לָכֶם אֲדֹנָי לֶחֶם צָר, וּמַיִם לָחַץ; וְלֹא-יִכָּנֵף עוֹד מוֹרֶיךָ, וְהָיוּ עֵינֶיךָ רֹאוֹת אֶת-מוֹרֶיךָ.	20 And though the Lord give you sparing bread and scant water, yet shall not thy Teacher hide Himself any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teacher;
30.21 כא  וְאָזְנֶיךָ תִּשְׁמַעְנָה דָבָר, מֵאַחֲרֶיךָ לֵאמֹר:  זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ לְכוּ בוֹ, כִּי תַאֲמִינוּ וְכִי תַשְׂמְאִילוּ.	21 And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying: 'This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.'
30.22 כב  וְטִמֵּאתֶם, אֶת-צִפּוּי פְּסִילֵי כַסְפֶּךָ, וְאֶת-אֲפֻדַּת, מַסֵּכַת זְהָבֶךָ; תִּזְרֵם כְּמוֹ דָוָה, צֵא תֹּאמַר לוֹ.	22 And ye shall defile thy graven images overlaid with silver, and thy molten images covered with gold; thou shalt put them far away as one unclean; thou shalt say unto it: 'Get thee hence.'
30.23 כג  וְנָתַן מְטַר זַרְעֲךָ אֲשֶׁר-תִּזְרַע אֶת-הָאֲדָמָה, וְלֶחֶם תְּבוּאַת הָאֲדָמָה, וְהָיָה דָשֵׁן, וְשָׁמֵן; יִרְעֶה מִקְנֶיךָ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כַּר נִרְחָב.	23 And He will give the rain for thy seed, wherewith thou sowest the ground, and bread of the increase of the ground, and it shall be fat and plenteous; in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.
30.24 כד  וְהָאֲלָפִים וְהָעֲיָרִים, עֹבְדֵי הָאֲדָמָה, בְּלִיל חָמִיץ, יֹאכֵלוּ--אֲשֶׁר-זֹרֶה בָרַחַת, וּבַמִּזְרֶה.	24 The oxen likewise and the young asses that till the ground shall eat savoury provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.
30.25 כה  וְהָיָה עַל-כָּל-הַר גָּבֹהַּ, וְעַל כָּל-גִּבְעָה נִשָּׂאָה, פְּלָגִים, יִבְלֵי-מָיִם--בְּיוֹם הֶרֶג רָב, בִּנְפֹל מִגְדָּלִים.	25 And there shall be upon every lofty mountain, and upon every high hill streams and watercourses, in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.
30.26 כו  וְהָיָה אוֹר-הַלְּבָנָה, כְּאוֹר הַחַמָּה, וְאוֹר הַחַמָּה יִהְיֶה שִׁבְעָתַיִם, כְּאוֹר שִׁבְעַת הַיָּמִים--בְּיוֹם, חֲבֹשׁ יְהוָה אֶת-שֶׁבֶר עַמּוֹ, וּמַחַץ מַכָּתוֹ, יִרְפָּא.  {פ}	26 Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of the seven days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the bruise of His people, and healeth the stroke of their wound. {P}
30.27 כז  הִנֵּה שֵׁם-יְהוָה, בָּא מִמֶּרְחָק, בֹּעֵר אַפּוֹ, וְכֹבֶד מַשָּׂאָה; שְׂפָתָיו מָלְאוּ זַעַם, וּלְשׁוֹנוֹ כְּאֵשׁ אֹכָלֶת.	27 Behold, the name of the LORD cometh from far, with His anger burning, and in thick uplifting of smoke; His lips are full of indignation, and His tongue is as a devouring fire;
30.28 כח  וְרוּחוֹ כְּנַחַל שׁוֹטֵף, עַד-צַוָּאר יֶחֱצֶה, לַהֲנָפָה גוֹיִם, בְּנָפַת שָׁוְא; וְרֶסֶן מַתְעֶה, עַל לְחָיֵי עַמִּים.	28 And His breath is as an overflowing stream, that divideth even unto the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of destruction; and a bridle that causeth to err shall be in the jaws of the peoples.
30.29 כט  הַשִּׁיר יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, כְּלֵיל הִתְקַדֶּשׁ-חָג; וְשִׂמְחַת לֵבָב, כַּהוֹלֵךְ בֶּחָלִיל, לָבוֹא בְהַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-צוּר יִשְׂרָאֵל.	29 Ye shall have a song as in the night when a feast is hallowed; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with the pipe to come into the mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel.
30.30 ל  וְהִשְׁמִיעַ יְהוָה אֶת-הוֹד קוֹלוֹ, וְנַחַת זְרוֹעוֹ יַרְאֶה, בְּזַעַף אַף, וְלַהַב אֵשׁ אוֹכֵלָה; נֶפֶץ וָזֶרֶם, וְאֶבֶן בָּרָד.	30 And the LORD will cause His glorious voice to be heard, and will show the lighting down of His arm, with furious anger, and the flame of a devouring fire, with a bursting of clouds, and a storm of rain, and hailstones.
30.31 לא  כִּי-מִקּוֹל יְהוָה, יֵחַת אַשּׁוּר; בַּשֵּׁבֶט, יַכֶּה.	31 For through the voice of the LORD shall Asshur be dismayed, the rod with which He smote.
30.32 לב  וְהָיָה, כֹּל מַעֲבַר מַטֵּה מוּסָדָה, אֲשֶׁר יָנִיחַ יְהוָה עָלָיו, בְּתֻפִּים וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת; וּבְמִלְחֲמוֹת תְּנוּפָה, נִלְחַם-בה (בָּם).	32 And in every place where the appointed staff shall pass, which the LORD shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps; and in battles of wielding will He fight with them.
30.33 לג  כִּי-עָרוּךְ מֵאֶתְמוּל תָּפְתֶּה, גַּם-הוא (הִיא) לַמֶּלֶךְ הוּכָן הֶעְמִיק הִרְחִב; מְדֻרָתָהּ, אֵשׁ וְעֵצִים הַרְבֵּה--נִשְׁמַת יְהוָה כְּנַחַל גָּפְרִית, בֹּעֲרָה בָּהּ.  {פ}	33 For a hearth is ordered of old; yea, for the king it is prepared, deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it. {P}
31.1 א  הוֹי הַיֹּרְדִים מִצְרַיִם לְעֶזְרָה, עַל-סוּסִים יִשָּׁעֵנוּ; וַיִּבְטְחוּ עַל-רֶכֶב כִּי רָב, וְעַל פָּרָשִׁים כִּי-עָצְמוּ מְאֹד--וְלֹא שָׁעוּ עַל-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-יְהוָה לֹא דָרָשׁוּ.	1 Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and rely on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many, and in horsemen, because they are exceeding mighty; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the LORD!
31.2 ב  וְגַם-הוּא חָכָם וַיָּבֵא רָע, וְאֶת-דְּבָרָיו לֹא הֵסִיר; וְקָם עַל-בֵּית מְרֵעִים, וְעַל-עֶזְרַת פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן.	2 Yet He also is wise, and bringeth evil, and doth not call back His words; but will arise against the house of the evil-doers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.
31.3 ג  וּמִצְרַיִם אָדָם וְלֹא-אֵל, וְסוּסֵיהֶם בָּשָׂר וְלֹא-רוּחַ; וַיהוָה יַטֶּה יָדוֹ, וְכָשַׁל עוֹזֵר וְנָפַל עָזֻר--וְיַחְדָּו, כֻּלָּם יִכְלָיוּן.  {ס}	3 Now the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit; so when the LORD shall stretch out His hand, both he that helpeth shall stumble, and he that is helped shall fall, and they all shall perish together. {S}
31.4 ד  כִּי כֹה אָמַר-יְהוָה אֵלַי כַּאֲשֶׁר יֶהְגֶּה הָאַרְיֵה וְהַכְּפִיר עַל-טַרְפּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יִקָּרֵא עָלָיו מְלֹא רֹעִים, מִקּוֹלָם לֹא יֵחָת, וּמֵהֲמוֹנָם לֹא יַעֲנֶה; כֵּן, יֵרֵד יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לִצְבֹּא עַל-הַר-צִיּוֹן, וְעַל-גִּבְעָתָהּ.	4 For thus saith the LORD unto me: Like as the lion, or the young lion, growling over his prey, though a multitude of shepherds be called forth against him, will not be dismayed at their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them; so will the LORD of hosts come down to fight upon mount Zion, and upon the hill thereof.
31.5 ה  כְּצִפֳּרִים עָפוֹת--כֵּן יָגֵן יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם; גָּנוֹן וְהִצִּיל, פָּסֹחַ וְהִמְלִיט.	5 As birds hovering, so will the LORD of hosts protect Jerusalem; He will deliver it as He protecteth it, He will rescue it as He passeth over.
31.6 ו  שׁוּבוּ, לַאֲשֶׁר הֶעְמִיקוּ סָרָה--בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 Turn ye unto Him against whom ye have deeply rebelled, O children of Israel.
31.7 ז  כִּי, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יִמְאָסוּן אִישׁ אֱלִילֵי כַסְפּוֹ, וֶאֱלִילֵי זְהָבוֹ--אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לָכֶם יְדֵיכֶם, חֵטְא.	7 For in that day they shall cast away every man his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin.
31.8 ח  וְנָפַל אַשּׁוּר בְּחֶרֶב לֹא-אִישׁ, וְחֶרֶב לֹא-אָדָם תֹּאכְלֶנּוּ; וְנָס לוֹ מִפְּנֵי-חֶרֶב, וּבַחוּרָיו לָמַס יִהְיוּ.	8 Then shall Asshur fall with the sword, not of man, and the sword, not of men, shall devour him; and he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall become tributary.
31.9 ט  וְסַלְעוֹ מִמָּגוֹר יַעֲבוֹר, וְחַתּוּ מִנֵּס שָׂרָיו:  נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-אוּר לוֹ בְּצִיּוֹן, וְתַנּוּר לוֹ, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	9 And his rock shall pass away by reason of terror, and his princes shall be dismayed at the ensign, saith the LORD, whose fire is in Zion, and His furnace in Jerusalem. {P}
32.1 א  הֵן לְצֶדֶק, יִמְלָךְ-מֶלֶךְ; וּלְשָׂרִים, לְמִשְׁפָּט יָשֹׂרוּ.	1 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and as for princes, they shall rule in justice.
32.2 ב  וְהָיָה-אִישׁ כְּמַחֲבֵא-רוּחַ, וְסֵתֶר זָרֶם, כְּפַלְגֵי-מַיִם בְּצָיוֹן, כְּצֵל סֶלַע-כָּבֵד בְּאֶרֶץ עֲיֵפָה.	2 And a man shall be as in a hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as by the watercourses in a dry place, as in the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
32.3 ג  וְלֹא תִשְׁעֶינָה, עֵינֵי רֹאִים; וְאָזְנֵי שֹׁמְעִים, תִּקְשַׁבְנָה.	3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be closed, and the ears of them that hear shall attend.
32.4 ד  וּלְבַב נִמְהָרִים, יָבִין לָדָעַת; וּלְשׁוֹן עִלְּגִים, תְּמַהֵר לְדַבֵּר צָחוֹת.	4 The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.
32.5 ה  לֹא-יִקָּרֵא עוֹד לְנָבָל, נָדִיב; וּלְכִילַי, לֹא יֵאָמֵר שׁוֹעַ.	5 The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to be noble.
32.6 ו  כִּי נָבָל נְבָלָה יְדַבֵּר, וְלִבּוֹ יַעֲשֶׂה-אָוֶן--לַעֲשׂוֹת חֹנֶף, וּלְדַבֵּר אֶל-יְהוָה תּוֹעָה, לְהָרִיק נֶפֶשׁ רָעֵב, וּמַשְׁקֶה צָמֵא יַחְסִיר.	6 For the vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise ungodliness, and to utter wickedness against the LORD, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
32.7 ז  וְכֵלַי, כֵּלָיו רָעִים; הוּא, זִמּוֹת יָעָץ, לְחַבֵּל ענוים (עֲנִיִּים) בְּאִמְרֵי-שֶׁקֶר, וּבְדַבֵּר אֶבְיוֹן מִשְׁפָּט.	7 The instruments also of the churl are evil; he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, and the needy when he speaketh right.
32.8 ח  וְנָדִיב, נְדִיבוֹת יָעָץ; וְהוּא, עַל-נְדִיבוֹת יָקוּם.  {ס}	8 But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall he stand. {S}
32.9 ט  נָשִׁים, שַׁאֲנַנּוֹת--קֹמְנָה, שְׁמַעְנָה קוֹלִי; בָּנוֹת, בֹּטְחוֹת--הַאְזֵנָּה, אִמְרָתִי.	9 Rise up, ye women that are at ease, and hear my voice; ye confident daughters, give ear unto my speech.
32.10 י  יָמִים, עַל-שָׁנָה, תִּרְגַּזְנָה, בֹּטְחוֹת:  כִּי כָּלָה בָצִיר, אֹסֶף בְּלִי יָבוֹא.	10 After a year and days shall ye be troubled, ye confident women; for the vintage shall fail, the ingathering shall not come.
32.11 יא  חִרְדוּ, שַׁאֲנַנּוֹת, רְגָזָה, בֹּטְחוֹת; פְּשֹׁטָה וְעֹרָה, וַחֲגוֹרָה עַל-חֲלָצָיִם.	11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye confident ones; strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins,
32.12 יב  עַל-שָׁדַיִם, סֹפְדִים; עַל-שְׂדֵי-חֶמֶד, עַל-גֶּפֶן פֹּרִיָּה.	12 Smiting upon the breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine;
32.13 יג  עַל אַדְמַת עַמִּי, קוֹץ שָׁמִיר תַּעֲלֶה:  כִּי עַל-כָּל-בָּתֵּי מָשׂוֹשׂ, קִרְיָה עַלִּיזָה.	13 For the land of my people whereon thorns and briers come up; yea, for all the houses of joy and the joyous city.
32.14 יד  כִּי-אַרְמוֹן נֻטָּשׁ, הֲמוֹן עִיר עֻזָּב; עֹפֶל וָבַחַן הָיָה בְעַד מְעָרוֹת, עַד-עוֹלָם--מְשׂוֹשׂ פְּרָאִים, מִרְעֵה עֲדָרִים.	14 For the palace shall be forsaken; the city with its stir shall be deserted; the mound and the tower shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;
32.15 טו  עַד-יֵעָרֶה עָלֵינוּ רוּחַ, מִמָּרוֹם; וְהָיָה מִדְבָּר לַכַּרְמֶל, וכרמל (וְהַכַּרְמֶל) לַיַּעַר יֵחָשֵׁב.	15 Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness become a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest.
32.16 טז  וְשָׁכַן בַּמִּדְבָּר, מִשְׁפָּט; וּצְדָקָה, בַּכַּרְמֶל תֵּשֵׁב.	16 Then justice shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness shall abide in the fruitful field.
32.17 יז  וְהָיָה מַעֲשֵׂה הַצְּדָקָה, שָׁלוֹם; וַעֲבֹדַת, הַצְּדָקָה--הַשְׁקֵט וָבֶטַח, עַד-עוֹלָם.	17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and confidence for ever.
32.18 יח  וְיָשַׁב עַמִּי, בִּנְוֵה שָׁלוֹם; וּבְמִשְׁכְּנוֹת, מִבְטַחִים, וּבִמְנוּחֹת, שַׁאֲנַנּוֹת.	18 And my people shall abide in a peaceable habitation, and in secure dwellings, and in quiet resting-places.
32.19 יט  וּבָרַד, בְּרֶדֶת הַיָּעַר; וּבַשִּׁפְלָה, תִּשְׁפַּל הָעִיר.	19 And it shall hail, in the downfall of the forest; but the city shall descend into the valley.
32.20 כ  אַשְׁרֵיכֶם, זֹרְעֵי עַל-כָּל-מָיִם; מְשַׁלְּחֵי רֶגֶל-הַשּׁוֹר, וְהַחֲמוֹר.  {ס}	20 Happy are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth freely the feet of the ox and the ass. {S}
33.1 א  הוֹי שׁוֹדֵד, וְאַתָּה לֹא שָׁדוּד, וּבוֹגֵד, וְלֹא-בָגְדוּ בוֹ; כַּהֲתִמְךָ שׁוֹדֵד תּוּשַּׁד, כַּנְּלֹתְךָ לִבְגֹּד יִבְגְּדוּ-בָךְ.  {ס}	1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! When thou hast ceased to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou art weary with dealing treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. {S}
33.2 ב  יְהוָה חָנֵּנוּ, לְךָ קִוִּינוּ; הֱיֵה זְרֹעָם לַבְּקָרִים, אַף-יְשׁוּעָתֵנוּ בְּעֵת צָרָה.	2 O LORD, be gracious unto us; we have waited for Thee; be Thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.
33.3 ג  מִקּוֹל הָמוֹן, נָדְדוּ עַמִּים; מֵרוֹמְמֻתֶךָ, נָפְצוּ גּוֹיִם.	3 At the noise of the tumult the peoples are fled; at the lifting up of Thyself the nations are scattered.
33.4 ד  וְאֻסַּף שְׁלַלְכֶם, אֹסֶף הֶחָסִיל--כְּמַשַּׁק גֵּבִים, שֹׁקֵק בּוֹ.	4 And your spoil is gathered as the caterpillar gathereth; as locusts leap do they leap upon it.
33.5 ה  נִשְׂגָּב יְהוָה, כִּי שֹׁכֵן מָרוֹם; מִלֵּא צִיּוֹן, מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה.	5 The LORD is exalted, for He dwelleth on high; He hath filled Zion with justice and righteousness.
33.6 ו  וְהָיָה אֱמוּנַת עִתֶּיךָ, חֹסֶן יְשׁוּעֹת חָכְמַת וָדָעַת; יִרְאַת יְהוָה, הִיא אוֹצָרוֹ.  {פ}	6 And the stability of thy times shall be a hoard of salvation--wisdom and knowledge, and the fear of the LORD which is His treasure. {P}
33.7 ז  הֵן, אֶרְאֶלָּם, צָעֲקוּ, חֻצָה; מַלְאֲכֵי שָׁלוֹם, מַר יִבְכָּיוּן.	7 Behold, their valiant ones cry without; the ambassadors of peace weep bitterly.
33.8 ח  נָשַׁמּוּ מְסִלּוֹת, שָׁבַת עֹבֵר אֹרַח; הֵפֵר בְּרִית מָאַס עָרִים, לֹא חָשַׁב אֱנוֹשׁ.	8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth; he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth not man.
33.9 ט  אָבַל אֻמְלְלָה אָרֶץ, הֶחְפִּיר לְבָנוֹן קָמַל; הָיָה הַשָּׁרוֹן כָּעֲרָבָה, וְנֹעֵר בָּשָׁן וְכַרְמֶל.  {ס}	9 The land mourneth and languisheth; Lebanon is ashamed, it withereth; Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel are clean bare. {S}
33.10 י  עַתָּה אָקוּם, יֹאמַר יְהוָה; עַתָּה, אֵרוֹמָם--עַתָּה, אֶנָּשֵׂא.	10 Now will I arise, saith the LORD; now will I be exalted; now will I lift Myself up.
33.11 יא  תַּהֲרוּ חֲשַׁשׁ, תֵּלְדוּ קַשׁ; רוּחֲכֶם, אֵשׁ תֹּאכַלְכֶם.	11 Ye conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble; your breath is a fire that shall devour you.
33.12 יב  וְהָיוּ עַמִּים, מִשְׂרְפוֹת שִׂיד; קוֹצִים כְּסוּחִים, בָּאֵשׁ יִצַּתּוּ.  {פ}	12 And the peoples shall be as the burnings of lime; as thorns cut down, that are burned in the fire. {P}
33.13 יג  שִׁמְעוּ רְחוֹקִים, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי; וּדְעוּ קְרוֹבִים, גְּבֻרָתִי.	13 Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are near, acknowledge My might.
33.14 יד  פָּחֲדוּ בְצִיּוֹן חַטָּאִים, אָחֲזָה רְעָדָה חֲנֵפִים; מִי יָגוּר לָנוּ, אֵשׁ אוֹכֵלָה--מִי-יָגוּר לָנוּ, מוֹקְדֵי עוֹלָם.	14 The sinners in Zion are afraid; trembling hath seized the ungodly: 'Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?'
33.15 טו  הֹלֵךְ צְדָקוֹת, וְדֹבֵר מֵישָׁרִים; מֹאֵס בְּבֶצַע מַעֲשַׁקּוֹת, נֹעֵר כַּפָּיו מִתְּמֹךְ בַּשֹּׁחַד, אֹטֵם אָזְנוֹ מִשְּׁמֹעַ דָּמִים, וְעֹצֵם עֵינָיו מֵרְאוֹת בְּרָע.	15 He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from looking upon evil;
33.16 טז  הוּא מְרוֹמִים יִשְׁכֹּן, מְצָדוֹת סְלָעִים מִשְׂגַּבּוֹ; לַחְמוֹ נִתָּן, מֵימָיו נֶאֱמָנִים.	16 He shall dwell on high; his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks; his bread shall be given, his waters shall be sure.
33.17 יז  מֶלֶךְ בְּיָפְיוֹ, תֶּחֱזֶינָה עֵינֶיךָ; תִּרְאֶינָה, אֶרֶץ מַרְחַקִּים.	17 Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty; they shall behold a land stretching afar.
33.18 יח  לִבְּךָ, יֶהְגֶּה אֵימָה; אַיֵּה סֹפֵר אַיֵּה שֹׁקֵל, אַיֵּה סֹפֵר אֶת-הַמִּגְדָּלִים.	18 Thy heart shall muse on the terror: 'Where is he that counted, where is he that weighed? Where is he that counted the towers?'
33.19 יט  אֶת-עַם נוֹעָז, לֹא תִרְאֶה:  עַם עִמְקֵי שָׂפָה מִשְּׁמוֹעַ, נִלְעַג לָשׁוֹן אֵין בִּינָה.	19 Thou shalt not see the fierce people; a people of a deep speech that thou canst not perceive, of a stammering tongue that thou canst not understand.
33.20 כ  חֲזֵה צִיּוֹן, קִרְיַת מוֹעֲדֵנוּ; עֵינֶיךָ תִרְאֶינָה יְרוּשָׁלִַם נָוֶה שַׁאֲנָן, אֹהֶל בַּל-יִצְעָן בַּל-יִסַּע יְתֵדֹתָיו לָנֶצַח, וְכָל-חֲבָלָיו, בַּל-יִנָּתֵקוּ.	20 Look upon Zion, the city of our solemn gatherings; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a peaceful habitation, a tent that shall not be removed, the stakes whereof shall never be plucked up, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.
33.21 כא  כִּי אִם-שָׁם אַדִּיר יְהוָה, לָנוּ, מְקוֹם-נְהָרִים יְאֹרִים, רַחֲבֵי יָדָיִם; בַּל-תֵּלֶךְ בּוֹ אֳנִי-שַׁיִט, וְצִי אַדִּיר לֹא יַעַבְרֶנּוּ.	21 But there the LORD will be with us in majesty, in a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.
33.22 כב  כִּי יְהוָה שֹׁפְטֵנוּ, יְהוָה מְחֹקְקֵנוּ; יְהוָה מַלְכֵּנוּ, הוּא יוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ.	22 For the LORD is our Judge, the LORD is our Lawgiver, the LORD is our King; He will save us.
33.23 כג  נִטְּשׁוּ, חֲבָלָיִךְ; בַּל-יְחַזְּקוּ כֵן-תָּרְנָם, בַּל-פָּרְשׂוּ נֵס, אָז חֻלַּק עַד-שָׁלָל מַרְבֶּה, פִּסְחִים בָּזְזוּ בַז.	23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they do not hold the stand of their mast, they do not spread the sail; then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.
33.24 כד  וּבַל-יֹאמַר שָׁכֵן, חָלִיתִי; הָעָם הַיֹּשֵׁב בָּהּ, נְשֻׂא עָוֺן.  {ס}	24 And the inhabitant shall not say: 'I am sick'; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. {S}
34.1 א  קִרְבוּ גוֹיִם לִשְׁמֹעַ, וּלְאֻמִּים הַקְשִׁיבוּ; תִּשְׁמַע הָאָרֶץ וּמְלֹאָהּ, תֵּבֵל וְכָל-צֶאֱצָאֶיהָ.	1 Come near, ye nations, to hear, and attend, ye peoples; let the earth hear, and the fulness thereof, the world, and all things that come forth of it.
34.2 ב  כִּי קֶצֶף לַיהוָה עַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, וְחֵמָה עַל-כָּל-צְבָאָם; הֶחֱרִימָם, נְתָנָם לַטָּבַח.	2 For the LORD hath indignation against all the nations, and fury against all their host; He hath utterly destroyed them, He hath delivered them to the slaughter.
34.3 ג  וְחַלְלֵיהֶם יֻשְׁלָכוּ, וּפִגְרֵיהֶם יַעֲלֶה בָאְשָׁם; וְנָמַסּוּ הָרִים, מִדָּמָם.	3 Their slain also shall be cast out, and the stench of their carcasses shall come up, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.
34.4 ד  וְנָמַקּוּ כָּל-צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְנָגֹלּוּ כַסֵּפֶר הַשָּׁמָיִם; וְכָל-צְבָאָם יִבּוֹל--כִּנְבֹל עָלֶה מִגֶּפֶן, וּכְנֹבֶלֶת מִתְּאֵנָה.	4 And all the host of heaven shall moulder away, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll; and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig-tree.
34.5 ה  כִּי-רִוְּתָה בַשָּׁמַיִם, חַרְבִּי; הִנֵּה עַל-אֱדוֹם תֵּרֵד, וְעַל-עַם חֶרְמִי לְמִשְׁפָּט.	5 For My sword hath drunk its fill in heaven; behold, it shall come down upon Edom, and upon the people of My ban, to judgment.
34.6 ו  חֶרֶב לַיהוָה מָלְאָה דָם, הֻדַּשְׁנָה מֵחֵלֶב, מִדַּם כָּרִים וְעַתּוּדִים, מֵחֵלֶב כִּלְיוֹת אֵילִים:  כִּי זֶבַח לַיהוָה בְּבָצְרָה, וְטֶבַח גָּדוֹל בְּאֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם.	6 The sword of the LORD is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams; for the LORD hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
34.7 ז  וְיָרְדוּ רְאֵמִים עִמָּם, וּפָרִים עִם-אַבִּירִים; וְרִוְּתָה אַרְצָם מִדָּם, וַעֲפָרָם מֵחֵלֶב יְדֻשָּׁן.	7 And the wild-oxen shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be drunken with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.
34.8 ח  כִּי יוֹם נָקָם, לַיהוָה--שְׁנַת שִׁלּוּמִים, לְרִיב צִיּוֹן.	8 For the LORD hath a day of vengeance, a year of recompense for the controversy of Zion.
34.9 ט  וְנֶהֶפְכוּ נְחָלֶיהָ לְזֶפֶת, וַעֲפָרָהּ לְגָפְרִית; וְהָיְתָה אַרְצָהּ, לְזֶפֶת בֹּעֵרָה.	9 And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch.
34.10 י  לַיְלָה וְיוֹמָם לֹא תִכְבֶּה, לְעוֹלָם יַעֲלֶה עֲשָׁנָהּ; מִדּוֹר לָדוֹר, תֶּחֱרָב--לְנֵצַח נְצָחִים, אֵין עֹבֵר בָּהּ.	10 It shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof shall go up for ever; from generation to generation it shall lie waste: none shall pass through it for ever and ever.
34.11 יא  וִירֵשׁוּהָ קָאַת וְקִפּוֹד, וְיַנְשׁוֹף וְעֹרֵב יִשְׁכְּנוּ-בָהּ; וְנָטָה עָלֶיהָ קַו-תֹהוּ, וְאַבְנֵי-בֹהוּ.	11 But the pelican and the bittern shall possess it, and the owl and the raven shall dwell therein; and He shall stretch over it the line of confusion, and the plummet of emptiness.
34.12 יב  חֹרֶיהָ וְאֵין-שָׁם, מְלוּכָה יִקְרָאוּ; וְכָל-שָׂרֶיהָ, יִהְיוּ אָפֶס.	12 As for her nobles, none shall be there to be called to the kingdom; and all her princes shall be nothing.
34.13 יג  וְעָלְתָה אַרְמְנֹתֶיהָ סִירִים, קִמּוֹשׂ וָחוֹחַ בְּמִבְצָרֶיהָ; וְהָיְתָה נְוֵה תַנִּים, חָצִיר לִבְנוֹת יַעֲנָה.	13 And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and thistles in the fortresses thereof; and it shall be a habitation of wild-dogs, an enclosure for ostriches.
34.14 יד  וּפָגְשׁוּ צִיִּים אֶת-אִיִּים, וְשָׂעִיר עַל-רֵעֵהוּ יִקְרָא; אַךְ-שָׁם הִרְגִּיעָה לִּילִית, וּמָצְאָה לָהּ מָנוֹחַ.	14 And the wild-cats shall meet with the jackals, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; yea, the night-monster shall repose there, and shall find her a place of rest.
34.15 טו  שָׁמָּה קִנְּנָה קִפּוֹז וַתְּמַלֵּט, וּבָקְעָה וְדָגְרָה בְצִלָּהּ; אַךְ-שָׁם נִקְבְּצוּ דַיּוֹת, אִשָּׁה רְעוּתָהּ.	15 There shall the arrowsnake make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and brood under her shadow; yea, there shall the kites be gathered, every one with her mate.
34.16 טז  דִּרְשׁוּ מֵעַל-סֵפֶר יְהוָה, וּקְרָאוּ--אַחַת מֵהֵנָּה לֹא נֶעְדָּרָה, אִשָּׁה רְעוּתָהּ לֹא פָקָדוּ:  כִּי-פִי הוּא צִוָּה, וְרוּחוֹ הוּא קִבְּצָן.	16 Seek ye out of the book of the LORD, and read; no one of these shall be missing, none shall want her mate; for My mouth it hath commanded, and the breath thereof it hath gathered them.
34.17 יז  וְהוּא-הִפִּיל לָהֶן גּוֹרָל, וְיָדוֹ חִלְּקַתָּה לָהֶם בַּקָּו; עַד-עוֹלָם, יִירָשׁוּהָ--לְדוֹר וָדוֹר, יִשְׁכְּנוּ-בָהּ.  {ס}	17 And He hath cast the lot for them, and His hand hath divided it unto them by line; they shall possess it for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein. {S}
35.1 א  יְשֻׂשׂוּם מִדְבָּר, וְצִיָּה; וְתָגֵל עֲרָבָה וְתִפְרַח, כַּחֲבַצָּלֶת.	1 The wilderness and the parched land shall be glad; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.
35.2 ב  פָּרֹחַ תִּפְרַח וְתָגֵל, אַף גִּילַת וְרַנֵּן--כְּבוֹד הַלְּבָנוֹן נִתַּן-לָהּ, הֲדַר הַכַּרְמֶל וְהַשָּׁרוֹן; הֵמָּה יִרְאוּ כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, הֲדַר אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {פ}	2 It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice, even with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon; they shall see the glory of the LORD, the excellency of our God. {P}
35.3 ג  חַזְּקוּ, יָדַיִם רָפוֹת; וּבִרְכַּיִם כֹּשְׁלוֹת, אַמֵּצוּ.	3 Strengthen ye the weak hands, and make firm the tottering knees.
35.4 ד  אִמְרוּ, לְנִמְהֲרֵי-לֵב, חִזְקוּ, אַל-תִּירָאוּ; הִנֵּה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, נָקָם יָבוֹא--גְּמוּל אֱלֹהִים, הוּא יָבוֹא וְיֹשַׁעֲכֶם.	4 Say to them that are of a fearful heart: 'Be strong, fear not'; behold, your God will come with vengeance, with the recompense of God He will come and save you.
35.5 ה  אָז תִּפָּקַחְנָה, עֵינֵי עִוְרִים; וְאָזְנֵי חֵרְשִׁים, תִּפָּתַחְנָה.	5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
35.6 ו  אָז יְדַלֵּג כָּאַיָּל פִּסֵּחַ, וְתָרֹן לְשׁוֹן אִלֵּם:  כִּי-נִבְקְעוּ בַמִּדְבָּר מַיִם, וּנְחָלִים בָּעֲרָבָה.	6 Then shall the lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.
35.7 ז  וְהָיָה הַשָּׁרָב לַאֲגַם, וְצִמָּאוֹן לְמַבּוּעֵי מָיִם; בִּנְוֵה תַנִּים רִבְצָהּ, חָצִיר לְקָנֶה וָגֹמֶא.	7 And the parched land shall become a pool, and the thirsty ground springs of water; in the habitation of jackals herds shall lie down, it shall be an enclosure for reeds and rushes.
35.8 ח  וְהָיָה-שָׁם מַסְלוּל וָדֶרֶךְ, וְדֶרֶךְ הַקֹּדֶשׁ יִקָּרֵא לָהּ--לֹא-יַעַבְרֶנּוּ טָמֵא, וְהוּא-לָמוֹ; הֹלֵךְ דֶּרֶךְ וֶאֱוִילִים, לֹא יִתְעוּ.	8 And a highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those; the wayfaring men, yea fools, shall not err therein.
35.9 ט  לֹא-יִהְיֶה שָׁם אַרְיֵה, וּפְרִיץ חַיּוֹת בַּל-יַעֲלֶנָּה--לֹא תִמָּצֵא, שָׁם; וְהָלְכוּ, גְּאוּלִים.	9 No lion shall be there, nor shall any ravenous beast go up thereon, they shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there;
35.10 י  וּפְדוּיֵי יְהוָה יְשֻׁבוּן, וּבָאוּ צִיּוֹן בְּרִנָּה, וְשִׂמְחַת עוֹלָם, עַל-רֹאשָׁם; שָׂשׂוֹן וְשִׂמְחָה יַשִּׂיגוּ, וְנָסוּ יָגוֹן וַאֲנָחָה.  {ס}	10 And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. {S}
36.1 א  וַיְהִי בְּאַרְבַּע עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה לַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, עָלָה סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר עַל כָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה הַבְּצֻרוֹת--וַיִּתְפְּשֵׂם.	1 Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.
36.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֶת-רַבְשָׁקֵה מִלָּכִישׁ יְרוּשָׁלְַמָה אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, בְּחֵיל כָּבֵד; וַיַּעֲמֹד, בִּתְעָלַת הַבְּרֵכָה הָעֶלְיוֹנָה, בִּמְסִלַּת, שְׂדֵה כוֹבֵס.	2 And the king of Assyria sent Rab-shakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fullers' field.
36.3 ג  וַיֵּצֵא אֵלָיו אֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּהוּ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַבָּיִת--וְשֶׁבְנָא, הַסֹּפֵר, וְיוֹאָח בֶּן-אָסָף, הַמַּזְכִּיר.	3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.
36.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם רַבְשָׁקֵה, אִמְרוּ-נָא אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  כֹּה-אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ הַגָּדוֹל, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, מָה הַבִּטָּחוֹן הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר בָּטָחְתָּ.	4 And Rab-shakeh said unto them: 'Say ye now to Hezekiah: Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria: What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?
36.5 ה  אָמַרְתִּי, אַךְ-דְּבַר-שְׂפָתַיִם, עֵצָה וּגְבוּרָה, לַמִּלְחָמָה; עַתָּה עַל-מִי בָטַחְתָּ, כִּי מָרַדְתָּ בִּי.	5 I said: It is but vain words; for counsel and strength are for the war. Now on whom dost thou trust, that thou hast rebelled against me?
36.6 ו  הִנֵּה בָטַחְתָּ עַל-מִשְׁעֶנֶת הַקָּנֶה הָרָצוּץ הַזֶּה, עַל-מִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר יִסָּמֵךְ אִישׁ עָלָיו, וּבָא בְכַפּוֹ וּנְקָבָהּ:  כֵּן פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם, לְכָל-הַבֹּטְחִים עָלָיו.	6 Behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it; so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust on him.
36.7 ז  וְכִי-תֹאמַר אֵלַי, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ בָּטָחְנוּ:  הֲלוֹא-הוּא, אֲשֶׁר הֵסִיר חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-בָּמֹתָיו וְאֶת-מִזְבְּחֹתָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לִיהוּדָה וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם, לִפְנֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ הַזֶּה תִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ.	7 But if thou say unto me: We trust in the LORD our God; is not that He, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and hath said to Judah and to Jerusalem: Ye shall worship before this altar?
36.8 ח  וְעַתָּה הִתְעָרֶב נָא, אֶת-אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר; וְאֶתְּנָה לְךָ, אַלְפַּיִם סוּסִים--אִם-תּוּכַל, לָתֶת לְךָ רֹכְבִים עֲלֵיהֶם.	8 Now therefore, I pray thee, make a wager with my master, the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
36.9 ט  וְאֵיךְ תָּשִׁיב, אֵת פְּנֵי פַחַת אַחַד עַבְדֵי אֲדֹנִי--הַקְּטַנִּים; וַתִּבְטַח לְךָ עַל-מִצְרַיִם, לְרֶכֶב וּלְפָרָשִׁים.	9 How then canst thou turn away the face of one captain, even of the least of my master's servants? yet thou puttest thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen!
36.10 י  וְעַתָּה הֲמִבַּלְעֲדֵי יְהוָה, עָלִיתִי עַל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת לְהַשְׁחִיתָהּ; יְהוָה אָמַר אֵלַי, עֲלֵה אֶל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת וְהַשְׁחִיתָהּ.  {ס}	10 And am I now come up without the LORD against this land to destroy it? The LORD said unto me: Go up against this land, and destroy it.' {S}
36.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶלְיָקִים וְשֶׁבְנָא וְיוֹאָח אֶל-רַבְשָׁקֵה, דַּבֶּר-נָא אֶל-עֲבָדֶיךָ אֲרָמִית--כִּי שֹׁמְעִים, אֲנָחְנוּ; וְאַל-תְּדַבֵּר אֵלֵינוּ, יְהוּדִית, בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַחוֹמָה.	11 Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rab-shakeh: 'Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Aramean language, for we understand it; and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall.'
36.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר רַבְשָׁקֵה, הַאֶל אֲדֹנֶיךָ וְאֵלֶיךָ שְׁלָחַנִי אֲדֹנִי, לְדַבֵּר, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה:  הֲלֹא עַל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַיֹּשְׁבִים עַל-הַחוֹמָה, לֶאֱכֹל אֶת-חראיהם (צוֹאָתָם) וְלִשְׁתּוֹת אֶת-שיניהם (מֵימֵי רַגְלֵיהֶם), עִמָּכֶם.	12 But Rab-shakeh said: 'Hath my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall, to eat their own dung, and to drink their own water with you?'
36.13 יג  וַיַּעֲמֹד, רַבְשָׁקֵה, וַיִּקְרָא בְקוֹל-גָּדוֹל, יְהוּדִית; וַיֹּאמֶר--שִׁמְעוּ אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ הַגָּדוֹל, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	13 Then Rab-shakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said: 'Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.
36.14 יד  כֹּה אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַל-יַשִּׁא לָכֶם חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  כִּי לֹא-יוּכַל, לְהַצִּיל אֶתְכֶם.	14 Thus saith the king: Let not Hezekiah beguile you, for he will not be able to deliver you;
36.15 טו  וְאַל-יַבְטַח אֶתְכֶם חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, הַצֵּל יַצִּילֵנוּ יְהוָה:  לֹא תִנָּתֵן הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	15 neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying: The LORD will surely deliver us; this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
36.16 טז  אַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ;  {פ} כִּי כֹה אָמַר הַמֶּלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, עֲשׂוּ-אִתִּי בְרָכָה וּצְאוּ אֵלַי, וְאִכְלוּ אִישׁ-גַּפְנוֹ וְאִישׁ תְּאֵנָתוֹ, וּשְׁתוּ אִישׁ מֵי-בוֹרוֹ.	16 Hearken not to Hezekiah; {P} for thus saith the king of Assyria: Make your peace with me, and come out to me; and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig-tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;
36.17 יז  עַד-בֹּאִי, וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּאַרְצְכֶם:  אֶרֶץ דָּגָן וְתִירוֹשׁ, אֶרֶץ לֶחֶם וּכְרָמִים.	17 until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
36.18 יח  פֶּן-יַסִּית אֶתְכֶם חִזְקִיָּהוּ לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה יַצִּילֵנוּ; הַהִצִּילוּ אֱלֹהֵי הַגּוֹיִם, אִישׁ אֶת-אַרְצוֹ, מִיַּד, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	18 Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying: The LORD will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
36.19 יט  אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֵי חֲמָת, וְאַרְפָּד--אַיֵּה, אֱלֹהֵי סְפַרְוָיִם; וְכִי-הִצִּילוּ אֶת-שֹׁמְרוֹן, מִיָּדִי.	19 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
36.20 כ  מִי, בְּכָל-אֱלֹהֵי הָאֲרָצוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-הִצִּילוּ אֶת-אַרְצָם, מִיָּדִי; כִּי-יַצִּיל יְהוָה אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מִיָּדִי.	20 Who are they among all the gods of these countries, that have delivered their country out of my hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?'
36.21 כא  וַיַּחֲרִישׁוּ, וְלֹא-עָנוּ אֹתוֹ דָּבָר:  כִּי-מִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ הִיא לֵאמֹר, לֹא תַעֲנֻהוּ.	21 But they held their peace, and answered him not a word; for the king's commandment was, saying: 'Answer him not.'
36.22 כב  וַיָּבֹא אֶלְיָקִים בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּהוּ אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַבַּיִת וְשֶׁבְנָא הַסֹּפֵר וְיוֹאָח בֶּן-אָסָף הַמַּזְכִּיר, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ--קְרוּעֵי בְגָדִים; וַיַּגִּידוּ לוֹ, אֵת דִּבְרֵי רַבְשָׁקֵה.  {ס}	22 Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rab-shakeh. {S}
37.1 א  וַיְהִי, כִּשְׁמֹעַ הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, וַיִּקְרַע, אֶת-בְּגָדָיו; וַיִּתְכַּס בַּשָּׂק, וַיָּבֹא בֵּית יְהוָה.	1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD.
37.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֶת-אֶלְיָקִים אֲשֶׁר-עַל-הַבַּיִת וְאֵת שֶׁבְנָא הַסּוֹפֵר, וְאֵת זִקְנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, מִתְכַּסִּים, בַּשַּׂקִּים--אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ, הַנָּבִיא.	2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
37.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, יוֹם-צָרָה וְתוֹכֵחָה וּנְאָצָה, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי בָאוּ בָנִים עַד-מַשְׁבֵּר, וְכֹחַ אַיִן לְלֵדָה.	3 And they said unto him: 'Thus saith Hezekiah: This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of contumely; for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.
37.4 ד  אוּלַי יִשְׁמַע יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֵת דִּבְרֵי רַבְשָׁקֵה, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אֲדֹנָיו לְחָרֵף אֱלֹהִים חַי, וְהוֹכִיחַ בַּדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַע יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ; וְנָשָׂאתָ תְפִלָּה, בְּעַד הַשְּׁאֵרִית הַנִּמְצָאָה.	4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to taunt the living God, and will rebuke the words which the LORD thy God hath heard; wherefore make prayer for the remnant that is left.'
37.5 ה  וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַבְדֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ--אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ.	5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
37.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, כֹּה תֹאמְרוּן אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיכֶם:  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אַל-תִּירָא מִפְּנֵי הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתָּ, אֲשֶׁר גִּדְּפוּ נַעֲרֵי מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר, אוֹתִי.	6 And Isaiah said unto them: 'Thus shall ye say to your master: Thus saith the LORD: Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed Me.
37.7 ז  הִנְנִי נוֹתֵן בּוֹ רוּחַ, וְשָׁמַע שְׁמוּעָה וְשָׁב אֶל-אַרְצוֹ; וְהִפַּלְתִּיו בַּחֶרֶב, בְּאַרְצוֹ.	7 Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return unto his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.'
37.8 ח  וַיָּשָׁב, רַבְשָׁקֵה, וַיִּמְצָא אֶת-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, נִלְחָם עַל-לִבְנָה:  כִּי שָׁמַע, כִּי נָסַע מִלָּכִישׁ.	8 So Rab-shakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah; for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
37.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁמַע, עַל-תִּרְהָקָה מֶלֶךְ-כּוּשׁ לֵאמֹר, יָצָא, לְהִלָּחֵם אִתָּךְ; וַיִּשְׁמַע וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ לֵאמֹר.	9 And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia: 'He is come out to fight against thee.' And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying:
37.10 י  כֹּה תֹאמְרוּן, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר, אַל-יַשִּׁאֲךָ אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה בּוֹטֵחַ בּוֹ לֵאמֹר:  לֹא תִנָּתֵן יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	10 'Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying: Let not thy God in whom thou trustest beguile thee, saying: Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
37.11 יא  הִנֵּה אַתָּה שָׁמַעְתָּ, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר לְכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת--לְהַחֲרִימָם; וְאַתָּה, תִּנָּצֵל.	11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
37.12 יב  הַהִצִּילוּ אוֹתָם אֱלֹהֵי הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁחִיתוּ אֲבוֹתַי, אֶת-גּוֹזָן, וְאֶת-חָרָן; וְרֶצֶף וּבְנֵי-עֶדֶן, אֲשֶׁר בִּתְלַשָּׂר.	12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden that were in Telassar?
37.13 יג  אַיֵּה מֶלֶךְ-חֲמָת וּמֶלֶךְ אַרְפָּד, וּמֶלֶךְ לָעִיר סְפַרְוָיִם, הֵנַע, וְעִוָּה.	13 Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?'
37.14 יד  וַיִּקַּח חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-הַסְּפָרִים מִיַּד הַמַּלְאָכִים, וַיִּקְרָאֵהוּ; וַיַּעַל בֵּית יְהוָה, וַיִּפְרְשֵׂהוּ חִזְקִיָּהוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.  {ס}	14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it; and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD. {S}
37.15 טו  וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל, חִזְקִיָּהוּ, אֶל-יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר.	15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, saying:
37.16 טז  יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יֹשֵׁב הַכְּרֻבִים, אַתָּה-הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים לְבַדְּךָ, לְכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ; אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ, אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	16 'O LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, that sittest upon the cherubim, Thou art the God, even Thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; Thou hast made heaven and earth.
37.17 יז  הַטֵּה יְהוָה אָזְנְךָ וּשְׁמָע, פְּקַח יְהוָה עֵינֶךָ וּרְאֵה; וּשְׁמַע, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי סַנְחֵרִיב, אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַח, לְחָרֵף אֱלֹהִים חָי.	17 Incline Thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open Thine eyes, O LORD, and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib, who hath sent to taunt the living God.
37.18 יח  אָמְנָם, יְהוָה:  הֶחֱרִיבוּ מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר, אֶת-כָּל-הָאֲרָצוֹת--וְאֶת-אַרְצָם.	18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the countries, and their land,
37.19 יט  וְנָתֹן אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, בָּאֵשׁ:  כִּי לֹא אֱלֹהִים הֵמָּה, כִּי אִם-מַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵי-אָדָם עֵץ וָאֶבֶן--וַיְאַבְּדוּם.	19 and have cast their gods into the fire; for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them.
37.20 כ  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ מִיָּדוֹ; וְיֵדְעוּ כָּל-מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה לְבַדֶּךָ.	20 Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that Thou art the LORD, even Thou only.'
37.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הִתְפַּלַּלְתָּ אֵלַי, אֶל-סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Whereas thou hast prayed to Me against Sennacherib king of Assyria,
37.22 כב  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה עָלָיו:  בָּזָה לְךָ לָעֲגָה לְךָ, בְּתוּלַת בַּת-צִיּוֹן--אַחֲרֶיךָ רֹאשׁ הֵנִיעָה, בַּת יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	22 this is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.
37.23 כג  אֶת-מִי חֵרַפְתָּ וְגִדַּפְתָּ, וְעַל-מִי הֲרִימוֹתָה קּוֹל; וַתִּשָּׂא מָרוֹם עֵינֶיךָ, אֶל-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 Whom hast thou taunted and blasphemed? And against whom hast thou exalted thy voice? Yea, thou hast lifted up thine eyes on high, even against the Holy One of Israel!
37.24 כד  בְּיַד עֲבָדֶיךָ, חֵרַפְתָּ אֲדֹנָי, וַתֹּאמֶר בְּרֹב רִכְבִּי אֲנִי עָלִיתִי מְרוֹם הָרִים, יַרְכְּתֵי לְבָנוֹן; וְאֶכְרֹת קוֹמַת אֲרָזָיו, מִבְחַר בְּרֹשָׁיו, וְאָבוֹא מְרוֹם קִצּוֹ, יַעַר כַּרְמִלּוֹ.	24 By thy servants hast thou taunted the Lord, and hast said: With the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon; and I have cut down the tall cedars thereof, and the choice cypress-trees thereof; and I have entered into his farthest height, the forest of his fruitful field.
37.25 כה  אֲנִי קַרְתִּי, וְשָׁתִיתִי מָיִם; וְאַחְרִב, בְּכַף-פְּעָמַי, כֹּל, יְאֹרֵי מָצוֹר.	25 I have digged and drunk water, and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of Egypt.
37.26 כו  הֲלוֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ לְמֵרָחוֹק אוֹתָהּ עָשִׂיתִי, מִימֵי קֶדֶם וִיצַרְתִּיהָ; עַתָּה הֲבֵאתִיהָ--וּתְהִי לְהַשְׁאוֹת גַּלִּים נִצִּים, עָרִים בְּצֻרוֹת.	26 Hast thou not heard? Long ago I made it, in ancient times I fashioned it; now have I brought it to pass, yea, it is done; that fortified cities should be laid waste into ruinous heaps.
37.27 כז  וְיֹשְׁבֵיהֶן, קִצְרֵי-יָד, חַתּוּ, וָבֹשׁוּ; הָיוּ עֵשֶׂב שָׂדֶה, וִירַק דֶּשֶׁא, חֲצִיר גַּגּוֹת, וּשְׁדֵמָה לִפְנֵי קָמָה.	27 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as a field of corn before it is grown up.
37.28 כח  וְשִׁבְתְּךָ וְצֵאתְךָ וּבוֹאֲךָ, יָדָעְתִּי; וְאֵת, הִתְרַגֶּזְךָ אֵלָי.	28 But I know thy sitting down, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against Me.
37.29 כט  יַעַן הִתְרַגֶּזְךָ אֵלַי, וְשַׁאֲנַנְךָ עָלָה בְאָזְנָי--וְשַׂמְתִּי חַחִי בְּאַפֶּךָ, וּמִתְגִּי בִּשְׂפָתֶיךָ, וַהֲשִׁיבֹתִיךָ, בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-בָּאתָ בָּהּ.	29 Because of thy raging against Me, and for that thine uproar is come up into Mine ears, therefore will I put My hook in thy nose, and My bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.
37.30 ל  וְזֶה-לְּךָ הָאוֹת--אָכוֹל הַשָּׁנָה סָפִיחַ, וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית שָׁחִיס; וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁלִישִׁית, זִרְעוּ וְקִצְרוּ וְנִטְעוּ כְרָמִים--ואכול (וְאִכְלוּ) פִרְיָם.	30 And this shall be the sign unto thee: ye shall eat this year that which groweth of itself, and in the second year that which springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.
37.31 לא  וְיָסְפָה פְּלֵיטַת בֵּית-יְהוּדָה, הַנִּשְׁאָרָה--שֹׁרֶשׁ לְמָטָּה; וְעָשָׂה פְרִי, לְמָעְלָה.	31 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
37.32 לב  כִּי מִירוּשָׁלִַם תֵּצֵא שְׁאֵרִית, וּפְלֵיטָה מֵהַר צִיּוֹן; קִנְאַת יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, תַּעֲשֶׂה-זֹּאת.  {ס}	32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and out of mount Zion they that shall escape; the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall perform this. {S}
37.33 לג  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, לֹא יָבוֹא אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְלֹא-יוֹרֶה שָׁם חֵץ; וְלֹא-יְקַדְּמֶנָּה מָגֵן, וְלֹא-יִשְׁפֹּךְ עָלֶיהָ סֹלְלָה.	33 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: He shall not come unto this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither shall he come before it with shield, nor cast a mound against it.
37.34 לד  בַּדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר-בָּא, בָּהּ יָשׁוּב; וְאֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת לֹא יָבוֹא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	34 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and he shall not come unto this city, saith the LORD.
37.35 לה  וְגַנּוֹתִי עַל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, לְהוֹשִׁיעָהּ--לְמַעֲנִי, וּלְמַעַן דָּוִד עַבְדִּי.  {ס}	35 For I will defend this city to save it, for Mine own sake, and for My servant David's sake.' {S}
37.36 לו  וַיֵּצֵא מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, וַיַּכֶּה בְּמַחֲנֵה אַשּׁוּר, מֵאָה וּשְׁמֹנִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה, אָלֶף; וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ בַבֹּקֶר, וְהִנֵּה כֻלָּם פְּגָרִים מֵתִים.	36 And the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand; and when men arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.
37.37 לז  וַיִּסַּע וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיָּשָׁב סַנְחֵרִיב מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר; וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּנִינְוֵה.	37 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went, and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.
37.38 לח  וַיְהִי הוּא מִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה בֵּית נִסְרֹךְ אֱלֹהָיו, וְאַדְרַמֶּלֶךְ וְשַׂרְאֶצֶר בָּנָיו הִכֻּהוּ בַחֶרֶב, וְהֵמָּה נִמְלְטוּ, אֶרֶץ אֲרָרָט; וַיִּמְלֹךְ אֵסַר-חַדֹּן בְּנוֹ, תַּחְתָּיו.  {ס}	38 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sarezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. {S}
38.1 א  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, חָלָה חִזְקִיָּהוּ לָמוּת; וַיָּבוֹא אֵלָיו יְשַׁעְיָהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹץ הַנָּבִיא, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צַו לְבֵיתֶךָ--כִּי מֵת אַתָּה, וְלֹא תִחְיֶה.	1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him: 'Thus saith the LORD: Set thy house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.'
38.2 ב  וַיַּסֵּב חִזְקִיָּהוּ פָּנָיו, אֶל-הַקִּיר; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-יְהוָה.	2 Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the LORD,
38.3 ג  וַיֹּאמַר, אָנָּה יְהוָה זְכָר-נָא אֵת אֲשֶׁר הִתְהַלַּכְתִּי לְפָנֶיךָ בֶּאֱמֶת וּבְלֵב שָׁלֵם, וְהַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ, עָשִׂיתִי; וַיֵּבְךְּ חִזְקִיָּהוּ, בְּכִי גָדוֹל.  {ס}	3 and said: 'Remember now, O LORD, I beseech Thee, how I have walked before Thee in truth and with a whole heart, and have done that which is good in Thy sight.' And Hezekiah wept sore. {S}
38.4 ד  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	4 Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, saying:
38.5 ה  הָלוֹךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי דָּוִד אָבִיךָ, שָׁמַעְתִּי אֶת-תְּפִלָּתֶךָ, רָאִיתִי אֶת-דִּמְעָתֶךָ; הִנְנִי יוֹסִף עַל-יָמֶיךָ, חֲמֵשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה.	5 'Go, and say to Hezekiah: Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears; behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years.
38.6 ו  וּמִכַּף מֶלֶךְ-אַשּׁוּר אַצִּילְךָ, וְאֵת הָעִיר הַזֹּאת; וְגַנּוֹתִי, עַל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת.	6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city.
38.7 ז  וְזֶה-לְּךָ הָאוֹת, מֵאֵת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר.	7 And this shall be the sign unto thee from the LORD, that the LORD will do this thing that He hath spoken:
38.8 ח  הִנְנִי מֵשִׁיב אֶת-צֵל הַמַּעֲלוֹת אֲשֶׁר יָרְדָה בְמַעֲלוֹת אָחָז בַּשֶּׁמֶשׁ, אֲחֹרַנִּית--עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת; וַתָּשָׁב הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ עֶשֶׂר מַעֲלוֹת, בַּמַּעֲלוֹת אֲשֶׁר יָרָדָה.  {ס}	8 behold, I will cause the shadow of the dial, which is gone down on the sun-dial of Ahaz, to return backward ten degrees.' So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. {S}
38.9 ט  מִכְתָּב, לְחִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בַּחֲלֹתוֹ, וַיְחִי מֵחָלְיוֹ.	9 The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness.
38.10 י  אֲנִי אָמַרְתִּי, בִּדְמִי יָמַי אֵלֵכָה--בְּשַׁעֲרֵי שְׁאוֹל; פֻּקַּדְתִּי, יֶתֶר שְׁנוֹתָי.	10 I said: In the noontide of my days I shall go, even to the gates of the nether-world; I am deprived of the residue of my years.
38.11 יא  אָמַרְתִּי לֹא-אֶרְאֶה יָהּ, יָהּ בְּאֶרֶץ הַחַיִּים; לֹא-אַבִּיט אָדָם עוֹד, עִם-יוֹשְׁבֵי חָדֶל.	11 I said: I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD in the land of the living; I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
38.12 יב  דּוֹרִי, נִסַּע וְנִגְלָה מִנִּי--כְּאֹהֶל רֹעִי; קִפַּדְתִּי כָאֹרֵג חַיַּי מִדַּלָּה יְבַצְּעֵנִי, מִיּוֹם עַד-לַיְלָה תַּשְׁלִימֵנִי.	12 My habitation is plucked up and carried away from me as a shepherd's tent; I have rolled up like a weaver my life; He will cut me off from the thrum; from day even to night wilt Thou make an end of me.
38.13 יג  שִׁוִּיתִי עַד-בֹּקֶר כָּאֲרִי, כֵּן יְשַׁבֵּר כָּל-עַצְמוֹתָי; מִיּוֹם עַד-לַיְלָה, תַּשְׁלִימֵנִי.	13 The more I make myself like unto a lion until morning, the more it breaketh all my bones; from day even to night wilt Thou make an end of me.
38.14 יד  כְּסוּס עָגוּר כֵּן אֲצַפְצֵף, אֶהְגֶּה כַּיּוֹנָה; דַּלּוּ עֵינַי לַמָּרוֹם, אֲדֹנָי עָשְׁקָה-לִּי עָרְבֵנִי.	14 Like a swallow or a crane, so do I chatter, I do moan as a dove; mine eyes fail with looking upward. O LORD, I am oppressed, be Thou my surety.
38.15 טו  מָה-אֲדַבֵּר וְאָמַר-לִי, וְהוּא עָשָׂה; אֶדַּדֶּה כָל-שְׁנוֹתַי, עַל-מַר נַפְשִׁי.	15 What shall I say? He hath both spoken unto me, and Himself hath done it; I shall go softly all my years for the bitterness of my soul.
38.16 טז  אֲדֹנָי, עֲלֵיהֶם יִחְיוּ; וּלְכָל-בָּהֶן חַיֵּי רוּחִי, וְתַחֲלִימֵנִי וְהַחֲיֵנִי.	16 O Lord, by these things men live, and altogether therein is the life of my spirit; wherefore recover Thou me, and make me to live.
38.17 יז  הִנֵּה לְשָׁלוֹם, מַר-לִי מָר; וְאַתָּה חָשַׁקְתָּ נַפְשִׁי, מִשַּׁחַת בְּלִי, כִּי הִשְׁלַכְתָּ אַחֲרֵי גֵוְךָ, כָּל-חֲטָאָי.	17 Behold, for my peace I had great bitterness; but Thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption; for Thou hast cast all my sins behind Thy back.
38.18 יח  כִּי לֹא שְׁאוֹל תּוֹדֶךָּ, מָוֶת יְהַלְלֶךָּ; לֹא-יְשַׂבְּרוּ יוֹרְדֵי-בוֹר, אֶל-אֲמִתֶּךָ.	18 For the nether-world cannot praise Thee, death cannot celebrate Thee; they that go down into the pit cannot hope for Thy truth.
38.19 יט  חַי חַי הוּא יוֹדֶךָ, כָּמוֹנִי הַיּוֹם; אָב לְבָנִים, יוֹדִיעַ אֶל-אֲמִתֶּךָ.	19 The living, the living, he shall praise Thee, as I do this day; the father to the children shall make known Thy truth.
38.20 כ  יְהוָה, לְהוֹשִׁיעֵנִי; וּנְגִנוֹתַי נְנַגֵּן כָּל-יְמֵי חַיֵּינוּ, עַל-בֵּית יְהוָה.	20 The LORD is ready to save me; therefore we will sing songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the LORD.
38.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, יִשְׂאוּ דְּבֶלֶת תְּאֵנִים; וְיִמְרְחוּ עַל-הַשְּׁחִין, וְיֶחִי.	21 And Isaiah said: 'Let them take a cake of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil, and he shall recover.'
38.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, מָה אוֹת:  כִּי אֶעֱלֶה, בֵּית יְהוָה.  {ס}	22 And Hezekiah said. 'What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the LORD?' {S}
39.1 א  בָּעֵת הַהִיא שָׁלַח מְרֹדַךְ בַּלְאֲדָן בֶּן-בַּלְאֲדָן מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, סְפָרִים וּמִנְחָה--אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ; וַיִּשְׁמַע, כִּי חָלָה וַיֶּחֱזָק.	1 At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah; for he heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.
39.2 ב  וַיִּשְׂמַח עֲלֵיהֶם, חִזְקִיָּהוּ, וַיַּרְאֵם אֶת-בֵּית נְכֹתֹה אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הַזָּהָב וְאֶת-הַבְּשָׂמִים וְאֵת הַשֶּׁמֶן הַטּוֹב וְאֵת כָּל-בֵּית כֵּלָיו, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר נִמְצָא בְּאֹצְרֹתָיו:  לֹא-הָיָה דָבָר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הֶרְאָם חִזְקִיָּהוּ בְּבֵיתוֹ--וּבְכָל-מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ.  {ס}	2 And Hezekiah was glad of them, and showed them his treasure-house, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious oil, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures; there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah showed them not. {S}
39.3 ג  וַיָּבֹא יְשַׁעְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ חִזְקִיָּהוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו מָה אָמְרוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, וּמֵאַיִן יָבֹאוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, מֵאֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה בָּאוּ אֵלַי מִבָּבֶל.	3 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him: 'What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee?' And Hezekiah said: 'They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.'
39.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר, מָה רָאוּ בְּבֵיתֶךָ; וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵיתִי רָאוּ--לֹא-הָיָה דָבָר אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הִרְאִיתִים, בְּאוֹצְרֹתָי.	4 Then said he: 'What have they seen in thy house?' And Hezekiah answered: 'All that is in my house have they seen; there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.'
39.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, אֶל-חִזְקִיָּהוּ:  שְׁמַע, דְּבַר-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	5 Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah: 'Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:
39.6 ו  הִנֵּה, יָמִים בָּאִים, וְנִשָּׂא כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵיתֶךָ וַאֲשֶׁר אָצְרוּ אֲבֹתֶיךָ עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, בָּבֶל:  לֹא-יִוָּתֵר דָּבָר, אָמַר יְהוָה.	6 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thy house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.
39.7 ז  וּמִבָּנֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר יֵצְאוּ מִמְּךָ, אֲשֶׁר תּוֹלִיד--יִקָּחוּ; וְהָיוּ, סָרִיסִים, בְּהֵיכַל, מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be officers in the palace of the king of Babylon.'
39.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר חִזְקִיָּהוּ אֶל-יְשַׁעְיָהוּ, טוֹב דְּבַר-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ; וַיֹּאמֶר, כִּי יִהְיֶה שָׁלוֹם וֶאֱמֶת בְּיָמָי.  {פ}	8 Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah: 'Good is the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken.' He said moreover: 'If but there shall be peace and truth in my days.' {P}
40.1 א  נַחֲמוּ נַחֲמוּ, עַמִּי--יֹאמַר, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	1 Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, saith your God.
40.2 ב  דַּבְּרוּ עַל-לֵב יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְקִרְאוּ אֵלֶיהָ--כִּי מָלְאָה צְבָאָהּ, כִּי נִרְצָה עֲוֺנָהּ:  כִּי לָקְחָה מִיַּד יְהוָה, כִּפְלַיִם בְּכָל-חַטֹּאתֶיהָ.  {ס}	2 Bid Jerusalem take heart, and proclaim unto her, that her time of service is accomplished, that her guilt is paid off; that she hath received of the LORD'S hand double for all her sins. {S}
40.3 ג  קוֹל קוֹרֵא--בַּמִּדְבָּר, פַּנּוּ דֶּרֶךְ יְהוָה; יַשְּׁרוּ, בָּעֲרָבָה, מְסִלָּה, לֵאלֹהֵינוּ.	3 Hark! one calleth: 'Clear ye in the wilderness the way of the LORD, make plain in the desert a highway for our God.
40.4 ד  כָּל-גֶּיא, יִנָּשֵׂא, וְכָל-הַר וְגִבְעָה, יִשְׁפָּלוּ; וְהָיָה הֶעָקֹב לְמִישׁוֹר, וְהָרְכָסִים לְבִקְעָה.	4 Every valley shall be lifted up, and every mountain and hill shall be made low; and the rugged shall be made level, and the rough places a plain;
40.5 ה  וְנִגְלָה, כְּבוֹד יְהוָה; וְרָאוּ כָל-בָּשָׂר יַחְדָּו, כִּי פִּי יְהוָה דִּבֵּר.  {פ}	5 And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.' {P}
40.6 ו  קוֹל אֹמֵר קְרָא, וְאָמַר מָה אֶקְרָא; כָּל-הַבָּשָׂר חָצִיר, וְכָל-חַסְדּוֹ כְּצִיץ הַשָּׂדֶה.	6 Hark! one saith: 'Proclaim!' And he saith: 'What shall I proclaim?' 'All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field;
40.7 ז  יָבֵשׁ חָצִיר נָבֵל צִיץ, כִּי רוּחַ יְהוָה נָשְׁבָה בּוֹ; אָכֵן חָצִיר, הָעָם.	7 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; because the breath of the LORD bloweth upon it--surely the people is grass.
40.8 ח  יָבֵשׁ חָצִיר, נָבֵל צִיץ; וּדְבַר-אֱלֹהֵינוּ, יָקוּם לְעוֹלָם.  {ס}	8 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; but the word of our God shall stand for ever.' {S}
40.9 ט  עַל הַר-גָּבֹהַּ עֲלִי-לָךְ, מְבַשֶּׂרֶת צִיּוֹן, הָרִימִי בַכֹּחַ קוֹלֵךְ, מְבַשֶּׂרֶת יְרוּשָׁלִָם; הָרִימִי, אַל-תִּירָאִי, אִמְרִי לְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, הִנֵּה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	9 O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion, get thee up into the high mountain; O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah: 'Behold your God!'
40.10 י  הִנֵּה אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה בְּחָזָק יָבוֹא, וּזְרֹעוֹ מֹשְׁלָה לוֹ; הִנֵּה שְׂכָרוֹ אִתּוֹ, וּפְעֻלָּתוֹ לְפָנָיו.	10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come as a Mighty One, and His arm will rule for Him; behold, His reward is with Him, and His recompense before Him.
40.11 יא  כְּרֹעֶה, עֶדְרוֹ יִרְעֶה, בִּזְרֹעוֹ יְקַבֵּץ טְלָאִים, וּבְחֵיקוֹ יִשָּׂא; עָלוֹת, יְנַהֵל.  {ס}	11 Even as a shepherd that feedeth his flock, that gathereth the lambs in his arm, and carrieth them in his bosom, and gently leadeth those that give suck. {S}
40.12 יב  מִי-מָדַד בְּשָׁעֳלוֹ מַיִם, וְשָׁמַיִם בַּזֶּרֶת תִּכֵּן, וְכָל בַּשָּׁלִשׁ, עֲפַר הָאָרֶץ; וְשָׁקַל בַּפֶּלֶס הָרִים, וּגְבָעוֹת בְּמֹאזְנָיִם.	12 Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?
40.13 יג  מִי-תִכֵּן אֶת-רוּחַ, יְהוָה; וְאִישׁ, עֲצָתוֹ יוֹדִיעֶנּוּ.	13 Who hath meted out the spirit of the LORD? Or who was His counsellor that he might instruct Him?
40.14 יד  אֶת-מִי נוֹעָץ וַיְבִינֵהוּ, וַיְלַמְּדֵהוּ בְּאֹרַח מִשְׁפָּט; וַיְלַמְּדֵהוּ דַעַת, וְדֶרֶךְ תְּבוּנוֹת יוֹדִיעֶנּוּ.	14 With whom took He counsel, and who instructed Him, and taught Him in the path of right, and taught Him knowledge, and made Him to know the way of discernment?
40.15 טו  הֵן גּוֹיִם כְּמַר מִדְּלִי, וּכְשַׁחַק מֹאזְנַיִם נֶחְשָׁבוּ; הֵן אִיִּים, כַּדַּק יִטּוֹל.	15 Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance; behold the isles are as a mote in weight.
40.16 טז  וּלְבָנוֹן, אֵין דֵּי בָּעֵר; וְחַיָּתוֹ--אֵין דֵּי, עוֹלָה.  {פ}	16 And Lebanon is not sufficient fuel, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for burnt-offerings. {P}
40.17 יז  כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, כְּאַיִן נֶגְדּוֹ; מֵאֶפֶס וָתֹהוּ, נֶחְשְׁבוּ-לוֹ.	17 All the nations are as nothing before Him; they are accounted by Him as things of nought, and vanity.
40.18 יח  וְאֶל-מִי, תְּדַמְּיוּן אֵל; וּמַה-דְּמוּת, תַּעַרְכוּ לוֹ.	18 To whom then will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare unto Him?
40.19 יט  הַפֶּסֶל נָסַךְ חָרָשׁ, וְצֹרֵף בַּזָּהָב יְרַקְּעֶנּוּ; וּרְתֻקוֹת כֶּסֶף, צוֹרֵף.	19 The image perchance, which the craftsman hath melted, and the goldsmith spread over with gold, the silversmith casting silver chains?
40.20 כ  הַמְסֻכָּן תְּרוּמָה, עֵץ לֹא-יִרְקַב יִבְחָר; חָרָשׁ חָכָם יְבַקֶּשׁ-לוֹ, לְהָכִין פֶּסֶל לֹא יִמּוֹט.  {ס}	20 A holm-oak is set apart, he chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning craftsman to set up an image, that shall not be moved. {S}
40.21 כא  הֲלוֹא תֵדְעוּ הֲלוֹא תִשְׁמָעוּ, הֲלוֹא הֻגַּד מֵרֹאשׁ לָכֶם; הֲלוֹא, הֲבִינוֹתֶם, מוֹסְדוֹת, הָאָרֶץ.	21 Know ye not? hear ye not? Hath it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not understood the foundations of the earth?
40.22 כב  הַיֹּשֵׁב עַל-חוּג הָאָרֶץ, וְיֹשְׁבֶיהָ כַּחֲגָבִים; הַנּוֹטֶה כַדֹּק שָׁמַיִם, וַיִּמְתָּחֵם כָּאֹהֶל לָשָׁבֶת.	22 It is He that sitteth above the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in;
40.23 כג  הַנּוֹתֵן רוֹזְנִים, לְאָיִן; שֹׁפְטֵי אֶרֶץ, כַּתֹּהוּ עָשָׂה.	23 That bringeth princes to nothing; He maketh the judges of the earth as a thing of nought.
40.24 כד  אַף בַּל-נִטָּעוּ, אַף בַּל-זֹרָעוּ--אַף בַּל-שֹׁרֵשׁ בָּאָרֶץ, גִּזְעָם; וְגַם-נָשַׁף בָּהֶם וַיִּבָשׁוּ, וּסְעָרָה כַּקַּשׁ תִּשָּׂאֵם.  {ס}	24 Scarce are they planted, scarce are they sown, scarce hath their stock taken root in the earth; when He bloweth upon them, they wither, and the whirlwind taketh them away as stubble. {S}
40.25 כה  וְאֶל-מִי תְדַמְּיוּנִי, וְאֶשְׁוֶה--יֹאמַר, קָדוֹשׁ.	25 To whom then will ye liken Me, that I should be equal? saith the Holy One.
40.26 כו  שְׂאוּ-מָרוֹם עֵינֵיכֶם וּרְאוּ מִי-בָרָא אֵלֶּה, הַמּוֹצִיא בְמִסְפָּר צְבָאָם; לְכֻלָּם, בְּשֵׁם יִקְרָא, מֵרֹב אוֹנִים וְאַמִּיץ כֹּחַ, אִישׁ לֹא נֶעְדָּר.  {ס}	26 Lift up your eyes on high, and see: who hath created these? He that bringeth out their host by number, He calleth them all by name; by the greatness of His might, and for that He is strong in power, not one faileth. {S}
40.27 כז  לָמָּה תֹאמַר יַעֲקֹב, וּתְדַבֵּר יִשְׂרָאֵל:  נִסְתְּרָה דַרְכִּי מֵיְהוָה, וּמֵאֱלֹהַי מִשְׁפָּטִי יַעֲבוֹר.	27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel: 'My way is hid from the LORD, and my right is passed over from my God'?
40.28 כח  הֲלוֹא יָדַעְתָּ אִם-לֹא שָׁמַעְתָּ, אֱלֹהֵי עוֹלָם יְהוָה בּוֹרֵא קְצוֹת הָאָרֶץ--לֹא יִיעַף, וְלֹא יִיגָע:  אֵין חֵקֶר, לִתְבוּנָתוֹ.	28 Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard that the everlasting God, the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? His discernment is past searching out.
40.29 כט  נֹתֵן לַיָּעֵף, כֹּחַ; וּלְאֵין אוֹנִים, עָצְמָה יַרְבֶּה.	29 He giveth power to the faint; and to him that hath no might He increaseth strength.
40.30 ל  וְיִעֲפוּ נְעָרִים, וְיִגָעוּ; וּבַחוּרִים, כָּשׁוֹל יִכָּשֵׁלוּ.	30 Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall;
40.31 לא  וְקוֹיֵ יְהוָה יַחֲלִיפוּ כֹחַ, יַעֲלוּ אֵבֶר כַּנְּשָׁרִים; יָרוּצוּ וְלֹא יִיגָעוּ, יֵלְכוּ וְלֹא יִיעָפוּ.  {ס}	31 But they that wait for the LORD shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint. {S}
41.1 א  הַחֲרִישׁוּ אֵלַי אִיִּים, וּלְאֻמִּים יַחֲלִיפוּ כֹחַ; יִגְּשׁוּ אָז יְדַבֵּרוּ, יַחְדָּו לַמִּשְׁפָּט נִקְרָבָה.	1 Keep silence before Me, O islands, and let the peoples renew their strength; let them draw near, then let them speak; let us come near together to judgment.
41.2 ב  מִי הֵעִיר מִמִּזְרָח, צֶדֶק יִקְרָאֵהוּ לְרַגְלוֹ; יִתֵּן לְפָנָיו גּוֹיִם, וּמְלָכִים יַרְדְּ--יִתֵּן כֶּעָפָר חַרְבּוֹ, כְּקַשׁ נִדָּף קַשְׁתּוֹ.	2 Who hath raised up one from the east, at whose steps victory attendeth? He giveth nations before him, and maketh him rule over kings; his sword maketh them as the dust, his bow as the driven stubble.
41.3 ג  יִרְדְּפֵם, יַעֲבוֹר שָׁלוֹם; אֹרַח בְּרַגְלָיו, לֹא יָבוֹא.	3 He pursueth them, and passeth on safely; the way with his feet he treadeth not.
41.4 ד  מִי-פָעַל וְעָשָׂה, קֹרֵא הַדֹּרוֹת מֵרֹאשׁ:  אֲנִי יְהוָה רִאשׁוֹן, וְאֶת-אַחֲרֹנִים אֲנִי-הוּא.	4 Who hath wrought and done it? He that called the generations from the beginning. I, the LORD, who am the first, and with the last am the same.
41.5 ה  רָאוּ אִיִּים וְיִרָאוּ, קְצוֹת הָאָרֶץ יֶחֱרָדוּ; קָרְבוּ, וַיֶּאֱתָיוּן.	5 The isles saw, and feared; the ends of the earth trembled; they drew near, and came.
41.6 ו  אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ, יַעְזֹרוּ; וּלְאָחִיו, יֹאמַר חֲזָק.	6 They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his brother: 'Be of good courage.'
41.7 ז  וַיְחַזֵּק חָרָשׁ אֶת-צֹרֵף, מַחֲלִיק פַּטִּישׁ אֶת-הוֹלֶם פָּעַם; אֹמֵר לַדֶּבֶק טוֹב הוּא, וַיְחַזְּקֵהוּ בְמַסְמְרִים לֹא יִמּוֹט.  {ס}	7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smiteth the anvil, saying of the soldering: 'It is good'; and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved. {S}
41.8 ח  וְאַתָּה יִשְׂרָאֵל עַבְדִּי, יַעֲקֹב אֲשֶׁר בְּחַרְתִּיךָ; זֶרַע, אַבְרָהָם אֹהֲבִי.	8 But thou, Israel, My servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham My friend;
41.9 ט  אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱזַקְתִּיךָ מִקְצוֹת הָאָרֶץ, וּמֵאֲצִילֶיהָ קְרָאתִיךָ; וָאֹמַר לְךָ עַבְדִּי-אַתָּה, בְּחַרְתִּיךָ וְלֹא מְאַסְתִּיךָ.	9 Thou whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the uttermost parts thereof, and said unto thee: 'Thou art My servant, I have chosen thee and not cast thee away';
41.10 י  אַל-תִּירָא כִּי עִמְּךָ-אָנִי, אַל-תִּשְׁתָּע כִּי-אֲנִי אֱלֹהֶיךָ; אִמַּצְתִּיךָ, אַף-עֲזַרְתִּיךָ--אַף-תְּמַכְתִּיךָ, בִּימִין צִדְקִי.	10 Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I strengthen thee, yea, I help thee; yea, I uphold thee with My victorious right hand.
41.11 יא  הֵן יֵבֹשׁוּ וְיִכָּלְמוּ, כֹּל הַנֶּחֱרִים בָּךְ; יִהְיוּ כְאַיִן וְיֹאבְדוּ, אַנְשֵׁי רִיבֶךָ.	11 Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded; they that strove with thee shall be as nothing, and shall perish.
41.12 יב  תְּבַקְשֵׁם וְלֹא תִמְצָאֵם, אַנְשֵׁי מַצֻּתֶךָ; יִהְיוּ כְאַיִן וּכְאֶפֶס, אַנְשֵׁי מִלְחַמְתֶּךָ.	12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee; they that warred against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.
41.13 יג  כִּי, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ--מַחֲזִיק יְמִינֶךָ; הָאֹמֵר לְךָ אַל-תִּירָא, אֲנִי עֲזַרְתִּיךָ.  {ס}	13 For I the LORD thy God hold thy right hand, who say unto thee: 'Fear not, I help thee.' {S}
41.14 יד  אַל-תִּירְאִי תּוֹלַעַת יַעֲקֹב, מְתֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; אֲנִי עֲזַרְתִּיךְ נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְגֹאֲלֵךְ קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I help thee, saith the LORD, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.
41.15 טו  הִנֵּה שַׂמְתִּיךְ, לְמוֹרַג חָרוּץ חָדָשׁ--בַּעַל, פִּיפִיּוֹת; תָּדוּשׁ הָרִים וְתָדֹק, וּגְבָעוֹת כַּמֹּץ תָּשִׂים.	15 Behold, I make thee a new threshing-sledge having sharp teeth; thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.
41.16 טז  תִּזְרֵם וְרוּחַ תִּשָּׂאֵם, וּסְעָרָה תָּפִיץ אוֹתָם; וְאַתָּה תָּגִיל בַּיהוָה, בִּקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל תִּתְהַלָּל.  {ס}	16 Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them; and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, thou shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. {S}
41.17 יז  הָעֲנִיִּים וְהָאֶבְיוֹנִים מְבַקְשִׁים מַיִם, וָאַיִן--לְשׁוֹנָם, בַּצָּמָא נָשָׁתָּה; אֲנִי יְהוָה אֶעֱנֵם, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא אֶעֶזְבֵם.	17 The poor and needy seek water and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst; I the LORD will answer them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.
41.18 יח  אֶפְתַּח עַל-שְׁפָיִים נְהָרוֹת, וּבְתוֹךְ בְּקָעוֹת מַעְיָנוֹת; אָשִׂים מִדְבָּר לַאֲגַם-מַיִם, וְאֶרֶץ צִיָּה לְמוֹצָאֵי מָיִם.	18 I will open rivers on the high hills, and fountains in the midst of the valleys; I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
41.19 יט  אֶתֵּן בַּמִּדְבָּר אֶרֶז שִׁטָּה, וַהֲדַס וְעֵץ שָׁמֶן; אָשִׂים בָּעֲרָבָה, בְּרוֹשׁ תִּדְהָר וּתְאַשּׁוּר--יַחְדָּו.	19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the acacia-tree, and the myrtle, and the oil-tree; I will set in the desert the cypress, the plane-tree, and the larch together;
41.20 כ  לְמַעַן יִרְאוּ וְיֵדְעוּ, וְיָשִׂימוּ וְיַשְׂכִּילוּ יַחְדָּו--כִּי יַד-יְהוָה, עָשְׂתָה זֹּאת; וּקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּרָאָהּ.  {פ}	20 That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it. {P}
41.21 כא  קָרְבוּ רִיבְכֶם, יֹאמַר יְהוָה; הַגִּישׁוּ, עֲצֻמוֹתֵיכֶם, יֹאמַר, מֶלֶךְ יַעֲקֹב.	21 Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your reasons, saith the King of Jacob.
41.22 כב  יַגִּישׁוּ וְיַגִּידוּ לָנוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר תִּקְרֶינָה; הָרִאשֹׁנוֹת מָה הֵנָּה, הַגִּידוּ וְנָשִׂימָה לִבֵּנוּ וְנֵדְעָה אַחֲרִיתָן, אוֹ הַבָּאוֹת, הַשְׁמִיעֻנוּ.	22 Let them bring them forth, and declare unto us the things that shall happen; the former things, what are they? Declare ye, that we may consider, and know the end of them; or announce to us things to come.
41.23 כג  הַגִּידוּ, הָאֹתִיּוֹת לְאָחוֹר, וְנֵדְעָה, כִּי אֱלֹהִים אַתֶּם; אַף-תֵּיטִיבוּ וְתָרֵעוּ, וְנִשְׁתָּעָה ונרא (וְנִרְאֶה) יַחְדָּו.	23 Declare the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods; yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.
41.24 כד  הֵן-אַתֶּם מֵאַיִן, וּפָעָלְכֶם מֵאָפַע; תּוֹעֵבָה, יִבְחַר בָּכֶם.  {פ}	24 Behold, ye are nothing, and your work a thing of nought; an abomination is he that chooseth you. {P}
41.25 כה  הַעִירוֹתִי מִצָּפוֹן וַיַּאת, מִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ יִקְרָא בִשְׁמִי; וְיָבֹא סְגָנִים כְּמוֹ-חֹמֶר, וּכְמוֹ יוֹצֵר יִרְמָס-טִיט.	25 I have roused up one from the north, and he is come, from the rising of the sun one that calleth upon My name; and he shall come upon rulers as upon mortar, and as the potter treadeth clay.
41.26 כו  מִי-הִגִּיד מֵרֹאשׁ וְנֵדָעָה, וּמִלְּפָנִים וְנֹאמַר צַדִּיק; אַף אֵין-מַגִּיד, אַף אֵין מַשְׁמִיעַ--אַף אֵין-שֹׁמֵעַ, אִמְרֵיכֶם.	26 Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say that he is right? Yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that announceth, yea, there is none that heareth your utterances.
41.27 כז  רִאשׁוֹן לְצִיּוֹן, הִנֵּה הִנָּם; וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם, מְבַשֵּׂר אֶתֵּן.	27 A harbinger unto Zion will I give: 'Behold, behold them', and to Jerusalem a messenger of good tidings.
41.28 כח  וְאֵרֶא וְאֵין אִישׁ, וּמֵאֵלֶּה וְאֵין יוֹעֵץ; וְאֶשְׁאָלֵם, וְיָשִׁיבוּ דָבָר.	28 And I look, but there is no man; even among them, but there is no counsellor, that, when I ask of them, can give an answer.
41.29 כט  הֵן כֻּלָּם, אָוֶן אֶפֶס מַעֲשֵׂיהֶם; רוּחַ וָתֹהוּ, נִסְכֵּיהֶם.  {פ}	29 Behold, all of them, their works are vanity and nought; their molten images are wind and confusion. {P}
42.1 א  הֵן עַבְדִּי אֶתְמָךְ-בּוֹ, בְּחִירִי רָצְתָה נַפְשִׁי; נָתַתִּי רוּחִי עָלָיו, מִשְׁפָּט לַגּוֹיִם יוֹצִיא.	1 Behold My servant, whom I uphold; Mine elect, in whom My soul delighteth; I have put My spirit upon him, he shall make the right to go forth to the nations.
42.2 ב  לֹא יִצְעַק, וְלֹא יִשָּׂא; וְלֹא-יַשְׁמִיעַ בַּחוּץ, קוֹלוֹ.	2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.
42.3 ג  קָנֶה רָצוּץ לֹא יִשְׁבּוֹר, וּפִשְׁתָּה כֵהָה לֹא יְכַבֶּנָּה; לֶאֱמֶת, יוֹצִיא מִשְׁפָּט.	3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and the dimly burning wick shall he not quench; he shall make the right to go forth according to the truth.
42.4 ד  לֹא יִכְהֶה וְלֹא יָרוּץ, עַד-יָשִׂים בָּאָרֶץ מִשְׁפָּט; וּלְתוֹרָתוֹ, אִיִּים יְיַחֵלוּ.  {פ}	4 He shall not fail nor be crushed, till he have set the right in the earth; and the isles shall wait for his teaching. {P}
42.5 ה  כֹּה-אָמַר הָאֵל יְהוָה, בּוֹרֵא הַשָּׁמַיִם וְנוֹטֵיהֶם, רֹקַע הָאָרֶץ, וְצֶאֱצָאֶיהָ; נֹתֵן נְשָׁמָה לָעָם עָלֶיהָ, וְרוּחַ לַהֹלְכִים בָּהּ.	5 Thus saith God the LORD, He that created the heavens, and stretched them forth, He that spread forth the earth and that which cometh out of it, He that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein:
42.6 ו  אֲנִי יְהוָה קְרָאתִיךָ בְצֶדֶק, וְאַחְזֵק בְּיָדֶךָ; וְאֶצָּרְךָ, וְאֶתֶּנְךָ לִבְרִית עָם--לְאוֹר גּוֹיִם.	6 I the LORD have called thee in righteousness, and have taken hold of thy hand, and kept thee, and set thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the nations;
42.7 ז  לִפְקֹחַ, עֵינַיִם עִוְרוֹת; לְהוֹצִיא מִמַּסְגֵּר אַסִּיר, מִבֵּית כֶּלֶא יֹשְׁבֵי חֹשֶׁךְ.	7 To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the dungeon, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house.
42.8 ח  אֲנִי יְהוָה, הוּא שְׁמִי; וּכְבוֹדִי לְאַחֵר לֹא-אֶתֵּן, וּתְהִלָּתִי לַפְּסִילִים.	8 I am the LORD, that is My name; and My glory will I not give to another, neither My praise to graven images.
42.9 ט  הָרִאשֹׁנוֹת, הִנֵּה-בָאוּ; וַחֲדָשׁוֹת אֲנִי מַגִּיד, בְּטֶרֶם תִּצְמַחְנָה אַשְׁמִיעַ אֶתְכֶם.  {פ}	9 Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare; before they spring forth I tell you of them. {P}
42.10 י  שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה שִׁיר חָדָשׁ, תְּהִלָּתוֹ מִקְצֵה הָאָרֶץ; יוֹרְדֵי הַיָּם וּמְלֹאוֹ, אִיִּים וְיֹשְׁבֵיהֶם.	10 Sing unto the LORD a new song, and His praise from the end of the earth; ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein, the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.
42.11 יא  יִשְׂאוּ מִדְבָּר וְעָרָיו, חֲצֵרִים תֵּשֵׁב קֵדָר; יָרֹנּוּ יֹשְׁבֵי סֶלַע, מֵרֹאשׁ הָרִים יִצְוָחוּ.	11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit; let the inhabitants of Sela exult, let them shout from the top of the mountains.
42.12 יב  יָשִׂימוּ לַיהוָה, כָּבוֹד; וּתְהִלָּתוֹ, בָּאִיִּים יַגִּידוּ.	12 Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare His praise in the islands.
42.13 יג  יְהוָה כַּגִּבּוֹר יֵצֵא, כְּאִישׁ מִלְחָמוֹת יָעִיר קִנְאָה; יָרִיעַ, אַף-יַצְרִיחַ--עַל-אֹיְבָיו, יִתְגַּבָּר.  {ס}	13 The LORD will go forth as a mighty man, He will stir up jealousy like a man of war; He will cry, yea, He will shout aloud, He will prove Himself mighty against His enemies. {S}
42.14 יד  הֶחֱשֵׁיתִי, מֵעוֹלָם--אַחֲרִישׁ, אֶתְאַפָּק; כַּיּוֹלֵדָה אֶפְעֶה, אֶשֹּׁם וְאֶשְׁאַף יָחַד.	14 I have long time held My peace, I have been still, and refrained Myself; now will I cry like a travailing woman, gasping and panting at once.
42.15 טו  אַחֲרִיב הָרִים וּגְבָעוֹת, וְכָל-עֶשְׂבָּם אוֹבִישׁ; וְשַׂמְתִּי נְהָרוֹת לָאִיִּים, וַאֲגַמִּים אוֹבִישׁ.	15 I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and will dry up the pools.
42.16 טז  וְהוֹלַכְתִּי עִוְרִים, בְּדֶרֶךְ לֹא יָדָעוּ--בִּנְתִיבוֹת לֹא-יָדְעוּ, אַדְרִיכֵם; אָשִׂים מַחְשָׁךְ לִפְנֵיהֶם לָאוֹר, וּמַעֲקַשִּׁים לְמִישׁוֹר--אֵלֶּה הַדְּבָרִים, עֲשִׂיתִם וְלֹא עֲזַבְתִּים.	16 And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, in paths that they knew not will I lead them; I will make darkness light before them, and rugged places plain. These things will I do, and I will not leave them undone.
42.17 יז  נָסֹגוּ אָחוֹר יֵבֹשׁוּ בֹשֶׁת, הַבֹּטְחִים בַּפָּסֶל; הָאֹמְרִים לְמַסֵּכָה, אַתֶּם אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {פ}	17 They shall be turned back, greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say unto molten images: 'Ye are our gods.' {P}
42.18 יח  הַחֵרְשִׁים, שְׁמָעוּ; וְהַעִוְרִים, הַבִּיטוּ לִרְאוֹת.	18 Hear, ye deaf, and look, ye blind, that ye may see.
42.19 יט  מִי עִוֵּר כִּי אִם-עַבְדִּי, וְחֵרֵשׁ כְּמַלְאָכִי אֶשְׁלָח; מִי עִוֵּר כִּמְשֻׁלָּם, וְעִוֵּר כְּעֶבֶד יְהוָה.	19 Who is blind, but My servant? Or deaf, as My messenger that I send? Who is blind as he that is wholehearted, and blind as the LORD'S servant?
42.20 כ  ראית (רָאוֹת) רַבּוֹת, וְלֹא תִשְׁמֹר; פָּקוֹחַ אָזְנַיִם, וְלֹא יִשְׁמָע.	20 Seeing many things, thou observest not; opening the ears, he heareth not.
42.21 כא  יְהוָה חָפֵץ, לְמַעַן צִדְקוֹ; יַגְדִּיל תּוֹרָה, וְיַאְדִּיר.	21 The LORD was pleased, for His righteousness' sake, to make the teaching great and glorious.
42.22 כב  וְהוּא, עַם-בָּזוּז וְשָׁסוּי, הָפֵחַ בַּחוּרִים כֻּלָּם, וּבְבָתֵּי כְלָאִים הָחְבָּאוּ; הָיוּ לָבַז וְאֵין מַצִּיל, מְשִׁסָּה וְאֵין-אֹמֵר הָשַׁב.	22 But this is a people robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison-houses; they are for a prey, and none delivereth, for a spoil, and none saith: 'Restore.'
42.23 כג  מִי בָכֶם, יַאֲזִין זֹאת; יַקְשִׁב וְיִשְׁמַע, לְאָחוֹר.	23 Who among you will give ear to this? Who will hearken and hear for the time to come?
42.24 כד  מִי-נָתַן למשוסה (לִמְשִׁסָּה) יַעֲקֹב וְיִשְׂרָאֵל לְבֹזְזִים, הֲלוֹא יְהוָה:  זוּ, חָטָאנוּ לוֹ, וְלֹא-אָבוּ בִדְרָכָיו הָלוֹךְ, וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ בְּתוֹרָתוֹ.	24 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the LORD? He against whom we have sinned, and in whose ways they would not walk, neither were they obedient unto His law.
42.25 כה  וַיִּשְׁפֹּךְ עָלָיו חֵמָה אַפּוֹ, וֶעֱזוּז מִלְחָמָה; וַתְּלַהֲטֵהוּ מִסָּבִיב וְלֹא יָדָע, וַתִּבְעַר-בּוֹ וְלֹא-יָשִׂים עַל-לֵב.	25 Therefore He poured upon him the fury of His anger, and the strength of battle; and it set him on fire round about, yet he knew not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.
43.1 א  וְעַתָּה כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, בֹּרַאֲךָ יַעֲקֹב, וְיֹצֶרְךָ, יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אַל-תִּירָא כִּי גְאַלְתִּיךָ, קָרָאתִי בְשִׁמְךָ לִי-אָתָּה.	1 But now thus saith the LORD that created thee, O Jacob, and He that formed thee, O Israel: Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art Mine.
43.2 ב  כִּי-תַעֲבֹר בַּמַּיִם אִתְּךָ-אָנִי, וּבַנְּהָרוֹת לֹא יִשְׁטְפוּךָ:  כִּי-תֵלֵךְ בְּמוֹ-אֵשׁ לֹא תִכָּוֶה, וְלֶהָבָה לֹא תִבְעַר-בָּךְ.	2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
43.3 ג  כִּי, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מוֹשִׁיעֶךָ; נָתַתִּי כָפְרְךָ מִצְרַיִם, כּוּשׁ וּסְבָא תַּחְתֶּיךָ.	3 For I am the LORD thy God, The Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour; I have given Egypt as thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.
43.4 ד  מֵאֲשֶׁר יָקַרְתָּ בְעֵינַי נִכְבַּדְתָּ, וַאֲנִי אֲהַבְתִּיךָ; וְאֶתֵּן אָדָם תַּחְתֶּיךָ, וּלְאֻמִּים תַּחַת נַפְשֶׁךָ.	4 Since thou art precious in My sight, and honourable, and I have loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and peoples for thy life.
43.5 ה  אַל-תִּירָא, כִּי אִתְּךָ-אָנִי:  מִמִּזְרָח אָבִיא זַרְעֶךָ, וּמִמַּעֲרָב אֲקַבְּצֶךָּ.	5 Fear not, for I am with thee; I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;
43.6 ו  אֹמַר לַצָּפוֹן תֵּנִי, וּלְתֵימָן אַל-תִּכְלָאִי; הָבִיאִי בָנַי מֵרָחוֹק, וּבְנוֹתַי מִקְצֵה הָאָרֶץ.	6 I will say to the north: 'Give up,' and to the south: 'Keep not back, bring My sons from far, and My daughters from the end of the earth;
43.7 ז  כֹּל הַנִּקְרָא בִשְׁמִי, וְלִכְבוֹדִי בְּרָאתִיו:  יְצַרְתִּיו, אַף-עֲשִׂיתִיו.	7 Every one that is called by My name, and whom I have created for My glory, I have formed him, yea, I have made him.'
43.8 ח  הוֹצִיא עַם-עִוֵּר, וְעֵינַיִם יֵשׁ; וְחֵרְשִׁים, וְאָזְנַיִם לָמוֹ.	8 The blind people that have eyes shall be brought forth, and the deaf that have ears.
43.9 ט  כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם נִקְבְּצוּ יַחְדָּו, וְיֵאָסְפוּ לְאֻמִּים--מִי בָהֶם יַגִּיד זֹאת, וְרִאשֹׁנוֹת יַשְׁמִיעֻנוּ; יִתְּנוּ עֵדֵיהֶם וְיִצְדָּקוּ, וְיִשְׁמְעוּ וְיֹאמְרוּ אֱמֶת.	9 All the nations are gathered together, and the peoples are assembled; who among them can declare this, and announce to us former things? Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be justified; and let them hear, and say: 'It is truth.'
43.10 י  אַתֶּם עֵדַי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְעַבְדִּי אֲשֶׁר בָּחָרְתִּי:  לְמַעַן תֵּדְעוּ וְתַאֲמִינוּ לִי וְתָבִינוּ, כִּי-אֲנִי הוּא--לְפָנַי לֹא-נוֹצַר אֵל, וְאַחֲרַי לֹא יִהְיֶה.  {ס}	10 Ye are My witnesses, saith the LORD, and My servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe Me, and understand that I am He; before Me there was no God formed, neither shall any be after Me. {S}
43.11 יא  אָנֹכִי אָנֹכִי, יְהוָה; וְאֵין מִבַּלְעָדַי, מוֹשִׁיעַ.	11 I, even I, am the LORD; and beside Me there is no saviour.
43.12 יב  אָנֹכִי הִגַּדְתִּי וְהוֹשַׁעְתִּי, וְהִשְׁמַעְתִּי--וְאֵין בָּכֶם, זָר; וְאַתֶּם עֵדַי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַאֲנִי-אֵל.	12 I have declared, and I have saved, and I have announced, and there was no strange god among you; therefore ye are My witnesses, saith the LORD, and I am God.
43.13 יג  גַּם-מִיּוֹם אֲנִי הוּא, וְאֵין מִיָּדִי מַצִּיל; אֶפְעַל, וּמִי יְשִׁיבֶנָּה.  {ס}	13 Yea, since the day was I am He, and there is none that can deliver out of My hand; I will work, and who can reverse it? {S}
43.14 יד  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה גֹּאַלְכֶם, קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  לְמַעַנְכֶם שִׁלַּחְתִּי בָבֶלָה, וְהוֹרַדְתִּי בָרִיחִים כֻּלָּם, וְכַשְׂדִּים, בָּאֳנִיּוֹת רִנָּתָם.	14 Thus saith the LORD, your Redeemer, The Holy One of Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and I will bring down all of them as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, in the ships of their shouting.
43.15 טו  אֲנִי יְהוָה, קְדוֹשְׁכֶם; בּוֹרֵא יִשְׂרָאֵל, מַלְכְּכֶם.  {ס}	15 I am the LORD, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King. {S}
43.16 טז  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הַנּוֹתֵן בַּיָּם דָּרֶךְ, וּבְמַיִם עַזִּים, נְתִיבָה.	16 Thus saith the LORD, who maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;
43.17 יז  הַמּוֹצִיא רֶכֶב-וָסוּס, חַיִל וְעִזּוּז; יַחְדָּו יִשְׁכְּבוּ בַּל-יָקוּמוּ, דָּעֲכוּ כַּפִּשְׁתָּה כָבוּ.	17 Who bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power--they lie down together, they shall not rise, they are extinct, they are quenched as a wick:
43.18 יח  אַל-תִּזְכְּרוּ, רִאשֹׁנוֹת; וְקַדְמֹנִיּוֹת, אַל-תִּתְבֹּנָנוּ.	18 Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old.
43.19 יט  הִנְנִי עֹשֶׂה חֲדָשָׁה עַתָּה תִצְמָח, הֲלוֹא תֵּדָעוּהָ; אַף אָשִׂים בַּמִּדְבָּר דֶּרֶךְ, בִּישִׁמוֹן נְהָרוֹת.	19 Behold, I will do a new thing; now shall it spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.
43.20 כ  תְּכַבְּדֵנִי חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, תַּנִּים וּבְנוֹת יַעֲנָה:  כִּי-נָתַתִּי בַמִּדְבָּר מַיִם, נְהָרוֹת בִּישִׁימֹן, לְהַשְׁקוֹת, עַמִּי בְחִירִי.	20 The beasts of the field shall honour Me, the jackals and the ostriches; because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to My people, Mine elect;
43.21 כא  עַם-זוּ יָצַרְתִּי לִי, תְּהִלָּתִי יְסַפֵּרוּ.  {ס}	21 The people which I formed for Myself, that they might tell of My praise. {S}
43.22 כב  וְלֹא-אֹתִי קָרָאתָ, יַעֲקֹב:  כִּי-יָגַעְתָּ בִּי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.	22 Yet thou hast not called upon Me, O Jacob, neither hast thou wearied thyself about Me, O Israel.
43.23 כג  לֹא-הֵבֵיאתָ לִּי שֵׂה עֹלֹתֶיךָ, וּזְבָחֶיךָ לֹא כִבַּדְתָּנִי; לֹא הֶעֱבַדְתִּיךָ בְּמִנְחָה, וְלֹא הוֹגַעְתִּיךָ בִּלְבוֹנָה.	23 Thou hast not brought Me the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings; neither hast thou honoured Me with thy sacrifices. I have not burdened thee with a meal-offering, nor wearied thee with frankincense.
43.24 כד  לֹא-קָנִיתָ לִּי בַכֶּסֶף קָנֶה, וְחֵלֶב זְבָחֶיךָ לֹא הִרְוִיתָנִי; אַךְ, הֶעֱבַדְתַּנִי בְּחַטֹּאותֶיךָ, הוֹגַעְתַּנִי, בַּעֲוֺנֹתֶיךָ.	24 Thou hast bought Me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou satisfied Me with the fat of thy sacrifices; but thou hast burdened Me with thy sins, thou hast wearied Me with thine iniquities.
43.25 כה  אָנֹכִי אָנֹכִי הוּא מֹחֶה פְשָׁעֶיךָ, לְמַעֲנִי:  וְחַטֹּאתֶיךָ, לֹא אֶזְכֹּר.	25 I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake; and thy sins I will not remember.
43.26 כו  הַזְכִּירֵנִי, נִשָּׁפְטָה יָחַד; סַפֵּר אַתָּה, לְמַעַן תִּצְדָּק.	26 Put Me in remembrance, let us plead together; declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.
43.27 כז  אָבִיךָ הָרִאשׁוֹן, חָטָא; וּמְלִיצֶיךָ, פָּשְׁעוּ בִי.	27 Thy first father sinned, and thine intercessors have transgressed against Me.
43.28 כח  וַאֲחַלֵּל, שָׂרֵי קֹדֶשׁ; וְאֶתְּנָה לַחֵרֶם יַעֲקֹב, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל לְגִדּוּפִים.  {פ}	28 Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and I have given Jacob to condemnation, and Israel to reviling. {P}
44.1 א  וְעַתָּה שְׁמַע, יַעֲקֹב עַבְדִּי; וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּחַרְתִּי בוֹ.	1 Yet now hear, O Jacob My servant, and Israel, whom I have chosen;
44.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה עֹשֶׂךָ וְיֹצֶרְךָ מִבֶּטֶן, יַעְזְרֶךָּ:  אַל-תִּירָא עַבְדִּי יַעֲקֹב, וִישֻׁרוּן בָּחַרְתִּי בוֹ.	2 Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, who will help thee: Fear not, O Jacob My servant, and thou, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.
44.3 ג  כִּי אֶצָּק-מַיִם עַל-צָמֵא, וְנֹזְלִים עַל-יַבָּשָׁה; אֶצֹּק רוּחִי עַל-זַרְעֶךָ, וּבִרְכָתִי עַל-צֶאֱצָאֶיךָ.	3 For I will pour water upon the thirsty land, and streams upon the dry ground; I will pour My spirit upon thy seed, and My blessing upon thine offspring;
44.4 ד  וְצָמְחוּ, בְּבֵין חָצִיר, כַּעֲרָבִים, עַל-יִבְלֵי-מָיִם.	4 And they shall spring up among the grass, as willows by the watercourses.
44.5 ה  זֶה יֹאמַר לַיהוָה אָנִי, וְזֶה יִקְרָא בְשֵׁם-יַעֲקֹב; וְזֶה, יִכְתֹּב יָדוֹ לַיהוָה, וּבְשֵׁם יִשְׂרָאֵל, יְכַנֶּה.  {פ}	5 One shall say: 'I am the LORD'S'; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel. {P}
44.6 ו  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל וְגֹאֲלוֹ, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת:  אֲנִי רִאשׁוֹן וַאֲנִי אַחֲרוֹן, וּמִבַּלְעָדַי אֵין אֱלֹהִים.	6 Thus saith the LORD, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the LORD of hosts: I am the first, and I am the last, and beside Me there is no God.
44.7 ז  וּמִי-כָמוֹנִי יִקְרָא, וְיַגִּידֶהָ וְיַעְרְכֶהָ לִי, מִשּׂוּמִי, עַם-עוֹלָם; וְאֹתִיּוֹת וַאֲשֶׁר תָּבֹאנָה, יַגִּידוּ לָמוֹ.	7 And who, as I, can proclaim--let him declare it, and set it in order for Me--since I appointed the ancient people? And the things that are coming, and that shall come to pass, let them declare.
44.8 ח  אַל-תִּפְחֲדוּ, וְאַל-תִּרְהוּ--הֲלֹא מֵאָז הִשְׁמַעְתִּיךָ וְהִגַּדְתִּי, וְאַתֶּם עֵדָי; הֲיֵשׁ אֱלוֹהַּ מִבַּלְעָדַי, וְאֵין צוּר בַּל-יָדָעְתִּי.	8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid; have I not announced unto thee of old, and declared it? And ye are My witnesses. Is there a God beside Me? Yea, there is no Rock; I know not any.
44.9 ט  יֹצְרֵי-פֶסֶל כֻּלָּם תֹּהוּ, וַחֲמוּדֵיהֶם בַּל-יוֹעִילוּ; וְעֵדֵיהֶם הֵמָּה, בַּל-יִרְאוּ וּבַל-יֵדְעוּ--לְמַעַן יֵבֹשׁוּ.	9 They that fashion a graven image are all of them vanity, and their delectable things shall not profit; and their own witnesses see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.
44.10 י  מִי-יָצַר אֵל, וּפֶסֶל נָסָךְ--לְבִלְתִּי, הוֹעִיל.	10 Who hath fashioned a god, or molten an image that is profitable for nothing?
44.11 יא  הֵן כָּל-חֲבֵרָיו יֵבֹשׁוּ, וְחָרָשִׁים הֵמָּה מֵאָדָם; יִתְקַבְּצוּ כֻלָּם יַעֲמֹדוּ, יִפְחֲדוּ יֵבֹשׁוּ יָחַד.	11 Behold, all the fellows thereof shall be ashamed; and the craftsmen skilled above men; let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; they shall fear, they shall be ashamed together.
44.12 יב  חָרַשׁ בַּרְזֶל, מַעֲצָד, וּפָעַל בַּפֶּחָם, וּבַמַּקָּבוֹת יִצְּרֵהוּ; וַיִּפְעָלֵהוּ, בִּזְרוֹעַ כֹּחוֹ--גַּם-רָעֵב וְאֵין כֹּחַ, לֹא-שָׁתָה מַיִם וַיִּיעָף.	12 The smith maketh an axe, and worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with his strong arm; yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth; he drinketh no water, and is faint.
44.13 יג  חָרַשׁ עֵצִים, נָטָה קָו, יְתָאֲרֵהוּ בַשֶּׂרֶד, יַעֲשֵׂהוּ בַּמַּקְצֻעוֹת וּבַמְּחוּגָה יְתָאֳרֵהוּ; וַיַּעֲשֵׂהוּ כְּתַבְנִית אִישׁ, כְּתִפְאֶרֶת אָדָם לָשֶׁבֶת בָּיִת.	13 The carpenter stretcheth out a line; he marketh it out with a pencil; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compasses, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man, to dwell in the house.
44.14 יד  לִכְרָת-לוֹ אֲרָזִים--וַיִּקַּח תִּרְזָה וְאַלּוֹן, וַיְאַמֶּץ-לוֹ בַּעֲצֵי-יָעַר; נָטַע אֹרֶן, וְגֶשֶׁם יְגַדֵּל.	14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the ilex and the oak, and strengtheneth for himself one among the trees of the forest; he planteth a bay-tree, and the rain doth nourish it.
44.15 טו  וְהָיָה לְאָדָם, לְבָעֵר, וַיִּקַּח מֵהֶם וַיָּחָם, אַף-יַשִּׂיק וְאָפָה לָחֶם; אַף-יִפְעַל-אֵל וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ, עָשָׂהוּ פֶסֶל וַיִּסְגָּד-לָמוֹ.	15 Then a man useth it for fuel; and he taketh thereof, and warmeth himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto.
44.16 טז  חֶצְיוֹ, שָׂרַף בְּמוֹ-אֵשׁ, עַל-חֶצְיוֹ בָּשָׂר יֹאכֵל, יִצְלֶה צָלִי וְיִשְׂבָּע; אַף-יָחֹם וְיֹאמַר הֶאָח, חַמּוֹתִי רָאִיתִי אוּר.	16 He burneth the half thereof in the fire; with the half thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied; yea, he warmeth himself, and saith: 'Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire';
44.17 יז  וּשְׁאֵרִיתוֹ, לְאֵל עָשָׂה לְפִסְלוֹ; יסגוד- (יִסְגָּד-) לוֹ וְיִשְׁתַּחוּ, וְיִתְפַּלֵּל אֵלָיו, וְיֹאמַר הַצִּילֵנִי, כִּי אֵלִי אָתָּה.	17 And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image; he falleth down unto it and worshippeth, and prayeth unto it, and saith: 'Deliver me, for thou art my god.'
44.18 יח  לֹא יָדְעוּ, וְלֹא יָבִינוּ:  כִּי טַח מֵרְאוֹת עֵינֵיהֶם, מֵהַשְׂכִּיל לִבֹּתָם.	18 They know not, neither do they understand; for their eyes are bedaubed, that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they cannot understand.
44.19 יט  וְלֹא-יָשִׁיב אֶל-לִבּוֹ, וְלֹא דַעַת וְלֹא-תְבוּנָה לֵאמֹר, חֶצְיוֹ שָׂרַפְתִּי בְמוֹ-אֵשׁ וְאַף אָפִיתִי עַל-גֶּחָלָיו לֶחֶם, אֶצְלֶה בָשָׂר וְאֹכֵל; וְיִתְרוֹ לְתוֹעֵבָה אֶעֱשֶׂה, לְבוּל עֵץ אֶסְגּוֹד.	19 And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say: 'I have burned the half of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh and eaten it; and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?'
44.20 כ  רֹעֶה אֵפֶר, לֵב הוּתַל הִטָּהוּ; וְלֹא-יַצִּיל אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ וְלֹא יֹאמַר, הֲלוֹא שֶׁקֶר בִּימִינִי.  {ס}	20 He striveth after ashes, a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say: 'Is there not a lie in my right hand?' {S}
44.21 כא  זְכָר-אֵלֶּה יַעֲקֹב, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי עַבְדִּי-אָתָּה; יְצַרְתִּיךָ עֶבֶד-לִי אַתָּה, יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא תִנָּשֵׁנִי.	21 Remember these things, O Jacob, and Israel, for thou art My servant; I have formed thee, thou art Mine own servant; O Israel, thou shouldest not forget Me.
44.22 כב  מָחִיתִי כָעָב פְּשָׁעֶיךָ, וְכֶעָנָן חַטֹּאותֶיךָ; שׁוּבָה אֵלַי, כִּי גְאַלְתִּיךָ.	22 I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins; return unto Me, for I have redeemed thee.
44.23 כג  רָנּוּ שָׁמַיִם כִּי-עָשָׂה יְהוָה, הָרִיעוּ תַּחְתִּיּוֹת אָרֶץ, פִּצְחוּ הָרִים רִנָּה, יַעַר וְכָל-עֵץ בּוֹ:  כִּי-גָאַל יְהוָה יַעֲקֹב, וּבְיִשְׂרָאֵל יִתְפָּאָר.  {ס}	23 Sing, O ye heavens, for the LORD hath done it; shout, ye lowest parts of the earth; break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein; for the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and doth glorify Himself in Israel. {S}
44.24 כד  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה גֹּאֲלֶךָ, וְיֹצֶרְךָ מִבָּטֶן:  אָנֹכִי יְהוָה, עֹשֶׂה כֹּל--נֹטֶה שָׁמַיִם לְבַדִּי, רֹקַע הָאָרֶץ מי אתי (מֵאִתִּי).	24 Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, and He that formed thee from the womb: I am the LORD, that maketh all things; that stretched forth the heavens alone; that spread abroad the earth by Myself;
44.25 כה  מֵפֵר אֹתוֹת בַּדִּים, וְקֹסְמִים יְהוֹלֵל; מֵשִׁיב חֲכָמִים אָחוֹר, וְדַעְתָּם יְסַכֵּל.	25 That frustrateth the tokens of the imposters, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;
44.26 כו  מֵקִים דְּבַר עַבְדּוֹ, וַעֲצַת מַלְאָכָיו יַשְׁלִים; הָאֹמֵר לִירוּשָׁלִַם תּוּשָׁב, וּלְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה תִּבָּנֶינָה, וְחָרְבוֹתֶיהָ, אֲקוֹמֵם.	26 That confirmeth the word of His servant, and performeth the counsel of His messengers; that saith of Jerusalem: 'She shall be inhabited'; and of the cities of Judah: 'They shall be built, and I will raise up the waste places thereof';
44.27 כז  הָאֹמֵר לַצּוּלָה, חֳרָבִי; וְנַהֲרֹתַיִךְ, אוֹבִישׁ.	27 That saith to the deep: 'Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers';
44.28 כח  הָאֹמֵר לְכוֹרֶשׁ רֹעִי, וְכָל-חֶפְצִי יַשְׁלִם; וְלֵאמֹר לִירוּשָׁלִַם תִּבָּנֶה, וְהֵיכָל תִּוָּסֵד.  {פ}	28 That saith of Cyrus: 'He is My shepherd, and shall perform all My pleasure'; even saying of Jerusalem: 'She shall be built'; and to the temple: 'My foundation shall be laid.' {P}
45.1 א  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, לִמְשִׁיחוֹ לְכוֹרֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-הֶחֱזַקְתִּי בִימִינוֹ לְרַד-לְפָנָיו גּוֹיִם, וּמָתְנֵי מְלָכִים, אֲפַתֵּחַ--לִפְתֹּחַ לְפָנָיו דְּלָתַיִם, וּשְׁעָרִים לֹא יִסָּגֵרוּ.	1 Thus saith the LORD to His anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him, and to loose the loins of kings; to open the doors before him, and that the gates may not be shut:
45.2 ב  אֲנִי לְפָנֶיךָ אֵלֵךְ, וַהֲדוּרִים אושר (אֲיַשֵּׁר); דַּלְתוֹת נְחוּשָׁה אֲשַׁבֵּר, וּבְרִיחֵי בַרְזֶל אֲגַדֵּעַ.	2 I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight; I will break in pieces the doors of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron;
45.3 ג  וְנָתַתִּי לְךָ אוֹצְרוֹת חֹשֶׁךְ, וּמַטְמֻנֵי מִסְתָּרִים:  לְמַעַן תֵּדַע, כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה הַקּוֹרֵא בְשִׁמְךָ--אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I am the LORD, who call thee by thy name, even the God of Israel.
45.4 ד  לְמַעַן עַבְדִּי יַעֲקֹב, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל בְּחִירִי; וָאֶקְרָא לְךָ בִּשְׁמֶךָ, אֲכַנְּךָ וְלֹא יְדַעְתָּנִי.	4 For the sake of Jacob My servant, and Israel Mine elect, I have called thee by thy name, I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known Me.
45.5 ה  אֲנִי יְהוָה וְאֵין עוֹד, זוּלָתִי אֵין אֱלֹהִים; אֲאַזֶּרְךָ, וְלֹא יְדַעְתָּנִי.	5 I am the LORD, and there is none else, beside Me there is no God; I have girded thee, though thou hast not known Me;
45.6 ו  לְמַעַן יֵדְעוּ, מִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ וּמִמַּעֲרָבָה, כִּי-אֶפֶס, בִּלְעָדָי:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, וְאֵין עוֹד.	6 That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside Me; I am the LORD; and there is none else;
45.7 ז  יוֹצֵר אוֹר וּבוֹרֵא חֹשֶׁךְ, עֹשֶׂה שָׁלוֹם וּבוֹרֵא רָע; אֲנִי יְהוָה, עֹשֶׂה כָל-אֵלֶּה.  {פ}	7 I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I am the LORD, that doeth all these things. {P}
45.8 ח  הַרְעִיפוּ שָׁמַיִם מִמַּעַל, וּשְׁחָקִים יִזְּלוּ-צֶדֶק; תִּפְתַּח-אֶרֶץ וְיִפְרוּ-יֶשַׁע, וּצְדָקָה תַצְמִיחַ יַחַד--אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּרָאתִיו.  {ס}	8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness; let the earth open, that they may bring forth salvation, and let her cause righteousness to spring up together; I the LORD have created it. {S}
45.9 ט  הוֹי, רָב אֶת-יֹצְרוֹ--חֶרֶשׂ, אֶת-חַרְשֵׂי אֲדָמָה; הֲיֹאמַר חֹמֶר לְיֹצְרוֹ מַה-תַּעֲשֶׂה, וּפָעָלְךָ אֵין-יָדַיִם לוֹ.  {ס}	9 Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, as a potsherd with the potsherds of the earth! Shall the clay say to him that fashioned it: 'What makest thou?' Or: 'Thy work, it hath no hands'? {S}
45.10 י  הוֹי אֹמֵר לְאָב, מַה-תּוֹלִיד; וּלְאִשָּׁה, מַה-תְּחִילִין.  {ס}	10 Woe unto him that saith unto his father: 'Wherefore begettest thou?' Or to a woman: 'Wherefore travailest thou?' {S}
45.11 יא  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיֹצְרוֹ:  הָאֹתִיּוֹת שְׁאָלוּנִי, עַל-בָּנַי וְעַל-פֹּעַל יָדַי תְּצַוֻּנִי.	11 Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker: Ask Me of the things that are to come; concerning My sons, and concerning the work of My hands, command ye Me.
45.12 יב  אָנֹכִי עָשִׂיתִי אֶרֶץ, וְאָדָם עָלֶיהָ בָרָאתִי; אֲנִי, יָדַי נָטוּ שָׁמַיִם, וְכָל-צְבָאָם, צִוֵּיתִי.	12 I, even I, have made the earth, and created man upon it; I, even My hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.
45.13 יג  אָנֹכִי הַעִירֹתִהוּ בְצֶדֶק, וְכָל-דְּרָכָיו אֲיַשֵּׁר; הוּא-יִבְנֶה עִירִי, וְגָלוּתִי יְשַׁלֵּחַ--לֹא בִמְחִיר וְלֹא בְשֹׁחַד, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {ס}	13 I have roused him up in victory, and I make level all his ways; he shall build My city, and he shall let Mine exiles go free, not for price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts. {S}
45.14 יד  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, יְגִיעַ מִצְרַיִם וּסְחַר-כּוּשׁ וּסְבָאִים אַנְשֵׁי מִדָּה, עָלַיִךְ יַעֲבֹרוּ וְלָךְ יִהְיוּ, אַחֲרַיִךְ יֵלֵכוּ בַּזִּקִּים יַעֲבֹרוּ; וְאֵלַיִךְ יִשְׁתַּחֲווּ אֵלַיִךְ יִתְפַּלָּלוּ, אַךְ בָּךְ אֵל וְאֵין עוֹד אֶפֶס אֱלֹהִים.	14 Thus saith the LORD: The labour of Egypt, and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine; they shall go after thee, in chains they shall come over; and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee: Surely God is in thee, and there is none else, there is no other God.
45.15 טו  אָכֵן, אַתָּה אֵל מִסְתַּתֵּר--אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מוֹשִׁיעַ.	15 Verily Thou art a God that hidest Thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.
45.16 טז  בּוֹשׁוּ וְגַם-נִכְלְמוּ, כֻּלָּם:  יַחְדָּו הָלְכוּ בַכְּלִמָּה, חָרָשֵׁי צִירִים.	16 They shall be ashamed, yea, confounded, all of them; they shall go in confusion together that are makers of idols.
45.17 יז  יִשְׂרָאֵל נוֹשַׁע בַּיהוָה, תְּשׁוּעַת עוֹלָמִים:  לֹא-תֵבֹשׁוּ וְלֹא-תִכָּלְמוּ, עַד-עוֹלְמֵי עַד.  {פ}	17 O Israel, that art saved by the LORD with an everlasting salvation; ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end. {P}
45.18 יח  כִּי כֹה אָמַר-יְהוָה בּוֹרֵא הַשָּׁמַיִם הוּא הָאֱלֹהִים, יֹצֵר הָאָרֶץ וְעֹשָׂהּ הוּא כוֹנְנָהּ--לֹא-תֹהוּ בְרָאָהּ, לָשֶׁבֶת יְצָרָהּ; אֲנִי יְהוָה, וְאֵין עוֹד.	18 For thus saith the LORD that created the heavens, He is God; that formed the earth and made it, He established it, He created it not a waste, He formed it to be inhabited: I am the LORD, and there is none else.
45.19 יט  לֹא בַסֵּתֶר דִּבַּרְתִּי, בִּמְקוֹם אֶרֶץ חֹשֶׁךְ--לֹא אָמַרְתִּי לְזֶרַע יַעֲקֹב, תֹּהוּ בַקְּשׁוּנִי; אֲנִי יְהוָה דֹּבֵר צֶדֶק, מַגִּיד מֵישָׁרִים.	19 I have not spoken in secret, in a place of the land of darkness; I said not unto the seed of Jacob: 'Seek ye Me in vain'; I the LORD speak righteousness, I declare things that are right.
45.20 כ  הִקָּבְצוּ וָבֹאוּ הִתְנַגְּשׁוּ יַחְדָּו, פְּלִיטֵי הַגּוֹיִם; לֹא יָדְעוּ, הַנֹּשְׂאִים אֶת-עֵץ פִּסְלָם, וּמִתְפַּלְלִים, אֶל-אֵל לֹא יוֹשִׁיעַ.	20 Assemble yourselves and come, draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations; they have no knowledge that carry the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.
45.21 כא  הַגִּידוּ וְהַגִּישׁוּ, אַף יִוָּעֲצוּ יַחְדָּו:  מִי הִשְׁמִיעַ זֹאת מִקֶּדֶם מֵאָז הִגִּידָהּ, הֲלוֹא אֲנִי יְהוָה וְאֵין-עוֹד אֱלֹהִים מִבַּלְעָדַי--אֵל-צַדִּיק וּמוֹשִׁיעַ, אַיִן זוּלָתִי.	21 Declare ye, and bring them near, yea, let them take counsel together: Who hath announced this from ancient time, and declared it of old? Have not I the LORD? And there is no God else beside Me, a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside Me.
45.22 כב  פְּנוּ-אֵלַי וְהִוָּשְׁעוּ, כָּל-אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ:  כִּי אֲנִי-אֵל, וְאֵין עוֹד.	22 Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else.
45.23 כג  בִּי נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי--יָצָא מִפִּי צְדָקָה דָּבָר, וְלֹא יָשׁוּב:  כִּי-לִי תִּכְרַע כָּל-בֶּרֶךְ, תִּשָּׁבַע כָּל-לָשׁוֹן.	23 By Myself have I sworn, the word is gone forth from My mouth in righteousness, and shall not come back, that unto Me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.
45.24 כד  אַךְ בַּיהוָה לִי אָמַר, צְדָקוֹת וָעֹז; עָדָיו יָבוֹא וְיֵבֹשׁוּ, כֹּל הַנֶּחֱרִים בּוֹ.	24 Only in the LORD, shall one say of Me, is victory and strength; even to Him shall men come in confusion, all they that were incensed against Him.
45.25 כה  בַּיהוָה יִצְדְּקוּ וְיִתְהַלְלוּ, כָּל-זֶרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל.	25 In the LORD shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.
46.1 א  כָּרַע בֵּל, קֹרֵס נְבוֹ--הָיוּ עֲצַבֵּיהֶם, לַחַיָּה וְלַבְּהֵמָה; נְשֻׂאֹתֵיכֶם עֲמוּסוֹת, מַשָּׂא לַעֲיֵפָה.	1 Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth; their idols are upon the beasts, and upon the cattle; the things that ye carried about are made a load, a burden to the weary beast.
46.2 ב  קָרְסוּ כָרְעוּ יַחְדָּו, לֹא יָכְלוּ מַלֵּט מַשָּׂא; וְנַפְשָׁם, בַּשְּׁבִי הָלָכָה.  {פ}	2 They stoop, they bow down together, they could not deliver the burden; and themselves are gone into captivity. {P}
46.3 ג  שִׁמְעוּ אֵלַי בֵּית יַעֲקֹב, וְכָל-שְׁאֵרִית בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--הַעֲמֻסִים, מִנִּי-בֶטֶן, הַנְּשֻׂאִים, מִנִּי-רָחַם.	3 Hearken unto Me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, that are borne [by Me] from the birth, that are carried from the womb:
46.4 ד  וְעַד-זִקְנָה אֲנִי הוּא, וְעַד-שֵׂיבָה אֲנִי אֶסְבֹּל; אֲנִי עָשִׂיתִי וַאֲנִי אֶשָּׂא, וַאֲנִי אֶסְבֹּל וַאֲמַלֵּט.  {ס}	4 Even to old age I am the same, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you; I have made, and I will bear; yea, I will carry, and will deliver. {S}
46.5 ה  לְמִי תְדַמְּיוּנִי, וְתַשְׁווּ; וְתַמְשִׁלוּנִי, וְנִדְמֶה.	5 To whom will ye liken Me, and make Me equal, and compare Me, that we may be like?
46.6 ו  הַזָּלִים זָהָב מִכִּיס, וְכֶסֶף בַּקָּנֶה יִשְׁקֹלוּ; יִשְׂכְּרוּ צוֹרֵף וְיַעֲשֵׂהוּ אֵל, יִסְגְּדוּ אַף-יִשְׁתַּחֲווּ.	6 Ye that lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance; ye that hire a goldsmith, that he make it a god, to fall down thereto, yea, to worship.
46.7 ז  יִשָּׂאֻהוּ עַל-כָּתֵף יִסְבְּלֻהוּ וְיַנִּיחֻהוּ תַחְתָּיו, וְיַעֲמֹד--מִמְּקוֹמוֹ, לֹא יָמִישׁ; אַף-יִצְעַק אֵלָיו וְלֹא יַעֲנֶה, מִצָּרָתוֹ לֹא יוֹשִׁיעֶנּוּ.  {ס}	7 He is borne upon the shoulder, he is carried, and set in his place, and he standeth, from his place he doth not remove; yea, though one cry unto him, he cannot answer, nor save him out of his trouble. {S}
46.8 ח  זִכְרוּ-זֹאת, וְהִתְאֹשָׁשׁוּ; הָשִׁיבוּ פוֹשְׁעִים, עַל-לֵב.	8 Remember this, and stand fast; bring it to mind, O ye transgressors.
46.9 ט  זִכְרוּ רִאשֹׁנוֹת, מֵעוֹלָם:  כִּי אָנֹכִי אֵל וְאֵין עוֹד, אֱלֹהִים וְאֶפֶס כָּמוֹנִי.	9 Remember the former things of old: that I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like Me;
46.10 י  מַגִּיד מֵרֵאשִׁית אַחֲרִית, וּמִקֶּדֶם אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נַעֲשׂוּ; אֹמֵר עֲצָתִי תָקוּם, וְכָל-חֶפְצִי אֶעֱשֶׂה.	10 Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things that are not yet done; saying: 'My counsel shall stand, and all My pleasure will I do';
46.11 יא  קֹרֵא מִמִּזְרָח עַיִט, מֵאֶרֶץ מֶרְחָק אִישׁ עצתו (עֲצָתִי); אַף-דִּבַּרְתִּי, אַף-אֲבִיאֶנָּה--יָצַרְתִּי, אַף-אֶעֱשֶׂנָּה.  {ס}	11 Calling a bird of prey from the east, the man of My counsel from a far country; yea, I have spoken, I will also bring it to pass, I have purposed, I will also do it. {S}
46.12 יב  שִׁמְעוּ אֵלַי, אַבִּירֵי לֵב--הָרְחוֹקִים, מִצְּדָקָה.	12 Hearken unto Me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness:
46.13 יג  קֵרַבְתִּי צִדְקָתִי לֹא תִרְחָק, וּתְשׁוּעָתִי לֹא תְאַחֵר; וְנָתַתִּי בְצִיּוֹן תְּשׁוּעָה, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל תִּפְאַרְתִּי.  {ס}	13 I bring near My righteousness, it shall not be far off, and My salvation shall not tarry; and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel My glory. {S}
47.1 א  רְדִי וּשְׁבִי עַל-עָפָר, בְּתוּלַת בַּת-בָּבֶל--שְׁבִי-לָאָרֶץ אֵין-כִּסֵּא, בַּת-כַּשְׂדִּים:  כִּי לֹא תוֹסִיפִי יִקְרְאוּ-לָךְ, רַכָּה וַעֲנֻגָּה.	1 Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground without a throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.
47.2 ב  קְחִי רֵחַיִם, וְטַחֲנִי קָמַח; גַּלִּי צַמָּתֵךְ חֶשְׂפִּי-שֹׁבֶל גַּלִּי-שׁוֹק, עִבְרִי נְהָרוֹת.	2 Take the millstones, and grind meal; remove thy veil, strip off the train, uncover the leg, pass through the rivers.
47.3 ג  תִּגָּל, עֶרְוָתֵךְ--גַּם תֵּרָאֶה, חֶרְפָּתֵךְ; נָקָם אֶקָּח, וְלֹא אֶפְגַּע אָדָם.  {פ}	3 Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen; I will take vengeance, and will let no man intercede. {P}
47.4 ד  גֹּאֲלֵנוּ, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת שְׁמוֹ--קְדוֹשׁ, יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 Our Redeemer, the LORD of hosts is His name, The Holy One of Israel.
47.5 ה  שְׁבִי דוּמָם וּבֹאִי בַחֹשֶׁךְ, בַּת-כַּשְׂדִּים:  כִּי לֹא תוֹסִיפִי יִקְרְאוּ-לָךְ, גְּבֶרֶת מַמְלָכוֹת.	5 Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for thou shalt no more be called the mistress of kingdoms.
47.6 ו  קָצַפְתִּי עַל-עַמִּי, חִלַּלְתִּי נַחֲלָתִי, וָאֶתְּנֵם, בְּיָדֵךְ; לֹא-שַׂמְתְּ לָהֶם, רַחֲמִים--עַל-זָקֵן, הִכְבַּדְתְּ עֻלֵּךְ מְאֹד.	6 I was wroth with My people, I profaned Mine inheritance, and gave them into thy hand; thou didst show them no mercy; upon the aged hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.
47.7 ז  וַתֹּאמְרִי, לְעוֹלָם אֶהְיֶה גְבָרֶת--עַד לֹא-שַׂמְתְּ אֵלֶּה עַל-לִבֵּךְ, לֹא זָכַרְתְּ אַחֲרִיתָהּ.  {פ}	7 And thou saidst: 'For ever shall I be mistress'; so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the end thereof. {P}
47.8 ח  וְעַתָּה שִׁמְעִי-זֹאת עֲדִינָה, הַיּוֹשֶׁבֶת לָבֶטַח, הָאֹמְרָה בִּלְבָבָהּ, אֲנִי וְאַפְסִי עוֹד; לֹא אֵשֵׁב אַלְמָנָה, וְלֹא אֵדַע שְׁכוֹל.	8 Now therefore hear this, thou that art given to pleasures, that sittest securely, that sayest in thy heart: 'I am, and there is none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children';
47.9 ט  וְתָבֹאנָה לָּךְ שְׁתֵּי-אֵלֶּה רֶגַע בְּיוֹם אֶחָד, שְׁכוֹל וְאַלְמֹן; כְּתֻמָּם, בָּאוּ עָלַיִךְ, בְּרֹב כְּשָׁפַיִךְ, בְּעָצְמַת חֲבָרַיִךְ מְאֹד.	9 But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood; in their full measure shall they come upon thee, for the multitude of thy sorceries, and the great abundance of thine enchantments.
47.10 י  וַתִּבְטְחִי בְרָעָתֵךְ, אָמַרְתְּ אֵין רֹאָנִי--חָכְמָתֵךְ וְדַעְתֵּךְ, הִיא שׁוֹבְבָתֶךְ; וַתֹּאמְרִי בְלִבֵּךְ, אֲנִי וְאַפְסִי עוֹד.	10 And thou hast been secure in thy wickedness, thou hast said: 'None seeth me'; thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thy heart. 'I am, and there is none else beside me.'
47.11 יא  וּבָא עָלַיִךְ רָעָה, לֹא תֵדְעִי שַׁחְרָהּ, וְתִפֹּל עָלַיִךְ הֹוָה, לֹא תוּכְלִי כַּפְּרָהּ; וְתָבֹא עָלַיִךְ פִּתְאֹם שֹׁאָה, לֹא תֵדָעִי.	11 Yet shall evil came upon thee; thou shalt not know how to charm it away; and calamity shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it away; and ruin shall come upon thee suddenly, before thou knowest.
47.12 יב  עִמְדִי-נָא בַחֲבָרַיִךְ וּבְרֹב כְּשָׁפַיִךְ, בַּאֲשֶׁר יָגַעַתְּ מִנְּעוּרָיִךְ; אוּלַי תּוּכְלִי הוֹעִיל, אוּלַי תַּעֲרוֹצִי.	12 Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.
47.13 יג  נִלְאֵית, בְּרֹב עֲצָתָיִךְ; יַעַמְדוּ-נָא וְיוֹשִׁיעֻךְ הברו (הֹבְרֵי) שָׁמַיִם, הַחֹזִים בַּכּוֹכָבִים, מוֹדִעִים לֶחֳדָשִׁים, מֵאֲשֶׁר יָבֹאוּ עָלָיִךְ.	13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels; let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from the things that shall come upon thee.
47.14 יד  הִנֵּה הָיוּ כְקַשׁ אֵשׁ שְׂרָפָתַם, לֹא-יַצִּילוּ אֶת-נַפְשָׁם מִיַּד לֶהָבָה; אֵין-גַּחֶלֶת לַחְמָם, אוּר לָשֶׁבֶת נֶגְדּוֹ.	14 Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame; it shall not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before.
47.15 טו  כֵּן הָיוּ-לָךְ, אֲשֶׁר יָגָעַתְּ; סֹחֲרַיִךְ מִנְּעוּרַיִךְ, אִישׁ לְעֶבְרוֹ תָּעוּ--אֵין, מוֹשִׁיעֵךְ.  {ס}	15 Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured; they that have trafficked with thee from thy youth shall wander every one to his quarter; there shall be none to save thee. {S}
48.1 א  שִׁמְעוּ-זֹאת בֵּית-יַעֲקֹב, הַנִּקְרָאִים בְּשֵׁם יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִמֵּי יְהוּדָה, יָצָאוּ; הַנִּשְׁבָּעִים בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה, וּבֵאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל יַזְכִּירוּ--לֹא בֶאֱמֶת, וְלֹא בִצְדָקָה.	1 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the fountain of Judah; who swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness.
48.2 ב  כִּי-מֵעִיר הַקֹּדֶשׁ נִקְרָאוּ, וְעַל-אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל נִסְמָכוּ:  יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ.  {ס}	2 For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel, the LORD of hosts is His name. {S}
48.3 ג  הָרִאשֹׁנוֹת מֵאָז הִגַּדְתִּי, וּמִפִּי יָצְאוּ וְאַשְׁמִיעֵם; פִּתְאֹם עָשִׂיתִי, וַתָּבֹאנָה.	3 I have declared the former things from of old; yea, they went forth out of My mouth, and I announced them; suddenly I did them, and they came to pass.
48.4 ד  מִדַּעְתִּי, כִּי קָשֶׁה אָתָּה; וְגִיד בַּרְזֶל עָרְפֶּךָ, וּמִצְחֲךָ נְחוּשָׁה.	4 Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;
48.5 ה  וָאַגִּיד לְךָ מֵאָז, בְּטֶרֶם תָּבוֹא הִשְׁמַעְתִּיךָ--פֶּן-תֹּאמַר עָצְבִּי עָשָׂם, וּפִסְלִי וְנִסְכִּי צִוָּם.	5 Therefore I have declared it to thee from of old; before it came to pass I announced it to thee; lest thou shouldest say: 'Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.'
48.6 ו  שָׁמַעְתָּ חֲזֵה כֻּלָּהּ, וְאַתֶּם הֲלוֹא תַגִּידוּ:  הִשְׁמַעְתִּיךָ חֲדָשׁוֹת מֵעַתָּה, וּנְצֻרוֹת וְלֹא יְדַעְתָּם.	6 Thou hast heard, see, all this; and ye, will ye not declare it? I have announced unto thee new things from this time, even hidden things, which thou hast not known.
48.7 ז  עַתָּה נִבְרְאוּ וְלֹא מֵאָז, וְלִפְנֵי-יוֹם וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתָּם--פֶּן-תֹּאמַר, הִנֵּה יְדַעְתִּין.	7 They are created now, and not from of old, and before this day thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say: 'Behold, I knew them.'
48.8 ח  גַּם לֹא-שָׁמַעְתָּ, גַּם לֹא יָדַעְתָּ--גַּם, מֵאָז לֹא-פִתְּחָה אָזְנֶךָ:  כִּי יָדַעְתִּי בָּגוֹד תִּבְגּוֹד, וּפֹשֵׁעַ מִבֶּטֶן קֹרָא לָךְ.	8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from of old thine ear was not opened; for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.
48.9 ט  לְמַעַן שְׁמִי אַאֲרִיךְ אַפִּי, וּתְהִלָּתִי אֶחֱטָם-לָךְ--לְבִלְתִּי, הַכְרִיתֶךָ.	9 For My name's sake will I defer Mine anger, and for My praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.
48.10 י  הִנֵּה צְרַפְתִּיךָ, וְלֹא בְכָסֶף; בְּחַרְתִּיךָ, בְּכוּר עֹנִי.	10 Behold, I have refined thee, but not as silver; I have tried thee in the furnace of affliction.
48.11 יא  לְמַעֲנִי לְמַעֲנִי אֶעֱשֶׂה, כִּי אֵיךְ יֵחָל; וּכְבוֹדִי, לְאַחֵר לֹא-אֶתֵּן.  {פ}	11 For Mine own sake, for Mine own sake, will I do it; for how should it be profaned? And My glory will I not give to another. {P}
48.12 יב  שְׁמַע אֵלַי יַעֲקֹב, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל מְקֹרָאִי:  אֲנִי-הוּא אֲנִי רִאשׁוֹן, אַף אֲנִי אַחֲרוֹן.	12 Hearken unto Me, O Jacob, and Israel My called: I am He; I am the first, I also am the last.
48.13 יג  אַף-יָדִי יָסְדָה אֶרֶץ, וִימִינִי טִפְּחָה שָׁמָיִם; קֹרֵא אֲנִי אֲלֵיהֶם, יַעַמְדוּ יַחְדָּו.	13 Yea, My hand hath laid the foundation of the earth, and My right hand hath spread out the heavens; when I call unto them, they stand up together.
48.14 יד  הִקָּבְצוּ כֻלְּכֶם וּשְׁמָעוּ, מִי בָהֶם הִגִּיד אֶת-אֵלֶּה; יְהוָה אֲהֵבוֹ--יַעֲשֶׂה חֶפְצוֹ בְּבָבֶל, וּזְרֹעוֹ כַּשְׂדִּים.	14 Assemble yourselves, all ye, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? He whom the LORD loveth shall perform His pleasure on Babylon, and show His arm on the Chaldeans.
48.15 טו  אֲנִי אֲנִי דִּבַּרְתִּי, אַף-קְרָאתִיו; הֲבִאֹתִיו, וְהִצְלִיחַ דַּרְכּוֹ.	15 I, even I, have spoken, yea, I have called him; I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.
48.16 טז  קִרְבוּ אֵלַי שִׁמְעוּ-זֹאת, לֹא מֵרֹאשׁ בַּסֵּתֶר דִּבַּרְתִּי--מֵעֵת הֱיוֹתָהּ, שָׁם אָנִי; וְעַתָּה, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה שְׁלָחַנִי--וְרוּחוֹ.  {פ}	16 Come ye near unto Me, hear ye this: From the beginning I have not spoken in secret; from the time that it was, there am I; and now the Lord GOD hath sent me, and His spirit. {P}
48.17 יז  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה גֹּאַלְךָ, קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ מְלַמֶּדְךָ לְהוֹעִיל, מַדְרִיכְךָ בְּדֶרֶךְ תֵּלֵךְ.	17 Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: I am the LORD thy God, who teacheth thee for thy profit, who leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.
48.18 יח  לוּא הִקְשַׁבְתָּ, לְמִצְוֺתָי; וַיְהִי כַנָּהָר שְׁלוֹמֶךָ, וְצִדְקָתְךָ כְּגַלֵּי הַיָּם.	18 Oh that thou wouldest hearken to My commandments! then would thy peace be as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea;
48.19 יט  וַיְהִי כַחוֹל זַרְעֶךָ, וְצֶאֱצָאֵי מֵעֶיךָ כִּמְעֹתָיו; לֹא-יִכָּרֵת וְלֹא-יִשָּׁמֵד שְׁמוֹ, מִלְּפָנָי.  {ס}	19 Thy seed also would be as the sand, and the offspring of thy body like the grains thereof; his name would not be cut off nor destroyed from before Me. {S}
48.20 כ  צְאוּ מִבָּבֶל, בִּרְחוּ מִכַּשְׂדִּים, בְּקוֹל רִנָּה הַגִּידוּ הַשְׁמִיעוּ זֹאת, הוֹצִיאוּהָ עַד-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ; אִמְרוּ, גָּאַל יְהוָה עַבְדּוֹ יַעֲקֹב.	20 Go ye forth from Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans; with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye: 'The LORD hath redeemed His servant Jacob.
48.21 כא  וְלֹא צָמְאוּ, בָּחֳרָבוֹת הוֹלִיכָם--מַיִם מִצּוּר, הִזִּיל לָמוֹ; וַיִּבְקַע-צוּר--וַיָּזֻבוּ, מָיִם.	21 And they thirsted not when He led them through the deserts; He caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them; He cleaved the rock also, and the waters gushed out.'
48.22 כב  אֵין שָׁלוֹם, אָמַר יְהוָה לָרְשָׁעִים.  {פ}	22 There is no peace, saith the LORD concerning the wicked. {P}
49.1 א  שִׁמְעוּ אִיִּים אֵלַי, וְהַקְשִׁיבוּ לְאֻמִּים מֵרָחוֹק; יְהוָה מִבֶּטֶן קְרָאָנִי, מִמְּעֵי אִמִּי הִזְכִּיר שְׁמִי.	1 Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken, ye peoples, from far: the LORD hath called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother hath He made mention of my name;
49.2 ב  וַיָּשֶׂם פִּי כְּחֶרֶב חַדָּה, בְּצֵל יָדוֹ הֶחְבִּיאָנִי; וַיְשִׂימֵנִי לְחֵץ בָּרוּר, בְּאַשְׁפָּתוֹ הִסְתִּירָנִי.	2 And He hath made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow of His hand hath He hid me; and He hath made me a polished shaft, in His quiver hath He concealed me;
49.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי, עַבְדִּי-אָתָּה--יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-בְּךָ אֶתְפָּאָר.	3 And He said unto me: 'Thou art My servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.'
49.4 ד  וַאֲנִי אָמַרְתִּי לְרִיק יָגַעְתִּי, לְתֹהוּ וְהֶבֶל כֹּחִי כִלֵּיתִי; אָכֵן מִשְׁפָּטִי אֶת-יְהוָה, וּפְעֻלָּתִי אֶת-אֱלֹהָי.  {ס}	4 But I said: 'I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought and vanity; yet surely my right is with the LORD, and my recompense with my God.' {S}
49.5 ה  וְעַתָּה אָמַר יְהוָה, יוֹצְרִי מִבֶּטֶן לְעֶבֶד לוֹ, לְשׁוֹבֵב יַעֲקֹב אֵלָיו, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל לא (לוֹ) יֵאָסֵף; וְאֶכָּבֵד בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, וֵאלֹהַי הָיָה עֻזִּי.	5 And now saith the LORD that formed me from the womb to be His servant, to bring Jacob back to Him, and that Israel be gathered unto Him--for I am honourable in the eyes of the LORD, and my God is become my strength--
49.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, נָקֵל מִהְיוֹתְךָ לִי עֶבֶד, לְהָקִים אֶת-שִׁבְטֵי יַעֲקֹב, ונצירי (וּנְצוּרֵי) יִשְׂרָאֵל לְהָשִׁיב; וּנְתַתִּיךָ לְאוֹר גּוֹיִם, לִהְיוֹת יְשׁוּעָתִי עַד-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}	6 Yea, He saith: 'It is too light a thing that thou shouldest be My servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the offspring of Israel; I will also give thee for a light of the nations, that My salvation may be unto the end of the earth.' {S}
49.7 ז  כֹּה אָמַר-יְהוָה גֹּאֵל יִשְׂרָאֵל קְדוֹשׁוֹ, לִבְזֹה-נֶפֶשׁ לִמְתָעֵב גּוֹי לְעֶבֶד מֹשְׁלִים, מְלָכִים יִרְאוּ וָקָמוּ, שָׂרִים וְיִשְׁתַּחֲווּ--לְמַעַן יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר נֶאֱמָן, קְדֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיִּבְחָרֶךָּ.  {ס}	7 Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One, to him who is despised of men, to him who is abhorred of nations, to a servant of rulers: kings shall see and arise, princes, and they shall prostrate themselves; because of the LORD that is faithful, even the Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee. {S}
49.8 ח  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, בְּעֵת רָצוֹן עֲנִיתִיךָ, וּבְיוֹם יְשׁוּעָה, עֲזַרְתִּיךָ; וְאֶצָּרְךָ, וְאֶתֶּנְךָ לִבְרִית עָם, לְהָקִים אֶרֶץ, לְהַנְחִיל נְחָלוֹת שֹׁמֵמוֹת.	8 Thus saith the LORD: In an acceptable time have I answered thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to raise up the land, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;
49.9 ט  לֵאמֹר לַאֲסוּרִים צֵאוּ, לַאֲשֶׁר בַּחֹשֶׁךְ הִגָּלוּ; עַל-דְּרָכִים יִרְעוּ, וּבְכָל-שְׁפָיִים מַרְעִיתָם.	9 Saying to the prisoners: 'Go forth'; to them that are in darkness: 'Show yourselves'; they shall feed in the ways, and in all high hills shall be their pasture;
49.10 י  לֹא יִרְעָבוּ וְלֹא יִצְמָאוּ, וְלֹא-יַכֵּם שָׁרָב וָשָׁמֶשׁ:  כִּי-מְרַחֲמָם יְנַהֲגֵם, וְעַל-מַבּוּעֵי מַיִם יְנַהֲלֵם.	10 They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor sun smite them; for He that hath compassion on them will lead them, even by the springs of water will He guide them.
49.11 יא  וְשַׂמְתִּי כָל-הָרַי, לַדָּרֶךְ; וּמְסִלֹּתַי, יְרֻמוּן.	11 And I will make all My mountains a way, and My highways shall be raised on high.
49.12 יב  הִנֵּה-אֵלֶּה, מֵרָחוֹק יָבֹאוּ; וְהִנֵּה-אֵלֶּה מִצָּפוֹן וּמִיָּם, וְאֵלֶּה מֵאֶרֶץ סִינִים.	12 Behold, these shall come from far; and, lo, these from the north and from the west, and these from the land of Sinim.
49.13 יג  רָנּוּ שָׁמַיִם וְגִילִי אָרֶץ, יפצחו (וּפִצְחוּ) הָרִים רִנָּה:  כִּי-נִחַם יְהוָה עַמּוֹ, וַעֲנִיָּיו יְרַחֵם.  {ס}	13 Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, O mountains; for the LORD hath comforted His people, and hath compassion upon His afflicted. {S}
49.14 יד  וַתֹּאמֶר צִיּוֹן, עֲזָבַנִי יְהוָה; וַאדֹנָי, שְׁכֵחָנִי.	14 But Zion said: 'The LORD hath forsaken me, and the Lord hath forgotten me.'
49.15 טו  הֲתִשְׁכַּח אִשָּׁה עוּלָהּ, מֵרַחֵם בֶּן-בִּטְנָהּ; גַּם-אֵלֶּה תִשְׁכַּחְנָה, וְאָנֹכִי לֹא אֶשְׁכָּחֵךְ.	15 Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, these may forget, yet will not I forget thee.
49.16 טז  הֵן עַל-כַּפַּיִם, חַקֹּתִיךְ; חוֹמֹתַיִךְ נֶגְדִּי, תָּמִיד.	16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of My hands; thy walls are continually before Me.
49.17 יז  מִהֲרוּ, בָּנָיִךְ; מְהָרְסַיִךְ וּמַחֲרִיבַיִךְ, מִמֵּךְ יֵצֵאוּ.	17 Thy children make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth from thee.
49.18 יח  שְׂאִי-סָבִיב עֵינַיִךְ וּרְאִי, כֻּלָּם נִקְבְּצוּ בָאוּ-לָךְ; חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי כֻלָּם כָּעֲדִי תִלְבָּשִׁי, וּתְקַשְּׁרִים, כַּכַּלָּה.	18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament, and gird thyself with them, like a bride.
49.19 יט  כִּי חָרְבֹתַיִךְ וְשֹׁמְמֹתַיִךְ, וְאֶרֶץ הֲרִסֻתֵךְ:  כִּי עַתָּה תֵּצְרִי מִיּוֹשֵׁב, וְרָחֲקוּ מְבַלְּעָיִךְ.	19 For thy waste and thy desolate places and thy land that hath been destroyed--surely now shalt thou be too strait for the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.
49.20 כ  עוֹד יֹאמְרוּ בְאָזְנַיִךְ, בְּנֵי שִׁכֻּלָיִךְ:  צַר-לִי הַמָּקוֹם, גְּשָׁה-לִּי וְאֵשֵׁבָה.	20 The children of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears: 'The place is too strait for me; give place to me that I may dwell.'
49.21 כא  וְאָמַרְתְּ בִּלְבָבֵךְ, מִי יָלַד-לִי אֶת-אֵלֶּה, וַאֲנִי שְׁכוּלָה, וְגַלְמוּדָה; גֹּלָה וְסוּרָה, וְאֵלֶּה מִי גִדֵּל--הֵן אֲנִי נִשְׁאַרְתִּי לְבַדִּי, אֵלֶּה אֵיפֹה הֵם.  {פ}	21 Then shalt thou say in thy heart: 'Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have been bereaved of my children, and am solitary, an exile, and wandering to and fro? And who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where were they?' {P}
49.22 כב  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה אֶשָּׂא אֶל-גּוֹיִם יָדִי, וְאֶל-עַמִּים, אָרִים נִסִּי; וְהֵבִיאוּ בָנַיִךְ בְּחֹצֶן, וּבְנֹתַיִךְ עַל-כָּתֵף תִּנָּשֶׂאנָה.	22 Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, I will lift up My hand to the nations, and set up Mine ensign to the peoples, and they shall bring thy sons in their bosom, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.
49.23 כג  וְהָיוּ מְלָכִים אֹמְנַיִךְ, וְשָׂרוֹתֵיהֶם מֵינִיקֹתַיִךְ--אַפַּיִם אֶרֶץ יִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָךְ, וַעֲפַר רַגְלַיִךְ יְלַחֵכוּ; וְיָדַעַתְּ כִּי-אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֵבֹשׁוּ קֹוָי.  {ס}	23 And kings shall be thy foster-fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their face to the earth, and lick the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD, for they shall not be ashamed that wait for Me. {S}
49.24 כד  הֲיֻקַּח מִגִּבּוֹר, מַלְקוֹחַ; וְאִם-שְׁבִי צַדִּיק, יִמָּלֵט.  {ס}	24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the captives of the victorious be delivered? {S}
49.25 כה  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, גַּם-שְׁבִי גִבּוֹר יֻקָּח, וּמַלְקוֹחַ עָרִיץ, יִמָּלֵט; וְאֶת-יְרִיבֵךְ אָנֹכִי אָרִיב, וְאֶת-בָּנַיִךְ אָנֹכִי אוֹשִׁיעַ.	25 But thus saith the LORD: Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; and I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children.
49.26 כו  וְהַאֲכַלְתִּי אֶת-מוֹנַיִךְ אֶת-בְּשָׂרָם, וְכֶעָסִיס דָּמָם יִשְׁכָּרוּן; וְיָדְעוּ כָל-בָּשָׂר, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה מוֹשִׁיעֵךְ, וְגֹאֲלֵךְ, אֲבִיר יַעֲקֹב.  {ס}	26 And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine; and all flesh shall know that I the LORD am thy Saviour, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. {S}
50.1 א  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אֵי זֶה סֵפֶר כְּרִיתוּת אִמְּכֶם אֲשֶׁר שִׁלַּחְתִּיהָ, אוֹ מִי מִנּוֹשַׁי, אֲשֶׁר-מָכַרְתִּי אֶתְכֶם לוֹ; הֵן בַּעֲוֺנֹתֵיכֶם נִמְכַּרְתֶּם, וּבְפִשְׁעֵיכֶם שֻׁלְּחָה אִמְּכֶם.	1 Thus saith the LORD: Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, wherewith I have put her away? Or which of My creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities were ye sold, and for your transgressions was your mother put away.
50.2 ב  מַדּוּעַ בָּאתִי וְאֵין אִישׁ, קָרָאתִי וְאֵין עוֹנֶה--הֲקָצוֹר קָצְרָה יָדִי מִפְּדוּת, וְאִם-אֵין-בִּי כֹחַ לְהַצִּיל; הֵן בְּגַעֲרָתִי אַחֲרִיב יָם, אָשִׂים נְהָרוֹת מִדְבָּר, תִּבְאַשׁ דְּגָתָם מֵאֵין מַיִם, וְתָמֹת בַּצָּמָא.	2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? Is My hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at My rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness; their fish become foul, because there is no water, and die for thirst.
50.3 ג  אַלְבִּישׁ שָׁמַיִם, קַדְרוּת; וְשַׂק, אָשִׂים כְּסוּתָם.  {פ}	3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. {P}
50.4 ד  אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, נָתַן לִי לְשׁוֹן לִמּוּדִים, לָדַעַת לָעוּת אֶת-יָעֵף, דָּבָר; יָעִיר בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר, יָעִיר לִי אֹזֶן, לִשְׁמֹעַ, כַּלִּמּוּדִים.	4 The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of them that are taught, that I should know how to sustain with words him that is weary; He wakeneth morning by morning, He wakeneth mine ear to hear as they that are taught.
50.5 ה  אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה פָּתַח-לִי אֹזֶן, וְאָנֹכִי לֹא מָרִיתִי:  אָחוֹר, לֹא נְסוּגֹתִי.	5 The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away backward.
50.6 ו  גֵּוִי נָתַתִּי לְמַכִּים, וּלְחָיַי לְמֹרְטִים; פָּנַי לֹא הִסְתַּרְתִּי, מִכְּלִמּוֹת וָרֹק.	6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and spitting.
50.7 ז  וַאדֹנָי יְהוִה יַעֲזָר-לִי, עַל-כֵּן לֹא נִכְלָמְתִּי; עַל-כֵּן שַׂמְתִּי פָנַי, כַּחַלָּמִישׁ, וָאֵדַע, כִּי-לֹא אֵבוֹשׁ.	7 For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore have I not been confounded; therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.
50.8 ח  קָרוֹב, מַצְדִּיקִי--מִי-יָרִיב אִתִּי, נַעַמְדָה יָּחַד; מִי-בַעַל מִשְׁפָּטִי, יִגַּשׁ אֵלָי.	8 He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand up together; who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.
50.9 ט  הֵן אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה יַעֲזָר-לִי, מִי-הוּא יַרְשִׁיעֵנִי; הֵן כֻּלָּם כַּבֶּגֶד יִבְלוּ, עָשׁ יֹאכְלֵם.  {ס}	9 Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? Behold, they all shall wax old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up. {S}
50.10 י  מִי בָכֶם יְרֵא יְהוָה, שֹׁמֵעַ בְּקוֹל עַבְדּוֹ--אֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ חֲשֵׁכִים, וְאֵין נֹגַהּ לוֹ, יִבְטַח בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה, וְיִשָּׁעֵן בֵּאלֹהָיו.  {ס}	10 Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice of His servant? though he walketh in darkness, and hath no light, let him trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God. {S}
50.11 יא  הֵן כֻּלְּכֶם קֹדְחֵי אֵשׁ, מְאַזְּרֵי זִיקוֹת; לְכוּ בְּאוּר אֶשְׁכֶם, וּבְזִיקוֹת בִּעַרְתֶּם--מִיָּדִי הָיְתָה-זֹּאת לָכֶם, לְמַעֲצֵבָה תִּשְׁכָּבוּן.  {ס}	11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that gird yourselves with firebrands, begone in the flame of your fire, and among the brands that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of My hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow. {S}
51.1 א  שִׁמְעוּ אֵלַי רֹדְפֵי צֶדֶק, מְבַקְשֵׁי יְהוָה; הַבִּיטוּ אֶל-צוּר חֻצַּבְתֶּם, וְאֶל-מַקֶּבֶת בּוֹר נֻקַּרְתֶּם.	1 Hearken to Me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the LORD; look unto the rock whence ye were hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye were digged.
51.2 ב  הַבִּיטוּ אֶל-אַבְרָהָם אֲבִיכֶם, וְאֶל-שָׂרָה תְּחוֹלֶלְכֶם:  כִּי-אֶחָד קְרָאתִיו, וַאֲבָרְכֵהוּ וְאַרְבֵּהוּ.	2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bore you; for when he was but one I called him, and I blessed him, and made him many.
51.3 ג  כִּי-נִחַם יְהוָה צִיּוֹן, נִחַם כָּל-חָרְבֹתֶיהָ, וַיָּשֶׂם מִדְבָּרָהּ כְּעֵדֶן, וְעַרְבָתָהּ כְּגַן-יְהוָה; שָׂשׂוֹן וְשִׂמְחָה יִמָּצֵא בָהּ, תּוֹדָה וְקוֹל זִמְרָה.  {ס}	3 For the LORD hath comforted Zion; He hath comforted all her waste places, and hath made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. {S}
51.4 ד  הַקְשִׁיבוּ אֵלַי עַמִּי, וּלְאוּמִּי אֵלַי הַאֲזִינוּ:  כִּי תוֹרָה, מֵאִתִּי תֵצֵא, וּמִשְׁפָּטִי, לְאוֹר עַמִּים אַרְגִּיעַ.	4 Attend unto Me, O My people, and give ear unto Me, O My nation; for instruction shall go forth from Me, and My right on a sudden for a light of the peoples.
51.5 ה  קָרוֹב צִדְקִי יָצָא יִשְׁעִי, וּזְרֹעַי עַמִּים יִשְׁפֹּטוּ; אֵלַי אִיִּים יְקַוּוּ, וְאֶל-זְרֹעִי יְיַחֵלוּן.	5 My favour is near, My salvation is gone forth, and Mine arms shall judge the peoples; the isles shall wait for Me, and on Mine arm shall they trust.
51.6 ו  שְׂאוּ לַשָּׁמַיִם עֵינֵיכֶם וְהַבִּיטוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ מִתַּחַת, כִּי-שָׁמַיִם כֶּעָשָׁן נִמְלָחוּ וְהָאָרֶץ כַּבֶּגֶד תִּבְלֶה--וְיֹשְׁבֶיהָ, כְּמוֹ-כֵן יְמוּתוּן; וִישׁוּעָתִי לְעוֹלָם תִּהְיֶה, וְצִדְקָתִי לֹא תֵחָת.  {פ}	6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner; but My salvation shall be for ever, and My favour shall not be abolished. {P}
51.7 ז  שִׁמְעוּ אֵלַי יֹדְעֵי צֶדֶק, עַם תּוֹרָתִי בְלִבָּם:  אַל-תִּירְאוּ חֶרְפַּת אֱנוֹשׁ, וּמִגִּדֻּפֹתָם אַל-תֵּחָתּוּ.	7 Hearken unto Me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is My law; fear ye not the taunt of men, neither be ye dismayed at their revilings.
51.8 ח  כִּי כַבֶּגֶד יֹאכְלֵם עָשׁ, וְכַצֶּמֶר יֹאכְלֵם סָס; וְצִדְקָתִי לְעוֹלָם תִּהְיֶה, וִישׁוּעָתִי לְדוֹר דּוֹרִים.  {ס}	8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool; but My favour shall be for ever, and My salvation unto all generations. {S}
51.9 ט  עוּרִי עוּרִי לִבְשִׁי-עֹז, זְרוֹעַ יְהוָה--עוּרִי כִּימֵי קֶדֶם, דֹּרוֹת עוֹלָמִים; הֲלוֹא אַתְּ-הִיא הַמַּחְצֶבֶת רַהַב, מְחוֹלֶלֶת תַּנִּין.	9 Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in the days of old, the generations of ancient times. Art thou not it that hewed Rahab in pieces, that pierced the dragon?
51.10 י  הֲלוֹא אַתְּ-הִיא הַמַּחֲרֶבֶת יָם, מֵי תְּהוֹם רַבָּה; הַשָּׂמָה, מַעֲמַקֵּי-יָם--דֶּרֶךְ, לַעֲבֹר גְּאוּלִים.	10 Art thou not it that dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep; that made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass over?
51.11 יא  וּפְדוּיֵי יְהוָה יְשׁוּבוּן, וּבָאוּ צִיּוֹן בְּרִנָּה, וְשִׂמְחַת עוֹלָם, עַל-רֹאשָׁם; שָׂשׂוֹן וְשִׂמְחָה יַשִּׂיגוּן, נָסוּ יָגוֹן וַאֲנָחָה.  {ס}	11 And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. {S}
51.12 יב  אָנֹכִי אָנֹכִי הוּא, מְנַחֶמְכֶם; מִי-אַתְּ וַתִּירְאִי מֵאֱנוֹשׁ יָמוּת, וּמִבֶּן-אָדָם חָצִיר יִנָּתֵן.	12 I, even I, am He that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou art afraid of man that shall die, and of the son of man that shall be made as grass;
51.13 יג  וַתִּשְׁכַּח יְהוָה עֹשֶׂךָ, נוֹטֶה שָׁמַיִם וְיֹסֵד אָרֶץ, וַתְּפַחֵד תָּמִיד כָּל-הַיּוֹם מִפְּנֵי חֲמַת הַמֵּצִיק, כַּאֲשֶׁר כּוֹנֵן לְהַשְׁחִית; וְאַיֵּה, חֲמַת הַמֵּצִיק.	13 And hast forgotten the LORD thy Maker, that stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and fearest continually all the day because of the fury of the oppressor, as he maketh ready to destroy? And where is the fury of the oppressor?
51.14 יד  מִהַר צֹעֶה, לְהִפָּתֵחַ; וְלֹא-יָמוּת לַשַּׁחַת, וְלֹא יֶחְסַר לַחְמוֹ.	14 He that is bent down shall speedily be loosed; and he shall not go down dying into the pit, neither shall his bread fail.
51.15 טו  וְאָנֹכִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, רֹגַע הַיָּם, וַיֶּהֱמוּ גַּלָּיו; יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ.	15 For I am the LORD thy God, who stirreth up the sea, that the waves thereof roar; the LORD of hosts is His name.
51.16 טז  וָאָשִׂם דְּבָרַי בְּפִיךָ, וּבְצֵל יָדִי כִּסִּיתִיךָ; לִנְטֹעַ שָׁמַיִם וְלִיסֹד אָרֶץ, וְלֵאמֹר לְצִיּוֹן עַמִּי-אָתָּה.  {ס}	16 And I have put My words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of My hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion: 'Thou art My people.' {S}
51.17 יז  הִתְעוֹרְרִי הִתְעוֹרְרִי, קוּמִי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֲשֶׁר שָׁתִית מִיַּד יְהוָה, אֶת-כּוֹס חֲמָתוֹ; אֶת-קֻבַּעַת כּוֹס הַתַּרְעֵלָה, שָׁתִית--מָצִית.	17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, that hast drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of His fury; thou hast drunken the beaker, even the cup of staggering, and drained it.
51.18 יח  אֵין-מְנַהֵל לָהּ, מִכָּל-בָּנִים יָלָדָה; וְאֵין מַחֲזִיק בְּיָדָהּ, מִכָּל-בָּנִים גִּדֵּלָה.	18 There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.
51.19 יט  שְׁתַּיִם הֵנָּה קֹרְאֹתַיִךְ, מִי יָנוּד לָךְ; הַשֹּׁד וְהַשֶּׁבֶר וְהָרָעָב וְהַחֶרֶב, מִי אֲנַחֲמֵךְ.	19 These two things are befallen thee; who shall bemoan thee? desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword; how shall I comfort thee?
51.20 כ  בָּנַיִךְ עֻלְּפוּ שָׁכְבוּ, בְּרֹאשׁ כָּל-חוּצוֹת--כְּתוֹא מִכְמָר; הַמְלֵאִים חֲמַת-יְהוָה, גַּעֲרַת אֱלֹהָיִךְ.	20 Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as an antelope in a net; they are full of the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.
51.21 כא  לָכֵן שִׁמְעִי-נָא זֹאת, עֲנִיָּה; וּשְׁכֻרַת, וְלֹא מִיָּיִן.  {פ}	21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine; {P}
51.22 כב  כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנַיִךְ יְהוָה, וֵאלֹהַיִךְ יָרִיב עַמּוֹ, הִנֵּה לָקַחְתִּי מִיָּדֵךְ, אֶת-כּוֹס הַתַּרְעֵלָה--אֶת-קֻבַּעַת כּוֹס חֲמָתִי, לֹא-תוֹסִיפִי לִשְׁתּוֹתָהּ עוֹד.	22 Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of His people: behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of staggering; the beaker, even the cup of My fury, thou shalt no more drink it again;
51.23 כג  וְשַׂמְתִּיהָ בְּיַד-מוֹגַיִךְ, אֲשֶׁר-אָמְרוּ לְנַפְשֵׁךְ שְׁחִי וְנַעֲבֹרָה; וַתָּשִׂימִי כָאָרֶץ גֵּוֵךְ, וְכַחוּץ לַעֹבְרִים.  {פ}	23 And I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; that have said to thy soul: 'Bow down, that we may go over'; and thou hast laid thy back as the ground, and as the street, to them that go over. {P}
52.1 א  עוּרִי עוּרִי לִבְשִׁי עֻזֵּךְ, צִיּוֹן:  לִבְשִׁי בִּגְדֵי תִפְאַרְתֵּךְ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם עִיר הַקֹּדֶשׁ--כִּי לֹא יוֹסִיף יָבֹא-בָךְ עוֹד, עָרֵל וְטָמֵא.	1 Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.
52.2 ב  הִתְנַעֲרִי מֵעָפָר קוּמִי שְּׁבִי, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; התפתחו (הִתְפַּתְּחִי) מוֹסְרֵי צַוָּארֵךְ, שְׁבִיָּה בַּת-צִיּוֹן.  {ס}	2 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem; loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. {S}
52.3 ג  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, חִנָּם נִמְכַּרְתֶּם; וְלֹא בְכֶסֶף, תִּגָּאֵלוּ.  {ס}	3 For thus saith the LORD: Ye were sold for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money. {S}
52.4 ד  כִּי כֹה אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, מִצְרַיִם יָרַד-עַמִּי בָרִאשֹׁנָה לָגוּר שָׁם; וְאַשּׁוּר, בְּאֶפֶס עֲשָׁקוֹ.	4 For thus saith the Lord GOD: My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.
52.5 ה  וְעַתָּה מַה-לִּי-פֹה נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי-לֻקַּח עַמִּי חִנָּם; מֹשְׁלָו יְהֵילִילוּ נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְתָמִיד כָּל-הַיּוֹם שְׁמִי מִנֹּאָץ.	5 Now therefore, what do I here, saith the LORD, seeing that My people is taken away for nought? They that rule over them do howl, saith the LORD, and My name continually all the day is blasphemed.
52.6 ו  לָכֵן יֵדַע עַמִּי, שְׁמִי; לָכֵן בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כִּי-אֲנִי-הוּא הַמְדַבֵּר הִנֵּנִי.  {ס}	6 Therefore My people shall know My name; therefore they shall know in that day that I, even He that spoke, behold, here I am. {S}
52.7 ז  מַה-נָּאווּ עַל-הֶהָרִים רַגְלֵי מְבַשֵּׂר, מַשְׁמִיעַ שָׁלוֹם מְבַשֵּׂר טוֹב--מַשְׁמִיעַ יְשׁוּעָה; אֹמֵר לְצִיּוֹן, מָלַךְ אֱלֹהָיִךְ.	7 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of the messenger of good tidings, that announceth peace, the harbinger of good tidings, that announceth salvation; that saith unto Zion: 'Thy God reigneth!'
52.8 ח  קוֹל צֹפַיִךְ נָשְׂאוּ קוֹל, יַחְדָּו יְרַנֵּנוּ:  כִּי עַיִן בְּעַיִן יִרְאוּ, בְּשׁוּב יְהוָה צִיּוֹן.	8 Hark, thy watchmen! they lift up the voice, together do they sing; for they shall see, eye to eye, the LORD returning to Zion.
52.9 ט  פִּצְחוּ רַנְּנוּ יַחְדָּו, חָרְבוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי-נִחַם יְהוָה עַמּוֹ, גָּאַל יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	9 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem; for the LORD hath comforted His people, He hath redeemed Jerusalem.
52.10 י  חָשַׂף יְהוָה אֶת-זְרוֹעַ קָדְשׁוֹ, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם; וְרָאוּ, כָּל-אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ, אֵת, יְשׁוּעַת אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {ס}	10 The LORD hath made bare His holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. {S}
52.11 יא  סוּרוּ סוּרוּ צְאוּ מִשָּׁם, טָמֵא אַל-תִּגָּעוּ; צְאוּ מִתּוֹכָהּ--הִבָּרוּ, נֹשְׂאֵי כְּלֵי יְהוָה.	11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, ye that bear the vessels of the LORD.
52.12 יב  כִּי לֹא בְחִפָּזוֹן תֵּצֵאוּ, וּבִמְנוּסָה לֹא תֵלֵכוּן:  כִּי-הֹלֵךְ לִפְנֵיכֶם יְהוָה, וּמְאַסִּפְכֶם אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	12 For ye shall not go out in haste, neither shall ye go by flight; for the LORD will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rearward. {S}
52.13 יג  הִנֵּה יַשְׂכִּיל, עַבְדִּי; יָרוּם וְנִשָּׂא וְגָבַהּ, מְאֹד.	13 Behold, My servant shall prosper, he shall be exalted and lifted up, and shall be very high.
52.14 יד  כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמְמוּ עָלֶיךָ רַבִּים, כֵּן-מִשְׁחַת מֵאִישׁ מַרְאֵהוּ; וְתֹאֲרוֹ, מִבְּנֵי אָדָם.	14 According as many were appalled at thee--so marred was his visage unlike that of a man, and his form unlike that of the sons of men--
52.15 טו  כֵּן יַזֶּה גּוֹיִם רַבִּים, עָלָיו יִקְפְּצוּ מְלָכִים פִּיהֶם:  כִּי אֲשֶׁר לֹא-סֻפַּר לָהֶם, רָאוּ, וַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ, הִתְבּוֹנָנוּ.  {ס}	15 So shall he startle many nations, kings shall shut their mouths because of him; for that which had not been told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they perceive. {S}
53.1 א  מִי הֶאֱמִין, לִשְׁמֻעָתֵנוּ; וּזְרוֹעַ יְהוָה, עַל-מִי נִגְלָתָה.	1 'Who would have believed our report? And to whom hath the arm of the LORD been revealed?
53.2 ב  וַיַּעַל כַּיּוֹנֵק לְפָנָיו, וְכַשֹּׁרֶשׁ מֵאֶרֶץ צִיָּה--לֹא-תֹאַר לוֹ, וְלֹא הָדָר; וְנִרְאֵהוּ וְלֹא-מַרְאֶה, וְנֶחְמְדֵהוּ.	2 For he shot up right forth as a sapling, and as a root out of a dry ground; he had no form nor comeliness, that we should look upon him, nor beauty that we should delight in him.
53.3 ג  נִבְזֶה וַחֲדַל אִישִׁים, אִישׁ מַכְאֹבוֹת וִידוּעַ חֹלִי; וּכְמַסְתֵּר פָּנִים מִמֶּנּוּ, נִבְזֶה וְלֹא חֲשַׁבְנֻהוּ.	3 He was despised, and forsaken of men, a man of pains, and acquainted with disease, and as one from whom men hide their face: he was despised, and we esteemed him not.
53.4 ד  אָכֵן חֳלָיֵנוּ הוּא נָשָׂא, וּמַכְאֹבֵינוּ סְבָלָם; וַאֲנַחְנוּ חֲשַׁבְנֻהוּ, נָגוּעַ מֻכֵּה אֱלֹהִים וּמְעֻנֶּה.	4 Surely our diseases he did bear, and our pains he carried; whereas we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.
53.5 ה  וְהוּא מְחֹלָל מִפְּשָׁעֵנוּ, מְדֻכָּא מֵעֲוֺנֹתֵינוּ; מוּסַר שְׁלוֹמֵנוּ עָלָיו, וּבַחֲבֻרָתוֹ נִרְפָּא-לָנוּ.	5 But he was wounded because of our transgressions, he was crushed because of our iniquities: the chastisement of our welfare was upon him, and with his stripes we were healed.
53.6 ו  כֻּלָּנוּ כַּצֹּאן תָּעִינוּ, אִישׁ לְדַרְכּוֹ פָּנִינוּ; וַיהוָה הִפְגִּיעַ בּוֹ, אֵת עֲוֺן כֻּלָּנוּ.	6 All we like sheep did go astray, we turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath made to light on him the iniquity of us all.
53.7 ז  נִגַּשׂ וְהוּא נַעֲנֶה, וְלֹא יִפְתַּח-פִּיו, כַּשֶּׂה לַטֶּבַח יוּבָל, וּכְרָחֵל לִפְנֵי גֹזְזֶיהָ נֶאֱלָמָה; וְלֹא יִפְתַּח, פִּיו.	7 He was oppressed, though he humbled himself and opened not his mouth; as a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and as a sheep that before her shearers is dumb; yea, he opened not his mouth.
53.8 ח  מֵעֹצֶר וּמִמִּשְׁפָּט לֻקָּח, וְאֶת-דּוֹרוֹ מִי יְשׂוֹחֵחַ:  כִּי נִגְזַר מֵאֶרֶץ חַיִּים, מִפֶּשַׁע עַמִּי נֶגַע לָמוֹ.	8 By oppression and judgment he was taken away, and with his generation who did reason? for he was cut off out of the land of the living, for the transgression of my people to whom the stroke was due.
53.9 ט  וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-רְשָׁעִים קִבְרוֹ, וְאֶת-עָשִׁיר בְּמֹתָיו; עַל לֹא-חָמָס עָשָׂה, וְלֹא מִרְמָה בְּפִיו.	9 And they made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich his tomb; although he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.'
53.10 י  וַיהוָה חָפֵץ דַּכְּאוֹ, הֶחֱלִי--אִם-תָּשִׂים אָשָׁם נַפְשׁוֹ, יִרְאֶה זֶרַע יַאֲרִיךְ יָמִים; וְחֵפֶץ יְהוָה, בְּיָדוֹ יִצְלָח.	10 Yet it pleased the LORD to crush him by disease; to see if his soul would offer itself in restitution, that he might see his seed, prolong his days, and that the purpose of the LORD might prosper by his hand:
53.11 יא  מֵעֲמַל נַפְשׁוֹ, יִרְאֶה יִשְׂבָּע--בְּדַעְתּוֹ יַצְדִּיק צַדִּיק עַבְדִּי, לָרַבִּים; וַעֲוֺנֹתָם, הוּא יִסְבֹּל.	11 Of the travail of his soul he shall see to the full, even My servant, who by his knowledge did justify the Righteous One to the many, and their iniquities he did bear.
53.12 יב  לָכֵן אֲחַלֶּק-לוֹ בָרַבִּים, וְאֶת-עֲצוּמִים יְחַלֵּק שָׁלָל, תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱרָה לַמָּוֶת נַפְשׁוֹ, וְאֶת-פֹּשְׁעִים נִמְנָה; וְהוּא חֵטְא-רַבִּים נָשָׂא, וְלַפֹּשְׁעִים יַפְגִּיעַ.  {פ}	12 Therefore will I divide him a portion among the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the mighty; because he bared his soul unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors; yet he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. {P}
54.1 א  רָנִּי עֲקָרָה, לֹא יָלָדָה; פִּצְחִי רִנָּה וְצַהֲלִי לֹא-חָלָה, כִּי-רַבִּים בְּנֵי-שׁוֹמֵמָה מִבְּנֵי בְעוּלָה אָמַר יְהוָה.	1 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear, break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail; for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the LORD.
54.2 ב  הַרְחִיבִי מְקוֹם אָהֳלֵךְ, וִירִיעוֹת מִשְׁכְּנוֹתַיִךְ יַטּוּ--אַל-תַּחְשֹׂכִי; הַאֲרִיכִי, מֵיתָרַיִךְ, וִיתֵדֹתַיִךְ, חַזֵּקִי.	2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations, spare not; lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.
54.3 ג  כִּי-יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול, תִּפְרֹצִי; וְזַרְעֵךְ גּוֹיִם יִירָשׁ, וְעָרִים נְשַׁמּוֹת יוֹשִׁיבוּ.	3 For thou shalt spread abroad on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall possess the nations, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.
54.4 ד  אַל-תִּירְאִי כִּי-לֹא תֵבוֹשִׁי, וְאַל-תִּכָּלְמִי כִּי לֹא תַחְפִּירִי:  כִּי בֹשֶׁת עֲלוּמַיִךְ תִּשְׁכָּחִי, וְחֶרְפַּת אַלְמְנוּתַיִךְ לֹא תִזְכְּרִי-עוֹד.	4 Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed. Neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and the reproach of thy widowhood shalt thou remember no more.
54.5 ה  כִּי בֹעֲלַיִךְ עֹשַׂיִךְ, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת שְׁמוֹ; וְגֹאֲלֵךְ קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֱלֹהֵי כָל-הָאָרֶץ יִקָּרֵא.	5 For thy Maker is thy husband, the LORD of hosts is His name; and the Holy One of Israel is thy Redeemer, the God of the whole earth shall He be called.
54.6 ו  כִּי-כְאִשָּׁה עֲזוּבָה וַעֲצוּבַת רוּחַ, קְרָאָךְ יְהוָה; וְאֵשֶׁת נְעוּרִים כִּי תִמָּאֵס, אָמַר אֱלֹהָיִךְ.	6 For the LORD hath called thee as a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit; and a wife of youth, can she be rejected? saith thy God.
54.7 ז  בְּרֶגַע קָטֹן, עֲזַבְתִּיךְ; וּבְרַחֲמִים גְּדֹלִים, אֲקַבְּצֵךְ.	7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great compassion will I gather thee.
54.8 ח  בְּשֶׁצֶף קֶצֶף, הִסְתַּרְתִּי פָנַי רֶגַע מִמֵּךְ, וּבְחֶסֶד עוֹלָם, רִחַמְתִּיךְ--אָמַר גֹּאֲלֵךְ, יְהוָה.  {ס}	8 In a little wrath I hid My face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have compassion on thee, saith the LORD thy Redeemer. {S}
54.9 ט  כִּי-מֵי נֹחַ, זֹאת לִי, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי מֵעֲבֹר מֵי-נֹחַ עוֹד, עַל-הָאָרֶץ--כֵּן נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי מִקְּצֹף עָלַיִךְ, וּמִגְּעָר-בָּךְ.	9 For this is as the waters of Noah unto Me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.
54.10 י  כִּי הֶהָרִים יָמוּשׁוּ, וְהַגְּבָעוֹת תְּמוּטֶינָה--וְחַסְדִּי מֵאִתֵּךְ לֹא-יָמוּשׁ, וּבְרִית שְׁלוֹמִי לֹא תָמוּט, אָמַר מְרַחֲמֵךְ, יְהוָה.  {ס}	10 For the mountains may depart, and the hills be removed; but My kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall My covenant of peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath compassion on thee. {S}
54.11 יא  עֲנִיָּה סֹעֲרָה, לֹא נֻחָמָה; הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי מַרְבִּיץ בַּפּוּךְ, אֲבָנַיִךְ, וִיסַדְתִּיךְ, בַּסַּפִּירִים.	11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will set thy stones in fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.
54.12 יב  וְשַׂמְתִּי כַּדְכֹד שִׁמְשֹׁתַיִךְ, וּשְׁעָרַיִךְ לְאַבְנֵי אֶקְדָּח; וְכָל-גְּבוּלֵךְ, לְאַבְנֵי-חֵפֶץ.	12 And I will make thy pinnacles of rubies, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy border of precious stones.
54.13 יג  וְכָל-בָּנַיִךְ, לִמּוּדֵי יְהוָה; וְרַב, שְׁלוֹם בָּנָיִךְ.	13 And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great shall be the peace of thy children.
54.14 יד  בִּצְדָקָה, תִּכּוֹנָנִי; רַחֲקִי מֵעֹשֶׁק, כִּי-לֹא תִירָאִי, וּמִמְּחִתָּה, כִּי לֹא-תִקְרַב אֵלָיִךְ.	14 In righteousness shalt thou be established; be thou far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear, and from ruin, for it shall not come near thee.
54.15 טו  הֵן גּוֹר יָגוּר אֶפֶס, מֵאוֹתִי--מִי-גָר אִתָּךְ, עָלַיִךְ יִפּוֹל.	15 Behold, they may gather together, but not by Me; whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall because of thee.
54.16 טז  הן (הִנֵּה) אָנֹכִי, בָּרָאתִי חָרָשׁ--נֹפֵחַ בְּאֵשׁ פֶּחָם, וּמוֹצִיא כְלִי לְמַעֲשֵׂהוּ; וְאָנֹכִי בָּרָאתִי מַשְׁחִית, לְחַבֵּל.	16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the fire of coals, and bringeth forth a weapon for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy.
54.17 יז  כָּל-כְּלִי יוּצַר עָלַיִךְ, לֹא יִצְלָח, וְכָל-לָשׁוֹן תָּקוּם-אִתָּךְ לַמִּשְׁפָּט, תַּרְשִׁיעִי; זֹאת נַחֲלַת עַבְדֵי יְהוָה וְצִדְקָתָם, מֵאִתִּי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their due reward from Me, saith the LORD. {S}
55.1 א  הוֹי כָּל-צָמֵא לְכוּ לַמַּיִם, וַאֲשֶׁר אֵין-לוֹ כָּסֶף; לְכוּ שִׁבְרוּ, וֶאֱכֹלוּ, וּלְכוּ שִׁבְרוּ בְּלוֹא-כֶסֶף וּבְלוֹא מְחִיר, יַיִן וְחָלָב.	1 Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye for water, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.
55.2 ב  לָמָּה תִשְׁקְלוּ-כֶסֶף בְּלוֹא-לֶחֶם, וִיגִיעֲכֶם בְּלוֹא לְשָׂבְעָה; שִׁמְעוּ שָׁמוֹעַ אֵלַי וְאִכְלוּ-טוֹב, וְתִתְעַנַּג בַּדֶּשֶׁן נַפְשְׁכֶם.	2 Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your gain for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto Me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.
55.3 ג  הַטּוּ אָזְנְכֶם וּלְכוּ אֵלַי, שִׁמְעוּ וּתְחִי נַפְשְׁכֶם; וְאֶכְרְתָה לָכֶם בְּרִית עוֹלָם, חַסְדֵי דָוִד הַנֶּאֱמָנִים.	3 Incline your ear, and come unto Me; hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.
55.4 ד  הֵן עֵד לְאוּמִּים, נְתַתִּיו; נָגִיד וּמְצַוֵּה, לְאֻמִּים.	4 Behold, I have given him for a witness to the peoples, a prince and commander to the peoples.
55.5 ה  הֵן גּוֹי לֹא-תֵדַע תִּקְרָא, וְגוֹי לֹא-יְדָעוּךָ אֵלֶיךָ יָרוּצוּ--לְמַעַן יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, וְלִקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי פֵאֲרָךְ.  {ס}	5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and a nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee; because of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for He hath glorified thee. {S}
55.6 ו  דִּרְשׁוּ יְהוָה, בְּהִמָּצְאוֹ; קְרָאֻהוּ, בִּהְיוֹתוֹ קָרוֹב.	6 Seek ye the LORD while He may be found, call ye upon Him while He is near;
55.7 ז  יַעֲזֹב רָשָׁע דַּרְכּוֹ, וְאִישׁ אָוֶן מַחְשְׁבֹתָיו; וְיָשֹׁב אֶל-יְהוָה וִירַחֲמֵהוּ, וְאֶל-אֱלֹהֵינוּ כִּי-יַרְבֶּה לִסְלוֹחַ.	7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts; and let him return unto the LORD, and He will have compassion upon him, and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon.
55.8 ח  כִּי לֹא מַחְשְׁבוֹתַי מַחְשְׁבוֹתֵיכֶם, וְלֹא דַרְכֵיכֶם דְּרָכָי--נְאֻם, יְהוָה.	8 For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith the LORD.
55.9 ט  כִּי-גָבְהוּ שָׁמַיִם, מֵאָרֶץ--כֵּן גָּבְהוּ דְרָכַי מִדַּרְכֵיכֶם, וּמַחְשְׁבֹתַי מִמַּחְשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם.	9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts.
55.10 י  כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר יֵרֵד הַגֶּשֶׁם וְהַשֶּׁלֶג מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְשָׁמָּה לֹא יָשׁוּב--כִּי אִם-הִרְוָה אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְהוֹלִידָהּ וְהִצְמִיחָהּ; וְנָתַן זֶרַע לַזֹּרֵעַ, וְלֶחֶם לָאֹכֵל.	10 For as the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, except it water the earth, and make it bring forth and bud, and give seed to the sower and bread to the eater;
55.11 יא  כֵּן יִהְיֶה דְבָרִי אֲשֶׁר יֵצֵא מִפִּי, לֹא-יָשׁוּב אֵלַי רֵיקָם:  כִּי אִם-עָשָׂה אֶת-אֲשֶׁר חָפַצְתִּי, וְהִצְלִיחַ אֲשֶׁר שְׁלַחְתִּיו.	11 So shall My word be that goeth forth out of My mouth: it shall not return unto Me void, except it accomplish that which I please, and make the thing whereto I sent it prosper.
55.12 יב  כִּי-בְשִׂמְחָה תֵצֵאוּ, וּבְשָׁלוֹם תּוּבָלוּן; הֶהָרִים וְהַגְּבָעוֹת, יִפְצְחוּ לִפְנֵיכֶם רִנָּה, וְכָל-עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה, יִמְחֲאוּ-כָף.	12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace; the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.
55.13 יג  תַּחַת הַנַּעֲצוּץ יַעֲלֶה בְרוֹשׁ, תחת (וְתַחַת) הַסִּרְפַּד יַעֲלֶה הֲדַס; וְהָיָה לַיהוָה לְשֵׁם, לְאוֹת עוֹלָם לֹא יִכָּרֵת.  {פ}	13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the cypress, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle; and it shall be to the LORD for a memorial, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off. {P}
56.1 א  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, שִׁמְרוּ מִשְׁפָּט וַעֲשׂוּ צְדָקָה:  כִּי-קְרוֹבָה יְשׁוּעָתִי לָבוֹא, וְצִדְקָתִי לְהִגָּלוֹת.	1 Thus saith the LORD: Keep ye justice, and do righteousness; for My salvation is near to come, and My favour to be revealed.
56.2 ב  אַשְׁרֵי אֱנוֹשׁ יַעֲשֶׂה-זֹּאת, וּבֶן-אָדָם יַחֲזִיק בָּהּ--שֹׁמֵר שַׁבָּת מֵחַלְּלוֹ, וְשֹׁמֵר יָדוֹ מֵעֲשׂוֹת כָּל-רָע.  {ס}	2 Happy is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that holdeth fast by it: that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil. {S}
56.3 ג  וְאַל-יֹאמַר בֶּן-הַנֵּכָר, הַנִּלְוָה אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, הַבְדֵּל יַבְדִּילַנִי יְהוָה, מֵעַל עַמּוֹ; וְאַל-יֹאמַר הַסָּרִיס, הֵן אֲנִי עֵץ יָבֵשׁ.  {פ}	3 Neither let the alien, that hath joined himself to the LORD, speak, saying: 'The LORD will surely separate me from His people'; neither let the eunuch say: 'Behold, I am a dry tree.' {P}
56.4 ד  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, לַסָּרִיסִים אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁמְרוּ אֶת-שַׁבְּתוֹתַי, וּבָחֲרוּ, בַּאֲשֶׁר חָפָצְתִּי; וּמַחֲזִיקִים, בִּבְרִיתִי.	4 For thus saith the LORD concerning the eunuchs that keep My sabbaths, and choose the things that please Me, and hold fast by My covenant:
56.5 ה  וְנָתַתִּי לָהֶם בְּבֵיתִי וּבְחוֹמֹתַי, יָד וָשֵׁם--טוֹב, מִבָּנִים וּמִבָּנוֹת:  שֵׁם עוֹלָם אֶתֶּן-לוֹ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא יִכָּרֵת.  {ס}	5 Even unto them will I give in My house and within My walls a monument and a memorial better than sons and daughters; I will give them an everlasting memorial, that shall not be cut off. {S}
56.6 ו  וּבְנֵי הַנֵּכָר, הַנִּלְוִים עַל-יְהוָה לְשָׁרְתוֹ, וּלְאַהֲבָה אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה, לִהְיוֹת לוֹ לַעֲבָדִים--כָּל-שֹׁמֵר שַׁבָּת מֵחַלְּלוֹ, וּמַחֲזִיקִים בִּבְרִיתִי.	6 Also the aliens, that join themselves to the LORD, to minister unto Him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be His servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and holdeth fast by My covenant:
56.7 ז  וַהֲבִיאוֹתִים אֶל-הַר קָדְשִׁי, וְשִׂמַּחְתִּים בְּבֵית תְּפִלָּתִי--עוֹלֹתֵיהֶם וְזִבְחֵיהֶם לְרָצוֹן, עַל-מִזְבְּחִי:  כִּי בֵיתִי, בֵּית-תְּפִלָּה יִקָּרֵא לְכָל-הָעַמִּים.	7 Even them will I bring to My holy mountain, and make them joyful in My house of prayer; their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be acceptable upon Mine altar; for My house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples.
56.8 ח  נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, מְקַבֵּץ נִדְחֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עוֹד אֲקַבֵּץ עָלָיו, לְנִקְבָּצָיו.	8 Saith the Lord GOD who gathereth the dispersed of Israel: Yet I will gather others to him, beside those of him that are gathered.
56.9 ט  כֹּל, חַיְתוֹ שָׂדָי; אֵתָיוּ, לֶאֱכֹל כָּל-חַיְתוֹ בַּיָּעַר.  {פ}	9 All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest. {P}
56.10 י  צֹפָו עִוְרִים כֻּלָּם, לֹא יָדָעוּ--כֻּלָּם כְּלָבִים אִלְּמִים, לֹא יוּכְלוּ לִנְבֹּחַ; הֹזִים, שֹׁכְבִים, אֹהֲבֵי, לָנוּם.	10 His watchmen are all blind, without knowledge; they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; raving, lying down, loving to slumber.
56.11 יא  וְהַכְּלָבִים עַזֵּי-נֶפֶשׁ, לֹא יָדְעוּ שָׂבְעָה, וְהֵמָּה רֹעִים, לֹא יָדְעוּ הָבִין; כֻּלָּם לְדַרְכָּם פָּנוּ, אִישׁ לְבִצְעוֹ מִקָּצֵהוּ.	11 Yea, the dogs are greedy, they know not when they have enough; and these are shepherds that cannot understand; they all turn to their own way, each one to his gain, one and all.
56.12 יב  אֵתָיוּ אֶקְחָה-יַיִן, וְנִסְבְּאָה שֵׁכָר; וְהָיָה כָזֶה יוֹם מָחָר, גָּדוֹל יֶתֶר מְאֹד.	12 'Come ye, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.'
57.1 א  הַצַּדִּיק אָבָד, וְאֵין אִישׁ שָׂם עַל-לֵב; וְאַנְשֵׁי-חֶסֶד נֶאֱסָפִים בְּאֵין מֵבִין, כִּי-מִפְּנֵי הָרָעָה נֶאֱסַף הַצַּדִּיק.	1 The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart, and godly men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
57.2 ב  יָבוֹא שָׁלוֹם, יָנוּחוּ עַל-מִשְׁכְּבוֹתָם; הֹלֵךְ, נְכֹחוֹ.  {ס}	2 He entereth into peace, they rest in their beds, each one that walketh in his uprightness. {S}
57.3 ג  וְאַתֶּם קִרְבוּ-הֵנָּה, בְּנֵי עֹנְנָה; זֶרַע מְנָאֵף, וַתִּזְנֶה.	3 But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the harlot.
57.4 ד  עַל-מִי, תִּתְעַנָּגוּ--עַל-מִי תַּרְחִיבוּ פֶה, תַּאֲרִיכוּ לָשׁוֹן; הֲלוֹא-אַתֶּם יִלְדֵי-פֶשַׁע, זֶרַע שָׁקֶר.	4 Against whom do ye sport yourselves? Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,
57.5 ה  הַנֵּחָמִים, בָּאֵלִים, תַּחַת, כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן; שֹׁחֲטֵי הַיְלָדִים בַּנְּחָלִים, תַּחַת סְעִפֵי הַסְּלָעִים.	5 Ye that inflame yourselves among the terebinths, under every leafy tree; that slay the children in the valleys, under the clefts of the rocks?
57.6 ו  בְּחַלְּקֵי-נַחַל חֶלְקֵךְ, הֵם הֵם גּוֹרָלֵךְ; גַּם-לָהֶם שָׁפַכְתְּ נֶסֶךְ, הֶעֱלִית מִנְחָה--הַעַל אֵלֶּה, אֶנָּחֵם.	6 Among the smooth stones of the valley is thy portion; they, they are thy lot; even to them hast thou poured a drink-offering, thou hast offered a meal-offering. Should I pacify Myself for these things?
57.7 ז  עַל הַר-גָּבֹהַּ וְנִשָּׂא, שַׂמְתְּ מִשְׁכָּבֵךְ; גַּם-שָׁם עָלִית, לִזְבֹּחַ זָבַח.	7 Upon a high and lofty mountain hast thou set thy bed; thither also wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.
57.8 ח  וְאַחַר הַדֶּלֶת וְהַמְּזוּזָה, שַׂמְתְּ זִכְרוֹנֵךְ:  כִּי מֵאִתִּי גִּלִּית וַתַּעֲלִי, הִרְחַבְתְּ מִשְׁכָּבֵךְ וַתִּכְרָת-לָךְ מֵהֶם--אָהַבְתְּ מִשְׁכָּבָם, יָד חָזִית.	8 And behind the doors and the posts hast thou set up thy symbol; for thou hast uncovered, and art gone up from Me, thou hast enlarged thy bed, and chosen thee of them whose bed thou lovedst, whose hand thou sawest.
57.9 ט  וַתָּשֻׁרִי לַמֶּלֶךְ בַּשֶּׁמֶן, וַתַּרְבִּי רִקֻּחָיִךְ; וַתְּשַׁלְּחִי צִרַיִךְ עַד-מֵרָחֹק, וַתַּשְׁפִּילִי עַד-שְׁאוֹל.	9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thine ambassadors far off, even down to the nether-world.
57.10 י  בְּרֹב דַּרְכֵּךְ יָגַעַתְּ, לֹא אָמַרְתְּ נוֹאָשׁ; חַיַּת יָדֵךְ מָצָאת, עַל-כֵּן לֹא חָלִית.	10 Thou wast wearied with the length of thy way; yet saidst thou not: 'There is no hope'; thou didst find a renewal of thy strength, therefore thou wast not affected.
57.11 יא  וְאֶת-מִי דָּאַגְתְּ וַתִּירְאִי, כִּי תְכַזֵּבִי, וְאוֹתִי לֹא זָכַרְתְּ, לֹא-שַׂמְתְּ עַל-לִבֵּךְ; הֲלֹא אֲנִי מַחְשֶׁה וּמֵעֹלָם, וְאוֹתִי לֹא תִירָאִי.	11 And of whom hast thou been afraid and in fear, that thou wouldest fail? And as for Me, thou hast not remembered Me, nor laid it to thy heart. Have not I held My peace even of long time? Therefore thou fearest Me not.
57.12 יב  אֲנִי אַגִּיד, צִדְקָתֵךְ; וְאֶת-מַעֲשַׂיִךְ, וְלֹא יוֹעִילוּךְ.	12 I will declare thy righteousness; thy works also--they shall not profit thee.
57.13 יג  בְּזַעֲקֵךְ יַצִּילֻךְ קִבּוּצַיִךְ, וְאֶת-כֻּלָּם יִשָּׂא-רוּחַ יִקַּח-הָבֶל; וְהַחוֹסֶה בִי יִנְחַל-אֶרֶץ, וְיִירַשׁ הַר-קָדְשִׁי.	13 When thou criest, let them that thou hast gathered deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away, a breath shall bear them off; but he that taketh refuge in Me shall possess the land, and shall inherit My holy mountain.
57.14 יד  וְאָמַר סֹלּוּ-סֹלּוּ, פַּנּוּ-דָרֶךְ; הָרִימוּ מִכְשׁוֹל, מִדֶּרֶךְ עַמִּי.  {ס}	14 And He will say: cast ye up, cast ye up, clear the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of My people. {S}
57.15 טו  כִּי כֹה אָמַר רָם וְנִשָּׂא, שֹׁכֵן עַד וְקָדוֹשׁ שְׁמוֹ--מָרוֹם וְקָדוֹשׁ, אֶשְׁכּוֹן; וְאֶת-דַּכָּא, וּשְׁפַל-רוּחַ, לְהַחֲיוֹת רוּחַ שְׁפָלִים, וּלְהַחֲיוֹת לֵב נִדְכָּאִים.	15 For thus saith the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
57.16 טז  כִּי לֹא לְעוֹלָם אָרִיב, וְלֹא לָנֶצַח אֶקְצוֹף:  כִּי-רוּחַ מִלְּפָנַי יַעֲטוֹף, וּנְשָׁמוֹת אֲנִי עָשִׂיתִי.	16 For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit that enwrappeth itself is from Me, and the souls which I have made.
57.17 יז  בַּעֲוֺן בִּצְעוֹ קָצַפְתִּי וְאַכֵּהוּ, הַסְתֵּר וְאֶקְצֹף; וַיֵּלֶךְ שׁוֹבָב, בְּדֶרֶךְ לִבּוֹ.	17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote him, I hid Me and was wroth; and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.
57.18 יח  דְּרָכָיו רָאִיתִי, וְאֶרְפָּאֵהוּ; וְאַנְחֵהוּ, וַאֲשַׁלֵּם נִחֻמִים לוֹ וְלַאֲבֵלָיו.	18 I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will lead him also, and requite with comforts him and his mourners.
57.19 יט  בּוֹרֵא, נוב (נִיב) שְׂפָתָיִם; שָׁלוֹם שָׁלוֹם לָרָחוֹק וְלַקָּרוֹב, אָמַר יְהוָה--וּרְפָאתִיו.	19 Peace, peace, to him that is far off and to him that is near, saith the LORD that createth the fruit of the lips; and I will heal him.
57.20 כ  וְהָרְשָׁעִים, כַּיָּם נִגְרָשׁ:  כִּי הַשְׁקֵט לֹא יוּכָל, וַיִּגְרְשׁוּ מֵימָיו רֶפֶשׁ וָטִיט.	20 But the wicked are like the troubled sea; for it cannot rest, and its waters cast up mire and dirt.
57.21 כא  אֵין שָׁלוֹם, אָמַר אֱלֹהַי לָרְשָׁעִים.  {פ}	21 There is no peace, saith my God concerning the wicked. {P}
58.1 א  קְרָא בְגָרוֹן אַל-תַּחְשֹׂךְ, כַּשּׁוֹפָר הָרֵם קוֹלֶךָ; וְהַגֵּד לְעַמִּי פִּשְׁעָם, וּלְבֵית יַעֲקֹב חַטֹּאתָם.	1 Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a horn, and declare unto My people their transgression, and to the house of Jacob their sins.
58.2 ב  וְאוֹתִי, יוֹם יוֹם יִדְרֹשׁוּן, וְדַעַת דְּרָכַי, יֶחְפָּצוּן; כְּגוֹי אֲשֶׁר-צְדָקָה עָשָׂה, וּמִשְׁפַּט אֱלֹהָיו לֹא עָזָב, יִשְׁאָלוּנִי מִשְׁפְּטֵי-צֶדֶק, קִרְבַת אֱלֹהִים יֶחְפָּצוּן.	2 Yet they seek Me daily, and delight to know My ways; as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God, they ask of Me righteous ordinances, they delight to draw near unto God.
58.3 ג  לָמָּה צַּמְנוּ וְלֹא רָאִיתָ, עִנִּינוּ נַפְשֵׁנוּ וְלֹא תֵדָע; הֵן בְּיוֹם צֹמְכֶם תִּמְצְאוּ-חֵפֶץ, וְכָל-עַצְּבֵיכֶם תִּנְגֹּשׂוּ.	3 'Wherefore have we fasted, and Thou seest not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and Thou takest no knowledge?'--Behold, in the day of your fast ye pursue your business, and exact all your labours.
58.4 ד  הֵן לְרִיב וּמַצָּה תָּצוּמוּ, וּלְהַכּוֹת בְּאֶגְרֹף רֶשַׁע; לֹא-תָצוּמוּ כַיּוֹם, לְהַשְׁמִיעַ בַּמָּרוֹם קוֹלְכֶם.	4 Behold, ye fast for strife and contention, and to smite with the fist of wickedness; ye fast not this day so as to make your voice to be heard on high.
58.5 ה  הֲכָזֶה, יִהְיֶה צוֹם אֶבְחָרֵהוּ--יוֹם עַנּוֹת אָדָם, נַפְשׁוֹ; הֲלָכֹף כְּאַגְמֹן רֹאשׁוֹ, וְשַׂק וָאֵפֶר יַצִּיעַ--הֲלָזֶה תִּקְרָא-צוֹם, וְיוֹם רָצוֹן לַיהוָה.	5 Is such the fast that I have chosen? the day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the LORD?
58.6 ו  הֲלוֹא זֶה, צוֹם אֶבְחָרֵהוּ--פַּתֵּחַ חַרְצֻבּוֹת רֶשַׁע, הַתֵּר אֲגֻדּוֹת מוֹטָה; וְשַׁלַּח רְצוּצִים חָפְשִׁים, וְכָל-מוֹטָה תְּנַתֵּקוּ.	6 Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the fetters of wickedness, to undo the bands of the yoke, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?
58.7 ז  הֲלוֹא פָרֹס לָרָעֵב לַחְמֶךָ, וַעֲנִיִּים מְרוּדִים תָּבִיא בָיִת:  כִּי-תִרְאֶה עָרֹם וְכִסִּיתוֹ, וּמִבְּשָׂרְךָ לֹא תִתְעַלָּם.	7 Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?
58.8 ח  אָז יִבָּקַע כַּשַּׁחַר אוֹרֶךָ, וַאֲרֻכָתְךָ מְהֵרָה תִצְמָח; וְהָלַךְ לְפָנֶיךָ צִדְקֶךָ, כְּבוֹד יְהוָה יַאַסְפֶךָ.	8 Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy healing shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the LORD shall be thy rearward.
58.9 ט  אָז תִּקְרָא וַיהוָה יַעֲנֶה, תְּשַׁוַּע וְיֹאמַר הִנֵּנִי:  אִם-תָּסִיר מִתּוֹכְךָ מוֹטָה, שְׁלַח אֶצְבַּע וְדַבֶּר-אָוֶן.	9 Then shalt thou call, and the LORD will answer; thou shalt cry, and He will say: 'Here I am.' If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking wickedness;
58.10 י  וְתָפֵק לָרָעֵב נַפְשֶׁךָ, וְנֶפֶשׁ נַעֲנָה תַּשְׂבִּיעַ; וְזָרַח בַּחֹשֶׁךְ אוֹרֶךָ, וַאֲפֵלָתְךָ כַּצָּהֳרָיִם.	10 And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in darkness, and thy gloom be as the noon-day;
58.11 יא  וְנָחֲךָ יְהוָה, תָּמִיד, וְהִשְׂבִּיעַ בְּצַחְצָחוֹת נַפְשֶׁךָ, וְעַצְמֹתֶיךָ יַחֲלִיץ; וְהָיִיתָ, כְּגַן רָוֶה, וּכְמוֹצָא מַיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְכַזְּבוּ מֵימָיו.	11 And the LORD will guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make strong thy bones; and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.
58.12 יב  וּבָנוּ מִמְּךָ חָרְבוֹת עוֹלָם, מוֹסְדֵי דוֹר-וָדוֹר תְּקוֹמֵם; וְקֹרָא לְךָ גֹּדֵר פֶּרֶץ, מְשֹׁבֵב נְתִיבוֹת לָשָׁבֶת.	12 And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places, thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in.
58.13 יג  אִם-תָּשִׁיב מִשַּׁבָּת רַגְלֶךָ, עֲשׂוֹת חֲפָצֶךָ בְּיוֹם קָדְשִׁי; וְקָרָאתָ לַשַּׁבָּת עֹנֶג, לִקְדוֹשׁ יְהוָה מְכֻבָּד, וְכִבַּדְתּוֹ מֵעֲשׂוֹת דְּרָכֶיךָ, מִמְּצוֹא חֶפְצְךָ וְדַבֵּר דָּבָר.	13 If thou turn away thy foot because of the sabbath, from pursuing thy business on My holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, and the holy of the LORD honourable; and shalt honour it, not doing thy wonted ways, nor pursuing thy business, nor speaking thereof;
58.14 יד  אָז, תִּתְעַנַּג עַל-יְהוָה, וְהִרְכַּבְתִּיךָ, עַל-במותי (בָּמֳתֵי) אָרֶץ; וְהַאֲכַלְתִּיךָ, נַחֲלַת יַעֲקֹב אָבִיךָ--כִּי פִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֵּר.  {פ}	14 Then shalt thou delight thyself in the LORD, and I will make thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father; for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. {P}
59.1 א  הֵן לֹא-קָצְרָה יַד-יְהוָה, מֵהוֹשִׁיעַ; וְלֹא-כָבְדָה אָזְנוֹ, מִשְּׁמוֹעַ.	1 Behold, the LORD'S hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither His ear heavy, that it cannot hear;
59.2 ב  כִּי אִם-עֲוֺנֹתֵיכֶם, הָיוּ מַבְדִּלִים, בֵּינֵכֶם, לְבֵין אֱלֹהֵיכֶם; וְחַטֹּאותֵיכֶם, הִסְתִּירוּ פָנִים מִכֶּם--מִשְּׁמוֹעַ.	2 But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid His face from you, that He will not hear.
59.3 ג  כִּי כַפֵּיכֶם נְגֹאֲלוּ בַדָּם, וְאֶצְבְּעוֹתֵיכֶם בֶּעָוֺן; שִׂפְתוֹתֵיכֶם, דִּבְּרוּ-שֶׁקֶר--לְשׁוֹנְכֶם, עַוְלָה תֶהְגֶּה.	3 For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue muttereth wickedness.
59.4 ד  אֵין-קֹרֵא בְצֶדֶק, וְאֵין נִשְׁפָּט בֶּאֱמוּנָה; בָּטוֹחַ עַל-תֹּהוּ וְדַבֶּר-שָׁוְא, הָרוֹ עָמָל וְהוֹלֵיד אָוֶן.	4 None sueth in righteousness, and none pleadeth in truth; they trust in vanity, and speak lies, they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.
59.5 ה  בֵּיצֵי צִפְעוֹנִי בִּקֵּעוּ, וְקוּרֵי עַכָּבִישׁ יֶאֱרֹגוּ; הָאֹכֵל מִבֵּיצֵיהֶם יָמוּת, וְהַזּוּרֶה תִּבָּקַע אֶפְעֶה.	5 They hatch basilisks' eggs, and weave the spider's web; he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper.
59.6 ו  קוּרֵיהֶם לֹא-יִהְיוּ לְבֶגֶד, וְלֹא יִתְכַּסּוּ בְּמַעֲשֵׂיהֶם; מַעֲשֵׂיהֶם, מַעֲשֵׂי-אָוֶן, וּפֹעַל חָמָס, בְּכַפֵּיהֶם.	6 Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall men cover themselves with their works; their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.
59.7 ז  רַגְלֵיהֶם, לָרַע יָרֻצוּ, וִימַהֲרוּ, לִשְׁפֹּךְ דָּם נָקִי; מַחְשְׁבֹתֵיהֶם, מַחְשְׁבוֹת אָוֶן--שֹׁד וָשֶׁבֶר, בִּמְסִלּוֹתָם.	7 Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, desolation and destruction are in their paths.
59.8 ח  דֶּרֶךְ שָׁלוֹם לֹא יָדָעוּ, וְאֵין מִשְׁפָּט בְּמַעְגְּלוֹתָם; נְתִיבוֹתֵיהֶם, עִקְּשׁוּ לָהֶם--כֹּל דֹּרֵךְ בָּהּ, לֹא יָדַע שָׁלוֹם.	8 The way of peace they know not, and there is no right in their goings; they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goeth therein doth not know peace.
59.9 ט  עַל-כֵּן, רָחַק מִשְׁפָּט מִמֶּנּוּ, וְלֹא תַשִּׂיגֵנוּ, צְדָקָה; נְקַוֶּה לָאוֹר וְהִנֵּה-חֹשֶׁךְ, לִנְגֹהוֹת בָּאֲפֵלוֹת נְהַלֵּךְ.	9 Therefore is justice far from us, neither doth righteousness overtake us; we look for light, but behold darkness, for brightness, but we walk in gloom.
59.10 י  נְגַשְׁשָׁה כַעִוְרִים קִיר, וּכְאֵין עֵינַיִם נְגַשֵּׁשָׁה; כָּשַׁלְנוּ בַצָּהֳרַיִם כַּנֶּשֶׁף, בָּאַשְׁמַנִּים כַּמֵּתִים.	10 We grope for the wall like the blind, yea, as they that have no eyes do we grope; we stumble at noonday as in the twilight; we are in dark places like the dead.
59.11 יא  נֶהֱמֶה כַדֻּבִּים כֻּלָּנוּ, וְכַיּוֹנִים הָגֹה נֶהְגֶּה; נְקַוֶּה לַמִּשְׁפָּט וָאַיִן, לִישׁוּעָה רָחֲקָה מִמֶּנּוּ.	11 We all growl like bears, and mourn sore like doves; we look for right, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.
59.12 יב  כִּי-רַבּוּ פְשָׁעֵינוּ נֶגְדֶּךָ, וְחַטֹּאותֵינוּ עָנְתָה בָּנוּ:  כִּי-פְשָׁעֵינוּ אִתָּנוּ, וַעֲוֺנֹתֵינוּ יְדַעֲנוּם.	12 For our transgressions are multiplied before Thee, and our sins testify against us; for our transgressions are present to us, and as for our iniquities, we know them:
59.13 יג  פָּשֹׁעַ וְכַחֵשׁ בַּיהוָה, וְנָסוֹג מֵאַחַר אֱלֹהֵינוּ; דַּבֶּר-עֹשֶׁק וְסָרָה, הֹרוֹ וְהֹגוֹ מִלֵּב דִּבְרֵי-שָׁקֶר.	13 Transgressing and denying the LORD, and turning away from following our God, speaking oppression and perverseness, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
59.14 יד  וְהֻסַּג אָחוֹר מִשְׁפָּט, וּצְדָקָה מֵרָחוֹק תַּעֲמֹד:  כִּי-כָשְׁלָה בָרְחוֹב אֱמֶת, וּנְכֹחָה לֹא-תוּכַל לָבוֹא.  {ס}	14 And justice is turned away backward, and righteousness standeth afar off; for truth hath stumbled in the broad place, and uprightness cannot enter. {S}
59.15 טו  וַתְּהִי הָאֱמֶת נֶעְדֶּרֶת, וְסָר מֵרָע מִשְׁתּוֹלֵל; וַיַּרְא יְהוָה וַיֵּרַע בְּעֵינָיו, כִּי-אֵין מִשְׁפָּט.	15 And truth is lacking, and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey. And the LORD saw it, and it displeased Him that there was no justice;
59.16 טז  וַיַּרְא כִּי-אֵין אִישׁ, וַיִּשְׁתּוֹמֵם כִּי אֵין מַפְגִּיעַ; וַתּוֹשַׁע לוֹ זְרֹעוֹ, וְצִדְקָתוֹ הִיא סְמָכָתְהוּ.	16 And He saw that there was no man, and was astonished that there was no intercessor; therefore His own arm brought salvation unto Him; and His righteousness, it sustained Him;
59.17 יז  וַיִּלְבַּשׁ צְדָקָה כַּשִּׁרְיָן, וְכוֹבַע יְשׁוּעָה בְּרֹאשׁוֹ; וַיִּלְבַּשׁ בִּגְדֵי נָקָם, תִּלְבֹּשֶׁת, וַיַּעַט כַּמְעִיל, קִנְאָה.	17 And He put on righteousness as a coat of mail, and a helmet of salvation upon His head, and He put on garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.
59.18 יח  כְּעַל גְּמֻלוֹת, כְּעַל יְשַׁלֵּם--חֵמָה לְצָרָיו, גְּמוּל לְאֹיְבָיו; לָאִיִּים, גְּמוּל יְשַׁלֵּם.	18 According to their deeds, accordingly He will repay, fury to His adversaries, recompense to His enemies; to the islands He will repay recompense.
59.19 יט  וְיִרְאוּ מִמַּעֲרָב אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה, וּמִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ אֶת-כְּבוֹדוֹ:  כִּי-יָבוֹא כַנָּהָר צָר, רוּחַ יְהוָה נֹסְסָה בוֹ.	19 So shall they fear the name of the LORD from the west, and His glory from the rising of the sun; for distress will come in like a flood, which the breath of the LORD driveth.
59.20 כ  וּבָא לְצִיּוֹן גּוֹאֵל, וּלְשָׁבֵי פֶשַׁע בְּיַעֲקֹב--נְאֻם, יְהוָה.	20 And a redeemer will come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the LORD.
59.21 כא  וַאֲנִי, זֹאת בְּרִיתִי אוֹתָם אָמַר יְהוָה--רוּחִי אֲשֶׁר עָלֶיךָ, וּדְבָרַי אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי בְּפִיךָ:  לֹא-יָמוּשׁוּ מִפִּיךָ וּמִפִּי זַרְעֲךָ וּמִפִּי זֶרַע זַרְעֲךָ, אָמַר יְהוָה, מֵעַתָּה, וְעַד-עוֹלָם.  {ס}	21 And as for Me, this is My covenant with them, saith the LORD; My spirit that is upon thee, and My words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the LORD, from henceforth and for ever. {S}
60.1 א  קוּמִי אוֹרִי, כִּי בָא אוֹרֵךְ; וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, עָלַיִךְ זָרָח.	1 Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee.
60.2 ב  כִּי-הִנֵּה הַחֹשֶׁךְ יְכַסֶּה-אֶרֶץ, וַעֲרָפֶל לְאֻמִּים; וְעָלַיִךְ יִזְרַח יְהוָה, וּכְבוֹדוֹ עָלַיִךְ יֵרָאֶה.	2 For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the peoples; but upon thee the LORD will arise, and His glory shall be seen upon thee.
60.3 ג  וְהָלְכוּ גוֹיִם, לְאוֹרֵךְ; וּמְלָכִים, לְנֹגַהּ זַרְחֵךְ.	3 And nations shall walk at thy light, and kings at the brightness of thy rising.
60.4 ד  שְׂאִי-סָבִיב עֵינַיִךְ, וּרְאִי--כֻּלָּם, נִקְבְּצוּ בָאוּ-לָךְ; בָּנַיִךְ מֵרָחוֹק יָבֹאוּ, וּבְנוֹתַיִךְ עַל-צַד תֵּאָמַנָה.	4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: they all are gathered together, and come to thee; thy sons come from far, and thy daughters are borne on the side.
60.5 ה  אָז תִּרְאִי וְנָהַרְתְּ, וּפָחַד וְרָחַב לְבָבֵךְ:  כִּי-יֵהָפֵךְ עָלַיִךְ הֲמוֹן יָם, חֵיל גּוֹיִם יָבֹאוּ לָךְ.	5 Then thou shalt see and be radiant, and thy heart shall throb and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be turned unto thee, the wealth of the nations shall come unto thee.
60.6 ו  שִׁפְעַת גְּמַלִּים תְּכַסֵּךְ, בִּכְרֵי מִדְיָן וְעֵיפָה--כֻּלָּם, מִשְּׁבָא יָבֹאוּ; זָהָב וּלְבוֹנָה יִשָּׂאוּ, וּתְהִלֹּת יְהוָה יְבַשֵּׂרוּ.	6 The caravan of camels shall cover thee, and of the young camels of Midian and Ephah, all coming from Sheba; they shall bring gold and incense, and shall proclaim the praises of the LORD.
60.7 ז  כָּל-צֹאן קֵדָר יִקָּבְצוּ לָךְ, אֵילֵי נְבָיוֹת יְשָׁרְתוּנֶךְ; יַעֲלוּ עַל-רָצוֹן מִזְבְּחִי, וּבֵית תִּפְאַרְתִּי אֲפָאֵר.	7 All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee; they shall come up with acceptance on Mine altar, and I will glorify My glorious house.
60.8 ח  מִי-אֵלֶּה, כָּעָב תְּעוּפֶינָה; וְכַיּוֹנִים, אֶל-אֲרֻבֹּתֵיהֶם.	8 Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their cotes?
60.9 ט  כִּי-לִי אִיִּים יְקַוּוּ, וָאֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ בָּרִאשֹׁנָה, לְהָבִיא בָנַיִךְ מֵרָחוֹק, כַּסְפָּם וּזְהָבָם אִתָּם--לְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהַיִךְ, וְלִקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל כִּי פֵאֲרָךְ.	9 Surely the isles shall wait for Me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, for the name of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, because He hath glorified thee.
60.10 י  וּבָנוּ בְנֵי-נֵכָר חֹמֹתַיִךְ, וּמַלְכֵיהֶם יְשָׁרְתוּנֶךְ:  כִּי בְקִצְפִּי הִכִּיתִיךְ, וּבִרְצוֹנִי רִחַמְתִּיךְ.	10 And aliens shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee; for in My wrath I smote thee, but in My favour have I had compassion on thee.
60.11 יא  וּפִתְּחוּ שְׁעָרַיִךְ תָּמִיד יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, לֹא יִסָּגֵרוּ:  לְהָבִיא אֵלַיִךְ חֵיל גּוֹיִם, וּמַלְכֵיהֶם נְהוּגִים.	11 Thy gates also shall be open continually, day and night, they shall not be shut; that men may bring unto thee the wealth of the nations, and their kings in procession.
60.12 יב  כִּי-הַגּוֹי וְהַמַּמְלָכָה אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יַעַבְדוּךְ, יֹאבֵדוּ; וְהַגּוֹיִם, חָרֹב יֶחֱרָבוּ.	12 For that nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.
60.13 יג  כְּבוֹד הַלְּבָנוֹן אֵלַיִךְ יָבוֹא, בְּרוֹשׁ תִּדְהָר וּתְאַשּׁוּר יַחְדָּו--לְפָאֵר מְקוֹם מִקְדָּשִׁי, וּמְקוֹם רַגְלַי אֲכַבֵּד.	13 The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the cypress, the plane-tree and the larch together; to beautify the place of My sanctuary, and I will make the place of My feet glorious.
60.14 יד  וְהָלְכוּ אֵלַיִךְ שְׁחוֹחַ בְּנֵי מְעַנַּיִךְ, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ עַל-כַּפּוֹת רַגְלַיִךְ כָּל-מְנַאֲצָיִךְ; וְקָרְאוּ לָךְ עִיר יְהוָה, צִיּוֹן קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	14 And the sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee the city of the LORD, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
60.15 טו  תַּחַת הֱיוֹתֵךְ עֲזוּבָה וּשְׂנוּאָה, וְאֵין עוֹבֵר; וְשַׂמְתִּיךְ לִגְאוֹן עוֹלָם, מְשׂוֹשׂ דּוֹר וָדוֹר.	15 Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man passed through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.
60.16 טז  וְיָנַקְתְּ חֲלֵב גּוֹיִם, וְשֹׁד מְלָכִים תִּינָקִי; וְיָדַעַתְּ, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה מוֹשִׁיעֵךְ, וְגֹאֲלֵךְ, אֲבִיר יַעֲקֹב.	16 Thou shalt also suck the milk of the nations, and shalt suck the breast of kings; and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy Saviour, and I, the Mighty One of Jacob, thy Redeemer.
60.17 יז  תַּחַת הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אָבִיא זָהָב, וְתַחַת הַבַּרְזֶל אָבִיא כֶסֶף, וְתַחַת הָעֵצִים נְחֹשֶׁת, וְתַחַת הָאֲבָנִים בַּרְזֶל; וְשַׂמְתִּי פְקֻדָּתֵךְ שָׁלוֹם, וְנֹגְשַׂיִךְ צְדָקָה.	17 For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron; I will also make thy officers peace, and righteousness thy magistrates.
60.18 יח  לֹא-יִשָּׁמַע עוֹד חָמָס בְּאַרְצֵךְ, שֹׁד וָשֶׁבֶר בִּגְבוּלָיִךְ; וְקָרָאת יְשׁוּעָה חוֹמֹתַיִךְ, וּשְׁעָרַיִךְ תְּהִלָּה.	18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, desolation nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.
60.19 יט  לֹא-יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ עוֹד הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, לְאוֹר יוֹמָם, וּלְנֹגַהּ, הַיָּרֵחַ לֹא-יָאִיר לָךְ; וְהָיָה-לָךְ יְהוָה לְאוֹר עוֹלָם, וֵאלֹהַיִךְ לְתִפְאַרְתֵּךְ.	19 The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee; but the LORD shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.
60.20 כ  לֹא-יָבוֹא עוֹד שִׁמְשֵׁךְ, וִירֵחֵךְ לֹא יֵאָסֵף:  כִּי יְהוָה, יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ לְאוֹר עוֹלָם, וְשָׁלְמוּ, יְמֵי אֶבְלֵךְ.	20 Thy sun shall no more go down, Neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the LORD shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.
60.21 כא  וְעַמֵּךְ כֻּלָּם צַדִּיקִים, לְעוֹלָם יִירְשׁוּ אָרֶץ; נֵצֶר מטעו (מַטָּעַי) מַעֲשֵׂה יָדַי, לְהִתְפָּאֵר.	21 Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land for ever; the branch of My planting, the work of My hands, wherein I glory.
60.22 כב  הַקָּטֹן יִהְיֶה לָאֶלֶף, וְהַצָּעִיר לְגוֹי עָצוּם; אֲנִי יְהוָה, בְּעִתָּהּ אֲחִישֶׁנָּה.  {ס}	22 The smallest shall become a thousand, and the least a mighty nation; I the LORD will hasten it in its time. {S}
61.1 א  רוּחַ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, עָלָי--יַעַן מָשַׁח יְהוָה אֹתִי לְבַשֵּׂר עֲנָוִים, שְׁלָחַנִי לַחֲבֹשׁ לְנִשְׁבְּרֵי-לֵב, לִקְרֹא לִשְׁבוּיִם דְּרוֹר, וְלַאֲסוּרִים פְּקַח-קוֹחַ.	1 The spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD hath anointed me to bring good tidings unto the humble; He hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the eyes to them that are bound;
61.2 ב  לִקְרֹא שְׁנַת-רָצוֹן לַיהוָה, וְיוֹם נָקָם לֵאלֹהֵינוּ, לְנַחֵם, כָּל-אֲבֵלִים.	2 To proclaim the year of the LORD'S good pleasure, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;
61.3 ג  לָשׂוּם לַאֲבֵלֵי צִיּוֹן, לָתֵת לָהֶם פְּאֵר תַּחַת אֵפֶר שֶׁמֶן שָׂשׂוֹן תַּחַת אֵבֶל--מַעֲטֵה תְהִלָּה, תַּחַת רוּחַ כֵּהָה; וְקֹרָא לָהֶם אֵילֵי הַצֶּדֶק, מַטַּע יְהוָה לְהִתְפָּאֵר.	3 To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them a garland for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the mantle of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called terebinths of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, wherein He might glory.
61.4 ד  וּבָנוּ חָרְבוֹת עוֹלָם, שֹׁמְמוֹת רִאשֹׁנִים יְקוֹמֵמוּ; וְחִדְּשׁוּ עָרֵי חֹרֶב, שֹׁמְמוֹת דּוֹר וָדוֹר.	4 And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall renew the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.
61.5 ה  וְעָמְדוּ זָרִים, וְרָעוּ צֹאנְכֶם; וּבְנֵי נֵכָר, אִכָּרֵיכֶם וְכֹרְמֵיכֶם.	5 And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and aliens shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.
61.6 ו  וְאַתֶּם, כֹּהֲנֵי יְהוָה תִּקָּרֵאוּ--מְשָׁרְתֵי אֱלֹהֵינוּ, יֵאָמֵר לָכֶם; חֵיל גּוֹיִם תֹּאכֵלוּ, וּבִכְבוֹדָם תִּתְיַמָּרוּ.	6 But ye shall be named the priests of the LORD, men shall call you the ministers of our God; ye shall eat the wealth of the nations, and in their splendour shall ye revel.
61.7 ז  תַּחַת בָּשְׁתְּכֶם מִשְׁנֶה, וּכְלִמָּה יָרֹנּוּ חֶלְקָם; לָכֵן בְּאַרְצָם מִשְׁנֶה יִירָשׁוּ, שִׂמְחַת עוֹלָם תִּהְיֶה לָהֶם.	7 For your shame which was double, and for that they rejoiced: 'Confusion is their portion'; therefore in their land they shall possess double, everlasting joy shall be unto them.
61.8 ח  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֹהֵב מִשְׁפָּט, שֹׂנֵא גָזֵל בְּעוֹלָה; וְנָתַתִּי פְעֻלָּתָם בֶּאֱמֶת, וּבְרִית עוֹלָם אֶכְרוֹת לָהֶם.	8 For I the LORD love justice, I hate robbery with iniquity; and I will give them their recompense in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
61.9 ט  וְנוֹדַע בַּגּוֹיִם זַרְעָם, וְצֶאֱצָאֵיהֶם בְּתוֹךְ הָעַמִּים; כָּל-רֹאֵיהֶם יַכִּירוּם, כִּי הֵם זֶרַע בֵּרַךְ יְהוָה.  {פ}	9 And their seed shall be known among the nations, and their offspring among the peoples; all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the LORD hath blessed. {P}
61.10 י  שׂוֹשׂ אָשִׂישׂ בַּיהוָה, תָּגֵל נַפְשִׁי בֵּאלֹהַי--כִּי הִלְבִּישַׁנִי בִּגְדֵי-יֶשַׁע, מְעִיל צְדָקָה יְעָטָנִי:  כֶּחָתָן יְכַהֵן פְּאֵר, וְכַכַּלָּה תַּעְדֶּה כֵלֶיהָ.	10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for He hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, He hath covered me with the robe of victory, as a bridegroom putteth on a priestly diadem, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.
61.11 יא  כִּי כָאָרֶץ תּוֹצִיא צִמְחָהּ, וּכְגַנָּה זֵרוּעֶיהָ תַצְמִיחַ--כֵּן אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, יַצְמִיחַ צְדָקָה וּתְהִלָּה, נֶגֶד, כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם.	11 For as the earth bringeth forth her growth, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord GOD will cause victory and glory to spring forth before all the nations.
62.1 א  לְמַעַן צִיּוֹן לֹא אֶחֱשֶׁה, וּלְמַעַן יְרוּשָׁלִַם לֹא אֶשְׁקוֹט, עַד-יֵצֵא כַנֹּגַהּ צִדְקָהּ, וִישׁוּעָתָהּ כְּלַפִּיד יִבְעָר.	1 For Zion's sake will I not hold My peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her triumph go forth as brightness, and her salvation as a torch that burneth.
62.2 ב  וְרָאוּ גוֹיִם צִדְקֵךְ, וְכָל-מְלָכִים כְּבוֹדֵךְ; וְקֹרָא לָךְ שֵׁם חָדָשׁ, אֲשֶׁר פִּי יְהוָה יִקֳּבֶנּוּ.	2 And the nations shall see thy triumph, and all kings thy glory; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the LORD shall mark out.
62.3 ג  וְהָיִית עֲטֶרֶת תִּפְאֶרֶת, בְּיַד-יְהוָה; וצנוף (וּצְנִיף) מְלוּכָה, בְּכַף-אֱלֹהָיִךְ.	3 Thou shalt also be a crown of beauty in the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the open hand of thy God.
62.4 ד  לֹא-יֵאָמֵר לָךְ עוֹד עֲזוּבָה, וּלְאַרְצֵךְ לֹא-יֵאָמֵר עוֹד שְׁמָמָה--כִּי לָךְ יִקָּרֵא חֶפְצִי-בָהּ, וּלְאַרְצֵךְ בְּעוּלָה:  כִּי-חָפֵץ יְהוָה בָּךְ, וְאַרְצֵךְ תִּבָּעֵל.	4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken, neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate; but thou shalt be called, My delight is in her, and thy land, Espoused; for the LORD delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be espoused.
62.5 ה  כִּי-יִבְעַל בָּחוּר בְּתוּלָה, יִבְעָלוּךְ בָּנָיִךְ; וּמְשׂוֹשׂ חָתָן עַל-כַּלָּה, יָשִׂישׂ עָלַיִךְ אֱלֹהָיִךְ.	5 For as a young man espouseth a virgin, so shall thy sons espouse thee; and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.
62.6 ו  עַל-חוֹמֹתַיִךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, הִפְקַדְתִּי שֹׁמְרִים--כָּל-הַיּוֹם וְכָל-הַלַּיְלָה תָּמִיד, לֹא יֶחֱשׁוּ; הַמַּזְכִּרִים, אֶת-יְהוָה--אַל-דֳּמִי, לָכֶם.	6 I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, they shall never hold their peace day nor night: 'Ye that are the LORD'S remembrancers, take ye no rest,
62.7 ז  וְאַל-תִּתְּנוּ דֳמִי, לוֹ:  עַד-יְכוֹנֵן וְעַד-יָשִׂים אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, תְּהִלָּה--בָּאָרֶץ.	7 And give Him no rest, till He establish, and till He make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.'
62.8 ח  נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה בִּימִינוֹ, וּבִזְרוֹעַ עֻזּוֹ:  אִם-אֶתֵּן אֶת-דְּגָנֵךְ עוֹד מַאֲכָל, לְאֹיְבַיִךְ, וְאִם-יִשְׁתּוּ בְנֵי-נֵכָר תִּירוֹשֵׁךְ, אֲשֶׁר יָגַעַתְּ בּוֹ.	8 The LORD hath sworn by His right hand, and by the arm of His strength: Surely I will no more give thy corn to be food for thine enemies; and strangers shall not drink thy wine, for which thou hast laboured;
62.9 ט  כִּי מְאַסְפָיו יֹאכְלֻהוּ, וְהִלְלוּ אֶת-יְהוָה; וּמְקַבְּצָיו יִשְׁתֻּהוּ, בְּחַצְרוֹת קָדְשִׁי.  {ס}	9 But they that have garnered it shall eat it, and praise the LORD, and they that have gathered it shall drink it in the courts of My sanctuary. {S}
62.10 י  עִבְרוּ עִבְרוּ בַּשְּׁעָרִים, פַּנּוּ דֶּרֶךְ הָעָם; סֹלּוּ סֹלּוּ הַמְסִלָּה סַקְּלוּ מֵאֶבֶן, הָרִימוּ נֵס עַל-הָעַמִּים.	10 Go through, go through the gates, clear ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway, gather out the stones; lift up an ensign over the peoples.
62.11 יא  הִנֵּה יְהוָה, הִשְׁמִיעַ אֶל-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ, אִמְרוּ לְבַת-צִיּוֹן, הִנֵּה יִשְׁעֵךְ בָּא; הִנֵּה שְׂכָרוֹ אִתּוֹ, וּפְעֻלָּתוֹ לְפָנָיו.	11 Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto the end of the earth: say ye to the daughter of Zion: 'Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, His reward is with Him, and His recompense before Him.'
62.12 יב  וְקָרְאוּ לָהֶם עַם-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, גְּאוּלֵי יְהוָה; וְלָךְ יִקָּרֵא דְרוּשָׁה, עִיר לֹא נֶעֱזָבָה.  {ס}	12 And they shall call them the holy people, The redeemed of the LORD; and thou shalt be called Sought out, a city not forsaken. {S}
63.1 א  מִי-זֶה בָּא מֵאֱדוֹם, חֲמוּץ בְּגָדִים מִבָּצְרָה, זֶה הָדוּר בִּלְבוּשׁוֹ, צֹעֶה בְּרֹב כֹּחוֹ; אֲנִי מְדַבֵּר בִּצְדָקָה, רַב לְהוֹשִׁיעַ.	1 'Who is this that cometh from Edom, with crimsoned garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his apparel, stately in the greatness of his strength?'--'I that speak in victory, mighty to save.'--
63.2 ב  מַדּוּעַ אָדֹם, לִלְבוּשֶׁךָ; וּבְגָדֶיךָ, כְּדֹרֵךְ בְּגַת.	2 'Wherefore is Thine apparel red, and Thy garments like his that treadeth in the winevat?'--
63.3 ג  פּוּרָה דָּרַכְתִּי לְבַדִּי, וּמֵעַמִּים אֵין-אִישׁ אִתִּי, וְאֶדְרְכֵם בְּאַפִּי, וְאֶרְמְסֵם בַּחֲמָתִי; וְיֵז נִצְחָם עַל-בְּגָדַי, וְכָל-מַלְבּוּשַׁי אֶגְאָלְתִּי.	3 'I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the peoples there was no man with Me; yea, I trod them in Mine anger, and trampled them in My fury; and their lifeblood is dashed against My garments, and I have stained all My raiment.
63.4 ד  כִּי יוֹם נָקָם, בְּלִבִּי; וּשְׁנַת גְּאוּלַי, בָּאָה.	4 For the day of vengeance that was in My heart, and My year of redemption are come.
63.5 ה  וְאַבִּיט וְאֵין עֹזֵר, וְאֶשְׁתּוֹמֵם וְאֵין סוֹמֵךְ; וַתּוֹשַׁע לִי זְרֹעִי, וַחֲמָתִי הִיא סְמָכָתְנִי.	5 And I looked, and there was none to help, and I beheld in astonishment, and there was none to uphold; therefore Mine own arm brought salvation unto Me, and My fury, it upheld Me.
63.6 ו  וְאָבוּס עַמִּים בְּאַפִּי, וַאֲשַׁכְּרֵם בַּחֲמָתִי; וְאוֹרִיד לָאָרֶץ, נִצְחָם.  {ס}	6 And I trod down the peoples in Mine anger, and made them drunk with My fury, and I poured out their lifeblood on the earth.' {S}
63.7 ז  חַסְדֵי יְהוָה אַזְכִּיר, תְּהִלֹּת יְהוָה, כְּעַל, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-גְּמָלָנוּ יְהוָה; וְרַב-טוּב לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-גְּמָלָם כְּרַחֲמָיו וּכְרֹב חֲסָדָיו.	7 I will make mention of the mercies of the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath bestowed on us; and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which He hath bestowed on them according to His compassions, and according to the multitude of His mercies.
63.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אַךְ-עַמִּי הֵמָּה, בָּנִים לֹא יְשַׁקֵּרוּ; וַיְהִי לָהֶם, לְמוֹשִׁיעַ.	8 For He said: 'Surely, they are My people, children that will not deal falsely'; so He was their Saviour.
63.9 ט  בְּכָל-צָרָתָם לא (לוֹ) צָר, וּמַלְאַךְ פָּנָיו הוֹשִׁיעָם--בְּאַהֲבָתוֹ וּבְחֶמְלָתוֹ, הוּא גְאָלָם; וַיְנַטְּלֵם וַיְנַשְּׂאֵם, כָּל-יְמֵי עוֹלָם.	9 In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the angel of His presence saved them; in His love and in His pity He redeemed them; and He bore them, and carried them all the days of old.
63.10 י  וְהֵמָּה מָרוּ וְעִצְּבוּ, אֶת-רוּחַ קָדְשׁוֹ; וַיֵּהָפֵךְ לָהֶם לְאוֹיֵב, הוּא נִלְחַם-בָּם.	10 But they rebelled, and grieved His holy spirit; therefore He was turned to be their enemy, Himself fought against them.
63.11 יא  וַיִּזְכֹּר יְמֵי-עוֹלָם, מֹשֶׁה עַמּוֹ; אַיֵּה הַמַּעֲלֵם מִיָּם, אֵת רֹעֵי צֹאנוֹ--אַיֵּה הַשָּׂם בְּקִרְבּוֹ, אֶת-רוּחַ קָדְשׁוֹ.	11 Then His people remembered the days of old, the days of Moses: 'Where is He that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of His flock? Where is He that put His holy spirit in the midst of them?
63.12 יב  מוֹלִיךְ לִימִין מֹשֶׁה, זְרוֹעַ תִּפְאַרְתּוֹ; בּוֹקֵעַ מַיִם מִפְּנֵיהֶם, לַעֲשׂוֹת לוֹ שֵׁם עוֹלָם.	12 That caused His glorious arm to go at the right hand of Moses? That divided the water before them, to make Himself an everlasting name?
63.13 יג  מוֹלִיכָם, בַּתְּהֹמוֹת; כַּסּוּס בַּמִּדְבָּר, לֹא יִכָּשֵׁלוּ.	13 That led them through the deep, as a horse in the wilderness, without stumbling?
63.14 יד  כַּבְּהֵמָה בַּבִּקְעָה תֵרֵד, רוּחַ יְהוָה תְּנִיחֶנּוּ--כֵּן נִהַגְתָּ עַמְּךָ, לַעֲשׂוֹת לְךָ שֵׁם תִּפְאָרֶת.	14 As the cattle that go down into the valley, the spirit of the LORD caused them to rest; so didst Thou lead Thy people, to make Thyself a glorious name.'
63.15 טו  הַבֵּט מִשָּׁמַיִם וּרְאֵה, מִזְּבֻל קָדְשְׁךָ וְתִפְאַרְתֶּךָ:  אַיֵּה קִנְאָתְךָ וּגְבוּרֹתֶךָ, הֲמוֹן מֵעֶיךָ וְרַחֲמֶיךָ אֵלַי הִתְאַפָּקוּ.	15 Look down from heaven, and see, even from Thy holy and glorious habitation; Where is Thy zeal and Thy mighty acts, the yearning of Thy heart and Thy compassions, now restrained toward me?
63.16 טז  כִּי-אַתָּה אָבִינוּ--כִּי אַבְרָהָם לֹא יְדָעָנוּ, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא יַכִּירָנוּ:  אַתָּה יְהוָה אָבִינוּ, גֹּאֲלֵנוּ מֵעוֹלָם שְׁמֶךָ.	16 For Thou art our Father; for Abraham knoweth us not, and Israel doth not acknowledge us; Thou, O LORD, art our Father, our Redeemer from everlasting is Thy name.
63.17 יז  לָמָּה תַתְעֵנוּ יְהוָה מִדְּרָכֶיךָ, תַּקְשִׁיחַ לִבֵּנוּ מִיִּרְאָתֶךָ; שׁוּב לְמַעַן עֲבָדֶיךָ, שִׁבְטֵי נַחֲלָתֶךָ.	17 O LORD, why dost Thou make us to err from Thy ways, and hardenest our heart from Thy fear? Return for Thy servants' sake, the tribes of Thine inheritance.
63.18 יח  לַמִּצְעָר, יָרְשׁוּ עַם-קָדְשֶׁךָ; צָרֵינוּ, בּוֹסְסוּ מִקְדָּשֶׁךָ.	18 Thy holy people they have well nigh driven out, our adversaries have trodden down Thy sanctuary.
63.19 יט  הָיִינוּ, מֵעוֹלָם לֹא-מָשַׁלְתָּ בָּם--לֹא-נִקְרָא שִׁמְךָ, עֲלֵיהֶם; לוּא-קָרַעְתָּ שָׁמַיִם יָרַדְתָּ, מִפָּנֶיךָ הָרִים נָזֹלּוּ.	19 We are become as they over whom Thou never borest rule, as they that were not called by Thy name. Oh, that Thou wouldest rend the heavens, that Thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might quake at Thy presence,
64.1 /
64.2 ב  כִּקְדֹחַ אֵשׁ הֲמָסִים, מַיִם תִּבְעֶה-אֵשׁ, לְהוֹדִיעַ שִׁמְךָ, לְצָרֶיךָ; מִפָּנֶיךָ, גּוֹיִם יִרְגָּזוּ.	2 As when fire kindleth the brush-wood, and the fire causeth the waters to boil; to make Thy name known to Thine adversaries, that the nations might tremble at Thy presence,
64.3 ג  בַּעֲשׂוֹתְךָ נוֹרָאוֹת, לֹא נְקַוֶּה; יָרַדְתָּ, מִפָּנֶיךָ הָרִים נָזֹלּוּ.  {ס}	3 When Thou didst tremendous things which we looked not for--Oh that Thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might quake at Thy presence!-- {S}
64.4 ד  וּמֵעוֹלָם לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ, לֹא הֶאֱזִינוּ; עַיִן לֹא-רָאָתָה, אֱלֹהִים זוּלָתְךָ--יַעֲשֶׂה, לִמְחַכֵּה-לוֹ.	4 And whereof from of old men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen a God beside Thee, who worketh for him that waiteth for Him.
64.5 ה  פָּגַעְתָּ אֶת-שָׂשׂ וְעֹשֵׂה צֶדֶק, בִּדְרָכֶיךָ יִזְכְּרוּךָ; הֵן-אַתָּה קָצַפְתָּ וַנֶּחֱטָא, בָּהֶם עוֹלָם וְנִוָּשֵׁעַ.	5 Thou didst take away him that joyfully worked righteousness, those that remembered Thee in Thy ways--behold, Thou wast wroth, and we sinned--upon them have we stayed of old, that we might be saved.
64.6 ו  וַנְּהִי כַטָּמֵא כֻּלָּנוּ, וּכְבֶגֶד עִדִּים כָּל-צִדְקֹתֵינוּ; וַנָּבֶל כֶּעָלֶה כֻּלָּנוּ, וַעֲוֺנֵנוּ כָּרוּחַ יִשָּׂאֻנוּ.	6 And we are all become as one that is unclean, and all our righteousnesses are as a polluted garment; and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, take us away.
64.7 ז  וְאֵין-קוֹרֵא בְשִׁמְךָ, מִתְעוֹרֵר לְהַחֲזִיק בָּךְ:  כִּי-הִסְתַּרְתָּ פָנֶיךָ מִמֶּנּוּ, וַתְּמוּגֵנוּ בְּיַד-עֲוֺנֵנוּ.	7 And there is none that calleth upon Thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of Thee; for Thou hast hid Thy face from us, and hast consumed us by means of our iniquities.
64.8 ח  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה, אָבִינוּ אָתָּה; אֲנַחְנוּ הַחֹמֶר וְאַתָּה יֹצְרֵנוּ, וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדְךָ כֻּלָּנוּ.	8 But now, O LORD, Thou art our Father; we are the clay, and Thou our potter, and we all are the work of Thy hand.
64.9 ט  אַל-תִּקְצֹף יְהוָה עַד-מְאֹד, וְאַל-לָעַד תִּזְכֹּר עָוֺן; הֵן הַבֶּט-נָא, עַמְּךָ כֻלָּנוּ.	9 Be not wroth very sore, O LORD, neither remember iniquity for ever; behold, look, we beseech Thee, we are all Thy people.
64.10 י  עָרֵי קָדְשְׁךָ, הָיוּ מִדְבָּר; צִיּוֹן מִדְבָּר הָיָתָה, יְרוּשָׁלִַם שְׁמָמָה.	10 Thy holy cities are become a wilderness, Zion is become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
64.11 יא  בֵּית קָדְשֵׁנוּ וְתִפְאַרְתֵּנוּ, אֲשֶׁר הִלְלוּךָ אֲבֹתֵינוּ--הָיָה, לִשְׂרֵפַת אֵשׁ; וְכָל-מַחֲמַדֵּינוּ, הָיָה לְחָרְבָּה.	11 Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised Thee, is burned with fire; and all our pleasant things are laid waste.
64.12 יב  הַעַל-אֵלֶּה תִתְאַפַּק, יְהוָה; תֶּחֱשֶׁה וּתְעַנֵּנוּ, עַד-מְאֹד.  {פ}	12 Wilt Thou refrain Thyself for these things, O LORD? Wilt Thou hold Thy peace, and afflict us very sore? {P}
65.1 א  נִדְרַשְׁתִּי לְלוֹא שָׁאָלוּ, נִמְצֵאתִי לְלֹא בִקְשֻׁנִי; אָמַרְתִּי הִנֵּנִי הִנֵּנִי, אֶל-גּוֹי לֹא-קֹרָא בִשְׁמִי.	1 I gave access to them that asked not for Me, I was at hand to them that sought Me not; I said: 'Behold Me, behold Me', unto a nation that was not called by My name.
65.2 ב  פֵּרַשְׂתִּי יָדַי כָּל-הַיּוֹם, אֶל-עַם סוֹרֵר--הַהֹלְכִים הַדֶּרֶךְ לֹא-טוֹב, אַחַר מַחְשְׁבֹתֵיהֶם.	2 I have spread out My hands all the day unto a rebellious people, that walk in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts;
65.3 ג  הָעָם, הַמַּכְעִסִים אֹתִי עַל-פָּנַי--תָּמִיד:  זֹבְחִים, בַּגַּנּוֹת, וּמְקַטְּרִים, עַל-הַלְּבֵנִים.	3 A people that provoke Me to My face continually, that sacrifice in gardens, and burn incense upon bricks;
65.4 ד  הַיֹּשְׁבִים, בַּקְּבָרִים, וּבַנְּצוּרִים, יָלִינוּ; הָאֹכְלִים בְּשַׂר הַחֲזִיר, ופרק (וּמְרַק) פִּגֻּלִים כְּלֵיהֶם.	4 That sit among the graves, and lodge in the vaults; that eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;
65.5 ה  הָאֹמְרִים קְרַב אֵלֶיךָ, אַל-תִּגַּשׁ-בִּי כִּי קְדַשְׁתִּיךָ; אֵלֶּה עָשָׁן בְּאַפִּי, אֵשׁ יֹקֶדֶת כָּל-הַיּוֹם.	5 That say: 'Stand by thyself, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou'; these are a smoke in My nose, a fire that burneth all the day.
65.6 ו  הִנֵּה כְתוּבָה, לְפָנָי:  לֹא אֶחֱשֶׁה כִּי אִם-שִׁלַּמְתִּי, וְשִׁלַּמְתִּי עַל-חֵיקָם.	6 Behold, it is written before Me; I will not keep silence, except I have requited, yea, I will requite into their bosom,
65.7 ז  עֲוֺנֹתֵיכֶם וַעֲוֺנֹת אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם יַחְדָּו, אָמַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר קִטְּרוּ עַל-הֶהָרִים, וְעַל-הַגְּבָעוֹת חֵרְפוּנִי; וּמַדֹּתִי פְעֻלָּתָם רִאשֹׁנָה, על- (אֶל-) חֵיקָם.  {ס}	7 Your own iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the LORD, that have offered upon the mountains, and blasphemed Me upon the hills; therefore will I first measure their wage into their bosom. {S}
65.8 ח  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִמָּצֵא הַתִּירוֹשׁ בָּאֶשְׁכּוֹל, וְאָמַר אַל-תַּשְׁחִיתֵהוּ, כִּי בְרָכָה בּוֹ--כֵּן אֶעֱשֶׂה לְמַעַן עֲבָדַי, לְבִלְתִּי הַשְׁחִית הַכֹּל.	8 Thus saith the LORD: As, when wine is found in the cluster, one saith: 'Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it'; so will I do for My servants' sakes, that I may not destroy all.
65.9 ט  וְהוֹצֵאתִי מִיַּעֲקֹב זֶרַע, וּמִיהוּדָה יוֹרֵשׁ הָרָי; וִירֵשׁוּהָ בְחִירַי, וַעֲבָדַי יִשְׁכְּנוּ-שָׁמָּה.	9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of My mountains; and Mine elect shall inherit it, and My servants shall dwell there.
65.10 י  וְהָיָה הַשָּׁרוֹן לִנְוֵה-צֹאן, וְעֵמֶק עָכוֹר לְרֵבֶץ בָּקָר, לְעַמִּי, אֲשֶׁר דְּרָשׁוּנִי.	10 And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down in, for My people that have sought Me;
65.11 יא  וְאַתֶּם עֹזְבֵי יְהוָה, הַשְּׁכֵחִים אֶת-הַר קָדְשִׁי--הַעֹרְכִים לַגַּד שֻׁלְחָן, וְהַמְמַלְאִים לַמְנִי מִמְסָךְ.	11 But ye that forsake the LORD, that forget My holy mountain, that prepare a table for Fortune, and that offer mingled wine in full measure unto Destiny,
65.12 יב  וּמָנִיתִי אֶתְכֶם לַחֶרֶב, וְכֻלְּכֶם לַטֶּבַח תִּכְרָעוּ--יַעַן קָרָאתִי וְלֹא עֲנִיתֶם, דִּבַּרְתִּי וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם; וַתַּעֲשׂוּ הָרַע בְּעֵינַי, וּבַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-חָפַצְתִּי בְּחַרְתֶּם.  {פ}	12 I will destine you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter; because when I called, ye did not answer, when I spoke, ye did not hear; but ye did that which was evil in Mine eyes, and chose that wherein I delighted not. {P}
65.13 יג  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה עֲבָדַי יֹאכֵלוּ וְאַתֶּם תִּרְעָבוּ--הִנֵּה עֲבָדַי יִשְׁתּוּ, וְאַתֶּם תִּצְמָאוּ; הִנֵּה עֲבָדַי יִשְׂמָחוּ, וְאַתֶּם תֵּבֹשׁוּ.	13 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, My servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; Behold, My servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; Behold, My servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed;
65.14 יד  הִנֵּה עֲבָדַי יָרֹנּוּ, מִטּוּב לֵב; וְאַתֶּם תִּצְעֲקוּ מִכְּאֵב לֵב, וּמִשֵּׁבֶר רוּחַ תְּיֵלִילוּ.	14 Behold, My servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall wail for vexation of spirit.
65.15 טו  וְהִנַּחְתֶּם שִׁמְכֶם לִשְׁבוּעָה לִבְחִירַי, וֶהֱמִיתְךָ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה; וְלַעֲבָדָיו יִקְרָא, שֵׁם אַחֵר.	15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto Mine elect: 'So may the Lord GOD slay thee'; but He shall call His servants by another name;
65.16 טז  אֲשֶׁר הַמִּתְבָּרֵךְ בָּאָרֶץ, יִתְבָּרֵךְ בֵּאלֹהֵי אָמֵן, וְהַנִּשְׁבָּע בָּאָרֶץ, יִשָּׁבַע בֵּאלֹהֵי אָמֵן:  כִּי נִשְׁכְּחוּ, הַצָּרוֹת הָרִאשֹׁנוֹת, וְכִי נִסְתְּרוּ, מֵעֵינָי.	16 So that he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself by the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from Mine eyes.
65.17 יז  כִּי-הִנְנִי בוֹרֵא שָׁמַיִם חֲדָשִׁים, וָאָרֶץ חֲדָשָׁה; וְלֹא תִזָּכַרְנָה הָרִאשֹׁנוֹת, וְלֹא תַעֲלֶינָה עַל-לֵב.	17 For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; and the former things shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.
65.18 יח  כִּי-אִם-שִׂישׂוּ וְגִילוּ עֲדֵי-עַד, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי בוֹרֵא:  כִּי הִנְנִי בוֹרֵא אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם גִּילָה, וְעַמָּהּ מָשׂוֹשׂ.	18 But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create; for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.
65.19 יט  וְגַלְתִּי בִירוּשָׁלִַם, וְשַׂשְׂתִּי בְעַמִּי; וְלֹא-יִשָּׁמַע בָּהּ עוֹד, קוֹל בְּכִי וְקוֹל זְעָקָה.	19 And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in My people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.
65.20 כ  לֹא-יִהְיֶה מִשָּׁם עוֹד, עוּל יָמִים וְזָקֵן, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְמַלֵּא, אֶת-יָמָיו:  כִּי הַנַּעַר, בֶּן-מֵאָה שָׁנָה יָמוּת, וְהַחוֹטֶא, בֶּן-מֵאָה שָׁנָה יְקֻלָּל.	20 There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man, that hath not filled his days; for the youngest shall die a hundred years old, and the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed.
65.21 כא  וּבָנוּ בָתִּים, וְיָשָׁבוּ; וְנָטְעוּ כְרָמִים, וְאָכְלוּ פִּרְיָם.	21 And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.
65.22 כב  לֹא יִבְנוּ וְאַחֵר יֵשֵׁב, לֹא יִטְּעוּ וְאַחֵר יֹאכֵל:  כִּי-כִימֵי הָעֵץ יְמֵי עַמִּי, וּמַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיהֶם יְבַלּוּ בְחִירָי.	22 They shall not build, and another inhabit, they shall not plant, and another eat; for as the days of a tree shall be the days of My people, and Mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
65.23 כג  לֹא יִיגְעוּ לָרִיק, וְלֹא יֵלְדוּ לַבֶּהָלָה:  כִּי זֶרַע בְּרוּכֵי יְהוָה, הֵמָּה, וְצֶאֱצָאֵיהֶם, אִתָּם.	23 They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for terror; for they are the seed blessed of the LORD, and their offspring with them.
65.24 כד  וְהָיָה טֶרֶם-יִקְרָאוּ, וַאֲנִי אֶעֱנֶה; עוֹד הֵם מְדַבְּרִים, וַאֲנִי אֶשְׁמָע.	24 And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
65.25 כה  זְאֵב וְטָלֶה יִרְעוּ כְאֶחָד, וְאַרְיֵה כַּבָּקָר יֹאכַל-תֶּבֶן, וְנָחָשׁ, עָפָר לַחְמוֹ; לֹא-יָרֵעוּ וְלֹא-יַשְׁחִיתוּ בְּכָל-הַר קָדְשִׁי, אָמַר יְהוָה.  {ס}	25 The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox; and dust shall be the serpent's food. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain, saith the LORD. {S}
66.1 א  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, הַשָּׁמַיִם כִּסְאִי, וְהָאָרֶץ הֲדֹם רַגְלָי; אֵי-זֶה בַיִת אֲשֶׁר תִּבְנוּ-לִי, וְאֵי-זֶה מָקוֹם מְנוּחָתִי.	1 Thus saith the LORD: The heaven is My throne, and the earth is My footstool; where is the house that ye may build unto Me? And where is the place that may be My resting-place?
66.2 ב  וְאֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה יָדִי עָשָׂתָה, וַיִּהְיוּ כָל-אֵלֶּה נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְאֶל-זֶה אַבִּיט--אֶל-עָנִי וּנְכֵה-רוּחַ, וְחָרֵד עַל-דְּבָרִי.	2 For all these things hath My hand made, and so all these things came to be, saith the LORD; but on this man will I look, even on him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at My word.
66.3 ג  שׁוֹחֵט הַשּׁוֹר מַכֵּה-אִישׁ, זוֹבֵחַ הַשֶּׂה עֹרֵף כֶּלֶב, מַעֲלֵה מִנְחָה דַּם-חֲזִיר, מַזְכִּיר לְבֹנָה מְבָרֵךְ אָוֶן--גַּם-הֵמָּה, בָּחֲרוּ בְּדַרְכֵיהֶם, וּבְשִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם, נַפְשָׁם חָפֵצָה.	3 He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he broke a dog's neck; he that offereth a meal-offering, as if he offered swine's blood; he that maketh a memorial-offering of frankincense, as if he blessed an idol; according as they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations;
66.4 ד  גַּם-אֲנִי אֶבְחַר בְּתַעֲלֻלֵיהֶם, וּמְגוּרֹתָם אָבִיא לָהֶם--יַעַן קָרָאתִי וְאֵין עוֹנֶה, דִּבַּרְתִּי וְלֹא שָׁמֵעוּ; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ הָרַע בְּעֵינַי, וּבַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-חָפַצְתִּי בָּחָרוּ.  {ס}	4 Even so I will choose their mockings, and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spoke, they did not hear, but they did that which was evil in Mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not. {S}
66.5 ה  שִׁמְעוּ, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, הַחֲרֵדִים, אֶל-דְּבָרוֹ; אָמְרוּ אֲחֵיכֶם שֹׂנְאֵיכֶם מְנַדֵּיכֶם, לְמַעַן שְׁמִי יִכְבַּד יְהוָה--וְנִרְאֶה בְשִׂמְחַתְכֶם, וְהֵם יֵבֹשׁוּ.	5 Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at His word: Your brethren that hate you, that cast you out for My name's sake, have said: 'Let the LORD be glorified, that we may gaze upon your joy', but they shall be ashamed.
66.6 ו  קוֹל שָׁאוֹן מֵעִיר, קוֹל מֵהֵיכָל; קוֹל יְהוָה, מְשַׁלֵּם גְּמוּל לְאֹיְבָיו.	6 Hark! an uproar from the city, Hark! it cometh from the temple, Hark! the LORD rendereth recompense to His enemies.
66.7 ז  בְּטֶרֶם תָּחִיל, יָלָדָה; בְּטֶרֶם יָבוֹא חֵבֶל לָהּ, וְהִמְלִיטָה זָכָר.	7 Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.
66.8 ח  מִי-שָׁמַע כָּזֹאת, מִי רָאָה כָּאֵלֶּה--הֲיוּחַל אֶרֶץ בְּיוֹם אֶחָד, אִם-יִוָּלֵד גּוֹי פַּעַם אֶחָת:  כִּי-חָלָה גַּם-יָלְדָה צִיּוֹן, אֶת-בָּנֶיהָ.	8 Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? Is a land born in one day? Is a nation brought forth at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.
66.9 ט  הַאֲנִי אַשְׁבִּיר וְלֹא אוֹלִיד, יֹאמַר יְהוָה; אִם-אֲנִי הַמּוֹלִיד וְעָצַרְתִּי, אָמַר אֱלֹהָיִךְ.  {ס}	9 Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the LORD; Shall I that cause to bring forth shut the womb? saith thy God. {S}
66.10 י  שִׂמְחוּ אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְגִילוּ בָהּ, כָּל-אֹהֲבֶיהָ; שִׂישׂוּ אִתָּהּ מָשׂוֹשׂ, כָּל-הַמִּתְאַבְּלִים עָלֶיהָ.	10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her; rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her;
66.11 יא  לְמַעַן תִּינְקוּ וּשְׂבַעְתֶּם, מִשֹּׁד תַּנְחֻמֶיהָ; לְמַעַן תָּמֹצּוּ וְהִתְעַנַּגְתֶּם, מִזִּיז כְּבוֹדָהּ.  {ס}	11 That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breast of her consolations; that ye may drink deeply with delight of the abundance of her glory. {S}
66.12 יב  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי נֹטֶה-אֵלֶיהָ כְּנָהָר שָׁלוֹם וּכְנַחַל שׁוֹטֵף כְּבוֹד גּוֹיִם--וִינַקְתֶּם; עַל-צַד, תִּנָּשֵׂאוּ, וְעַל-בִּרְכַּיִם, תְּשָׁעֳשָׁעוּ.	12 For thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the wealth of the nations like an overflowing stream, and ye shall suck thereof: Ye shall be borne upon the side, and shall be dandled upon the knees.
66.13 יג  כְּאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר אִמּוֹ תְּנַחֲמֶנּוּ--כֵּן אָנֹכִי אֲנַחֶמְכֶם, וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם תְּנֻחָמוּ.	13 As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
66.14 יד  וּרְאִיתֶם וְשָׂשׂ לִבְּכֶם, וְעַצְמוֹתֵיכֶם כַּדֶּשֶׁא תִפְרַחְנָה; וְנוֹדְעָה יַד-יְהוָה אֶת-עֲבָדָיו, וְזָעַם אֶת-אֹיְבָיו.  {ס}	14 And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like young grass; and the hand of the LORD shall be known toward His servants, and He will have indignation against His enemies. {S}
66.15 טו  כִּי-הִנֵּה יְהוָה בָּאֵשׁ יָבוֹא, וְכַסּוּפָה מַרְכְּבֹתָיו--לְהָשִׁיב בְּחֵמָה אַפּוֹ, וְגַעֲרָתוֹ בְּלַהֲבֵי-אֵשׁ.	15 For, behold, the LORD will come in fire, and His chariots shall be like the whirlwind; to render His anger with fury, and His rebuke with flames of fire.
66.16 טז  כִּי בָאֵשׁ יְהוָה נִשְׁפָּט, וּבְחַרְבּוֹ אֶת-כָּל-בָּשָׂר; וְרַבּוּ, חַלְלֵי יְהוָה.	16 For by fire will the LORD contend, and by His sword with all flesh; and the slain of the LORD shall be many.
66.17 יז  הַמִּתְקַדְּשִׁים וְהַמִּטַּהֲרִים אֶל-הַגַּנּוֹת, אַחַר אחד (אַחַת) בַּתָּוֶךְ, אֹכְלֵי בְּשַׂר הַחֲזִיר, וְהַשֶּׁקֶץ וְהָעַכְבָּר--יַחְדָּו יָסֻפוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	17 They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves to go unto the gardens, behind one in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the detestable thing, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the LORD.
66.18 יח  וְאָנֹכִי, מַעֲשֵׂיהֶם וּמַחְשְׁבֹתֵיהֶם--בָּאָה, לְקַבֵּץ אֶת-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם וְהַלְּשֹׁנוֹת; וּבָאוּ, וְרָאוּ אֶת-כְּבוֹדִי.	18 For I [know] their works and their thoughts; [the time] cometh, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and shall see My glory.
66.19 יט  וְשַׂמְתִּי בָהֶם אוֹת, וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי מֵהֶם פְּלֵיטִים אֶל-הַגּוֹיִם תַּרְשִׁישׁ פּוּל וְלוּד מֹשְׁכֵי קֶשֶׁת--תֻּבַל וְיָוָן:  הָאִיִּים הָרְחֹקִים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ אֶת-שִׁמְעִי וְלֹא-רָאוּ אֶת-כְּבוֹדִי--וְהִגִּידוּ אֶת-כְּבוֹדִי, בַּגּוֹיִם.	19 And I will work a sign among them, and I will send such as escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard My fame, neither have seen My glory; and they shall declare My glory among the nations.
66.20 כ  וְהֵבִיאוּ אֶת-כָּל-אֲחֵיכֶם מִכָּל-הַגּוֹיִם מִנְחָה לַיהוָה בַּסּוּסִים וּבָרֶכֶב וּבַצַּבִּים וּבַפְּרָדִים וּבַכִּרְכָּרוֹת, עַל הַר קָדְשִׁי יְרוּשָׁלִַם--אָמַר יְהוָה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר יָבִיאוּ בְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה בִּכְלִי טָהוֹר, בֵּית יְהוָה.	20 And they shall bring all your brethren out of all the nations for an offering unto the LORD, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to My holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring their offering in a clean vessel into the house of the LORD.
66.21 כא  וְגַם-מֵהֶם אֶקַּח לַכֹּהֲנִים לַלְוִיִּם, אָמַר יְהוָה.	21 And of them also will I take for the priests and for the Levites, saith the LORD.
66.22 כב  כִּי כַאֲשֶׁר הַשָּׁמַיִם הַחֲדָשִׁים וְהָאָרֶץ הַחֲדָשָׁה אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה, עֹמְדִים לְפָנַי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  כֵּן יַעֲמֹד זַרְעֲכֶם, וְשִׁמְכֶם.	22 For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before Me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your name remain.
66.23 כג  וְהָיָה, מִדֵּי-חֹדֶשׁ בְּחָדְשׁוֹ, וּמִדֵּי שַׁבָּת, בְּשַׁבַּתּוֹ; יָבוֹא כָל-בָּשָׂר לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת לְפָנַי, אָמַר יְהוָה.	23 And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before Me, saith the LORD.
66.24 כד  וְיָצְאוּ וְרָאוּ--בְּפִגְרֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַפֹּשְׁעִים בִּי:  כִּי תוֹלַעְתָּם לֹא תָמוּת, וְאִשָּׁם לֹא תִכְבֶּה, וְהָיוּ דֵרָאוֹן, לְכָל-בָּשָׂר.  {ש}	24 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have rebelled against Me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. {P}
