1.1 א  דִּבְרֵי יִרְמְיָהוּ, בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּהוּ, מִן-הַכֹּהֲנִים אֲשֶׁר בַּעֲנָתוֹת, בְּאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן.	1 The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin,
1.2 ב  אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלָיו, בִּימֵי יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹן מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, בִּשְׁלֹשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לְמָלְכוֹ.	2 to whom the word of the LORD came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.
1.3 ג  וַיְהִי, בִּימֵי יְהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, עַד-תֹּם עַשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לְצִדְקִיָּהוּ בֶן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--עַד-גְּלוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי.  {פ}	3 It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah, king of Judah, unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month. {P}
1.4 ד  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.	4 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
1.5 ה  בְּטֶרֶם אצורך (אֶצָּרְךָ) בַבֶּטֶן יְדַעְתִּיךָ, וּבְטֶרֶם תֵּצֵא מֵרֶחֶם הִקְדַּשְׁתִּיךָ:  נָבִיא לַגּוֹיִם, נְתַתִּיךָ.	5 Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee; I have appointed thee a prophet unto the nations.
1.6 ו  וָאֹמַר, אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה לֹא-יָדַעְתִּי, דַּבֵּר:  כִּי-נַעַר, אָנֹכִי.  {ס}	6 Then said I: 'Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I cannot speak; for I am a child.' {S}
1.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, אַל-תֹּאמַר נַעַר אָנֹכִי:  כִּי עַל-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֶשְׁלָחֲךָ, תֵּלֵךְ, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אֲצַוְּךָ, תְּדַבֵּר.	7 But the LORD said unto me: say not: I am a child; for to whomsoever I shall send thee thou shalt go, and whatsoever I shall command thee thou shalt speak.
1.8 ח  אַל-תִּירָא, מִפְּנֵיהֶם:  כִּי-אִתְּךָ אֲנִי לְהַצִּלֶךָ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	8 Be not afraid of them; for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the LORD.
1.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה אֶת-יָדוֹ, וַיַּגַּע עַל-פִּי; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי דְבָרַי בְּפִיךָ.	9 Then the LORD put forth His hand, and touched my mouth; and the LORD said unto me: Behold, I have put My words in thy mouth;
1.10 י  רְאֵה הִפְקַדְתִּיךָ הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, עַל-הַגּוֹיִם וְעַל-הַמַּמְלָכוֹת, לִנְתוֹשׁ וְלִנְתוֹץ, וּלְהַאֲבִיד וְלַהֲרוֹס--לִבְנוֹת, וְלִנְטוֹעַ.  {פ}	10 See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out and to pull down, and to destroy and to overthrow; to build, and to plant. {P}
1.11 יא  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלַי לֵאמֹר, מָה-אַתָּה רֹאֶה יִרְמְיָהוּ; וָאֹמַר, מַקֵּל שָׁקֵד אֲנִי רֹאֶה.	11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying: 'Jeremiah, what seest thou?' And I said: 'I see a rod of an almond-tree.'
1.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, הֵיטַבְתָּ לִרְאוֹת:  כִּי-שֹׁקֵד אֲנִי עַל-דְּבָרִי, לַעֲשֹׂתוֹ.  {ס}	12 Then said the LORD unto me: 'Thou hast well seen; for I watch over My word to perform it.' {S}
1.13 יג  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלַי שֵׁנִית לֵאמֹר, מָה אַתָּה רֹאֶה; וָאֹמַר, סִיר נָפוּחַ אֲנִי רֹאֶה, וּפָנָיו, מִפְּנֵי צָפוֹנָה.	13 And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying: 'What seest thou?' And I said: 'I see a seething pot; and the face thereof is from the north.'
1.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלָי:  מִצָּפוֹן תִּפָּתַח הָרָעָה, עַל כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ.	14 Then the LORD said unto me: 'Out of the north the evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.
1.15 טו  כִּי הִנְנִי קֹרֵא, לְכָל-מִשְׁפְּחוֹת מַמְלְכוֹת צָפוֹנָה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וּבָאוּ וְנָתְנוּ אִישׁ כִּסְאוֹ פֶּתַח שַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְעַל כָּל-חוֹמֹתֶיהָ סָבִיב, וְעַל, כָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה.	15 For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the LORD; and they shall come, and they shall set every one his throne at the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of Judah.
1.16 טז  וְדִבַּרְתִּי מִשְׁפָּטַי אוֹתָם, עַל כָּל-רָעָתָם--אֲשֶׁר עֲזָבוּנִי, וַיְקַטְּרוּ לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ, לְמַעֲשֵׂי יְדֵיהֶם.	16 And I will utter My judgments against them touching all their wickedness; in that they have forsaken me, and have offered unto other gods, and worshipped the work of their own hands.
1.17 יז  וְאַתָּה, תֶּאְזֹר מָתְנֶיךָ, וְקַמְתָּ וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי אֲצַוֶּךָּ; אַל-תֵּחַת, מִפְּנֵיהֶם--פֶּן-אֲחִתְּךָ, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	17 Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be not dismayed at them, lest I dismay thee before them.
1.18 יח  וַאֲנִי הִנֵּה נְתַתִּיךָ הַיּוֹם, לְעִיר מִבְצָר וּלְעַמּוּד בַּרְזֶל וּלְחֹמוֹת נְחֹשֶׁת--עַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ:  לְמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה לְשָׂרֶיהָ, לְכֹהֲנֶיהָ וּלְעַם הָאָרֶץ.	18 For, behold, I have made thee this day a fortified city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls, against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.
1.19 יט  וְנִלְחֲמוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וְלֹא-יוּכְלוּ לָךְ:  כִּי-אִתְּךָ אֲנִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לְהַצִּילֶךָ.  {פ}	19 And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee; For I am with thee, saith the LORD, to deliver thee.' {P}
2.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.	1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying:
2.2 ב  הָלֹךְ וְקָרָאתָ בְאָזְנֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, זָכַרְתִּי לָךְ חֶסֶד נְעוּרַיִךְ, אַהֲבַת כְּלוּלֹתָיִךְ--לֶכְתֵּךְ אַחֲרַי בַּמִּדְבָּר, בְּאֶרֶץ לֹא זְרוּעָה.	2 Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying: Thus saith the LORD: I remember for thee the affection of thy youth, the love of thine espousals; how thou wentest after Me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.
2.3 ג  קֹדֶשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל לַיהוָה, רֵאשִׁית תְּבוּאָתֹה; כָּל-אֹכְלָיו יֶאְשָׁמוּ, רָעָה תָּבֹא אֲלֵיהֶם נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	3 Israel is the LORD'S hallowed portion, His first-fruits of the increase; all that devour him shall be held guilty, evil shall come upon them, saith the LORD. {P}
2.4 ד  שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, בֵּית יַעֲקֹב, וְכָל-מִשְׁפְּחוֹת, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 Hear ye the word of the LORD, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel;
2.5 ה  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, מַה-מָּצְאוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם בִּי עָוֶל--כִּי רָחֲקוּ, מֵעָלָי; וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי הַהֶבֶל, וַיֶּהְבָּלוּ.	5 Thus saith the LORD: what unrighteousness have your fathers found in Me, that they are gone far from Me, and have walked after things of nought, and are become nought?
2.6 ו  וְלֹא אָמְרוּ--אַיֵּה יְהוָה, הַמַּעֲלֶה אֹתָנוּ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; הַמּוֹלִיךְ אֹתָנוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר, בְּאֶרֶץ עֲרָבָה וְשׁוּחָה בְּאֶרֶץ צִיָּה וְצַלְמָוֶת--בְּאֶרֶץ לֹא-עָבַר בָּהּ אִישׁ, וְלֹא-יָשַׁב אָדָם שָׁם.	6 Neither said they: 'Where is the LORD that brought us up out of the land of Egypt; that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt?'
2.7 ז  וָאָבִיא אֶתְכֶם אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַכַּרְמֶל, לֶאֱכֹל פִּרְיָהּ וְטוּבָהּ; וַתָּבֹאוּ וַתְּטַמְּאוּ אֶת-אַרְצִי, וְנַחֲלָתִי שַׂמְתֶּם לְתוֹעֵבָה.	7 And I brought you into a land of fruitful fields, to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled My land, and made My heritage an abomination.
2.8 ח  הַכֹּהֲנִים, לֹא אָמְרוּ אַיֵּה יְהוָה, וְתֹפְשֵׂי הַתּוֹרָה לֹא יְדָעוּנִי, וְהָרֹעִים פָּשְׁעוּ בִי; וְהַנְּבִאִים נִבְּאוּ בַבַּעַל, וְאַחֲרֵי לֹא-יוֹעִלוּ הָלָכוּ.	8 The priests said not: 'Where is the LORD?' And they that handle the law knew Me not, and the rulers transgressed against Me; the prophets also prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit.
2.9 ט  לָכֵן, עֹד אָרִיב אִתְּכֶם--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְאֶת-בְּנֵי בְנֵיכֶם, אָרִיב.	9 Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the LORD, and with your children's children will I plead.
2.10 י  כִּי עִבְרוּ אִיֵּי כִתִּיִּים, וּרְאוּ, וְקֵדָר שִׁלְחוּ וְהִתְבּוֹנְנוּ, מְאֹד; וּרְאוּ, הֵן הָיְתָה כָּזֹאת.	10 For pass over to the isles of the Kittites, and see, and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there hath been such a thing.
2.11 יא  הַהֵימִיר גּוֹי אֱלֹהִים, וְהֵמָּה לֹא אֱלֹהִים; וְעַמִּי הֵמִיר כְּבוֹדוֹ, בְּלוֹא יוֹעִיל.	11 Hath a nation changed its gods, which yet are no gods? But My people hath changed its glory for that which doth not profit.
2.12 יב  שֹׁמּוּ שָׁמַיִם, עַל-זֹאת; וְשַׂעֲרוּ חָרְבוּ מְאֹד, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	12 Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye exceeding amazed, saith the LORD.
2.13 יג  כִּי-שְׁתַּיִם רָעוֹת, עָשָׂה עַמִּי:  אֹתִי עָזְבוּ מְקוֹר מַיִם חַיִּים, לַחְצֹב לָהֶם בֹּארוֹת--בֹּארֹת נִשְׁבָּרִים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָכִלוּ הַמָּיִם.	13 For My people have committed two evils: they have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.
2.14 יד  הַעֶבֶד, יִשְׂרָאֵל--אִם-יְלִיד בַּיִת, הוּא:  מַדּוּעַ, הָיָה לָבַז.	14 Is Israel a servant? Is he a home-born slave? Why is he become a prey?
2.15 טו  עָלָיו יִשְׁאֲגוּ כְפִרִים, נָתְנוּ קוֹלָם; וַיָּשִׁיתוּ אַרְצוֹ לְשַׁמָּה, עָרָיו נצתה (נִצְּתוּ) מִבְּלִי יֹשֵׁב.	15 The young lions have roared upon him, and let their voice resound; and they have made his land desolate, his cities are laid waste, without inhabitant.
2.16 טז  גַּם-בְּנֵי-נֹף, ותחפנס (וְתַחְפַּנְחֵס), יִרְעוּךְ, קָדְקֹד.	16 The children also of Noph and Tahpanhes feed upon the crown of thy head.
2.17 יז  הֲלוֹא-זֹאת, תַּעֲשֶׂה-לָּךְ:  עָזְבֵךְ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהַיִךְ, בְּעֵת מוֹלִכֵךְ בַּדָּרֶךְ.	17 Is it not this that doth cause it unto thee, that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, when He led thee by the way?
2.18 יח  וְעַתָּה, מַה-לָּךְ לְדֶרֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, לִשְׁתּוֹת, מֵי שִׁחוֹר; וּמַה-לָּךְ לְדֶרֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, לִשְׁתּוֹת מֵי נָהָר.	18 And now what hast thou to do in the way to Egypt, to drink the waters of Shihor? Or what hast thou to do in the way to Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?
2.19 יט  תְּיַסְּרֵךְ רָעָתֵךְ, וּמְשֻׁבוֹתַיִךְ תּוֹכִחֻךְ, וּדְעִי וּרְאִי כִּי-רַע וָמָר, עָזְבֵךְ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיִךְ; וְלֹא פַחְדָּתִי אֵלַיִךְ, נְאֻם-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת.	19 Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that it is an evil and a bitter thing, that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, neither is My fear in thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.
2.20 כ  כִּי מֵעוֹלָם שָׁבַרְתִּי עֻלֵּךְ, נִתַּקְתִּי מוֹסְרוֹתַיִךְ, וַתֹּאמְרִי, לֹא אעבוד (אֶעֱבוֹר):  כִּי עַל-כָּל-גִּבְעָה גְּבֹהָה, וְתַחַת כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן, אַתְּ, צֹעָה זֹנָה.	20 For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands, and thou saidst: 'I will not transgress'; upon every high hill and under every leafy tree thou didst recline, playing the harlot.
2.21 כא  וְאָנֹכִי נְטַעְתִּיךְ שׂוֹרֵק, כֻּלֹּה זֶרַע אֱמֶת; וְאֵיךְ נֶהְפַּכְתְּ לִי, סוּרֵי הַגֶּפֶן נָכְרִיָּה.	21 Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto Me?
2.22 כב  כִּי אִם-תְּכַבְּסִי בַּנֶּתֶר, וְתַרְבִּי-לָךְ בֹּרִית--נִכְתָּם עֲוֺנֵךְ לְפָנַי, נְאֻם אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה.	22 For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before Me, saith the Lord GOD.
2.23 כג  אֵיךְ תֹּאמְרִי לֹא נִטְמֵאתִי, אַחֲרֵי הַבְּעָלִים לֹא הָלַכְתִּי--רְאִי דַרְכֵּךְ בַּגַּיְא, דְּעִי מֶה עָשִׂית:  בִּכְרָה קַלָּה, מְשָׂרֶכֶת דְּרָכֶיהָ.	23 How canst thou say: 'I am not defiled, I have not gone after the Baalim'? See thy way in the Valley, know what thou hast done; thou art a swift young camel traversing her ways;
2.24 כד  פֶּרֶה לִמֻּד מִדְבָּר, בְּאַוַּת נפשו (נַפְשָׁהּ) שָׁאֲפָה רוּחַ--תַּאֲנָתָהּ, מִי יְשִׁיבֶנָּה; כָּל-מְבַקְשֶׁיהָ לֹא יִיעָפוּ, בְּחָדְשָׁהּ יִמְצָאוּנְהָ.	24 A wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind in her desire; her lust, who can hinder it? All they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her.
2.25 כה  מִנְעִי רַגְלֵךְ מִיָּחֵף, וגורנך (וּגְרוֹנֵךְ) מִצִּמְאָה; וַתֹּאמְרִי נוֹאָשׁ--לוֹא, כִּי-אָהַבְתִּי זָרִים וְאַחֲרֵיהֶם אֵלֵךְ.	25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst; but thou saidst: 'There is no hope; no, for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.'
2.26 כו  כְּבֹשֶׁת גַּנָּב כִּי יִמָּצֵא, כֵּן הֹבִישׁוּ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; הֵמָּה מַלְכֵיהֶם שָׂרֵיהֶם, וְכֹהֲנֵיהֶם וּנְבִיאֵיהֶם.	26 As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets;
2.27 כז  אֹמְרִים לָעֵץ אָבִי אַתָּה, וְלָאֶבֶן אַתְּ ילדתני (יְלִדְתָּנוּ), כִּי-פָנוּ אֵלַי עֹרֶף, וְלֹא פָנִים; וּבְעֵת רָעָתָם יֹאמְרוּ, קוּמָה וְהוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ.	27 Who say to a stock: 'Thou art my father', and to a stone: 'Thou hast brought us forth', for they have turned their back unto Me, and not their face; but in the time of their trouble they will say: 'Arise, and save us.'
2.28 כח  וְאַיֵּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ לָּךְ--יָקוּמוּ, אִם-יוֹשִׁיעוּךָ בְּעֵת רָעָתֶךָ:  כִּי מִסְפַּר עָרֶיךָ, הָיוּ אֱלֹהֶיךָ יְהוּדָה.  {ס}	28 But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? Let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble; for according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah. {S}
2.29 כט  לָמָּה תָרִיבוּ, אֵלָי; כֻּלְּכֶם פְּשַׁעְתֶּם בִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	29 Wherefore will ye contend with Me? Ye all have transgressed against Me, saith the LORD.
2.30 ל  לַשָּׁוְא הִכֵּיתִי אֶת-בְּנֵיכֶם, מוּסָר לֹא לָקָחוּ; אָכְלָה חַרְבְּכֶם נְבִיאֵיכֶם, כְּאַרְיֵה מַשְׁחִית.	30 In vain have I smitten your children--they received no correction; your sword hath devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion.
2.31 לא  הַדּוֹר, אַתֶּם רְאוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, הֲמִדְבָּר הָיִיתִי לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם אֶרֶץ מַאְפֵּלְיָה; מַדּוּעַ אָמְרוּ עַמִּי, רַדְנוּ--לוֹא-נָבוֹא עוֹד, אֵלֶיךָ.	31 O generation, see ye the word of the LORD: have I been a wilderness unto Israel? or a land of thick darkness? Wherefore say My people: 'We roam at large; we will come no more unto Thee'?
2.32 לב  הֲתִשְׁכַּח בְּתוּלָה עֶדְיָהּ, כַּלָּה קִשֻּׁרֶיהָ; וְעַמִּי שְׁכֵחוּנִי, יָמִים אֵין מִסְפָּר.	32 Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet My people have forgotten Me days without number.
2.33 לג  מַה-תֵּיטִבִי דַּרְכֵּךְ, לְבַקֵּשׁ אַהֲבָה; לָכֵן גַּם אֶת-הָרָעוֹת, למדתי (לִמַּדְתְּ) אֶת-דְּרָכָיִךְ.	33 How trimmest thou thy way to seek love! Therefore--even the wicked women hast thou taught thy ways;
2.34 לד  גַּם בִּכְנָפַיִךְ נִמְצְאוּ, דַּם נַפְשׁוֹת אֶבְיוֹנִים נְקִיִּים; לֹא-בַמַּחְתֶּרֶת מְצָאתִים, כִּי עַל-כָּל-אֵלֶּה.	34 Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the innocent poor; thou didst not find them breaking in; yet for all these things
2.35 לה  וַתֹּאמְרִי כִּי נִקֵּיתִי, אַךְ שָׁב אַפּוֹ מִמֶּנִּי; הִנְנִי נִשְׁפָּט אוֹתָךְ, עַל-אָמְרֵךְ לֹא חָטָאתִי.	35 Thou saidst: 'I am innocent; surely His anger is turned away from me'--behold, I will enter into judgment with thee, because thou sayest: 'I have not sinned.'
2.36 לו  מַה-תֵּזְלִי מְאֹד, לְשַׁנּוֹת אֶת-דַּרְכֵּךְ; גַּם מִמִּצְרַיִם תֵּבֹשִׁי, כַּאֲשֶׁר-בֹּשְׁתְּ מֵאַשּׁוּר.	36 How greatly dost thou cheapen thyself to change thy way? Thou shalt be ashamed of Egypt also, as thou wast ashamed of Asshur.
2.37 לז  גַּם מֵאֵת זֶה תֵּצְאִי, וְיָדַיִךְ עַל-רֹאשֵׁךְ:  כִּי-מָאַס יְהוָה בְּמִבְטַחַיִךְ, וְלֹא תַצְלִיחִי לָהֶם.	37 From him also shalt thou go forth, with thy hands upon thy head; for the LORD hath rejected them in whom thou didst trust, and thou shalt not prosper in them.
3.1 א  לֵאמֹר הֵן יְשַׁלַּח אִישׁ אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ וְהָלְכָה מֵאִתּוֹ וְהָיְתָה לְאִישׁ-אַחֵר, הֲיָשׁוּב אֵלֶיהָ עוֹד--הֲלוֹא חָנוֹף תֶּחֱנַף, הָאָרֶץ הַהִיא; וְאַתְּ, זָנִית רֵעִים רַבִּים--וְשׁוֹב אֵלַי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	1 ... saying: If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, may he return unto her again? Will not that land be greatly polluted? But thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; and wouldest thou yet return to Me? saith the LORD.
3.2 ב  שְׂאִי-עֵינַיִךְ עַל-שְׁפָיִם וּרְאִי, אֵיפֹה לֹא שגלת (שֻׁכַּבְתְּ)--עַל-דְּרָכִים יָשַׁבְתְּ לָהֶם, כַּעֲרָבִי בַּמִּדְבָּר; וַתַּחֲנִיפִי אֶרֶץ, בִּזְנוּתַיִךְ וּבְרָעָתֵךְ.	2 Lift up thine eyes unto the high hills, and see: where hast thou not been lain with? By the ways hast thou sat for them, as an Arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy harlotries and with thy wickedness.
3.3 ג  וַיִּמָּנְעוּ רְבִבִים, וּמַלְקוֹשׁ לוֹא הָיָה; וּמֵצַח אִשָּׁה זוֹנָה הָיָה לָךְ, מֵאַנְתְּ הִכָּלֵם.	3 Therefore the showers have been withheld, and there hath been no latter rain; yet thou hadst a harlot's forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed.
3.4 ד  הֲלוֹא מֵעַתָּה, קראתי (קָרָאת) לִי אָבִי; אַלּוּף נְעֻרַי, אָתָּה.	4 Didst thou not just now cry unto Me: 'My father, Thou art the friend of my youth.
3.5 ה  הֲיִנְטֹר לְעוֹלָם, אִם-יִשְׁמֹר לָנֶצַח; הִנֵּה דִבַּרְתְּ וַתַּעֲשִׂי הָרָעוֹת, וַתּוּכָל.  {פ}	5 Will He bear grudge for ever? Will He keep it to the end?' Behold, thou hast spoken, but hast done evil things, and hast had thy way. {P}
3.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, בִּימֵי יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ, הֲרָאִיתָ, אֲשֶׁר עָשְׂתָה מְשֻׁבָה יִשְׂרָאֵל; הֹלְכָה הִיא עַל-כָּל-הַר גָּבֹהַּ, וְאֶל-תַּחַת כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן--וַתִּזְנִי-שָׁם.	6 And the LORD said unto me in the days of Josiah the king: 'Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel did? she went up upon every high mountain and under every leafy tree, and there played the harlot.
3.7 ז  וָאֹמַר, אַחֲרֵי עֲשׂוֹתָהּ אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה אֵלַי תָּשׁוּב--וְלֹא-שָׁבָה; ותראה (וַתֵּרֶא) בָּגוֹדָה אֲחוֹתָהּ, יְהוּדָה.	7 And I said: After she hath done all these things, she will return unto me; but she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.
3.8 ח  וָאֵרֶא, כִּי עַל-כָּל-אֹדוֹת אֲשֶׁר נִאֲפָה מְשֻׁבָה יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁלַּחְתִּיהָ, וָאֶתֵּן אֶת-סֵפֶר כְּרִיתֻתֶיהָ אֵלֶיהָ; וְלֹא יָרְאָה בֹּגֵדָה יְהוּדָה, אֲחוֹתָהּ--וַתֵּלֶךְ, וַתִּזֶן גַּם-הִיא.	8 And I saw, when, forasmuch as backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put her away and given her a bill of divorcement, that yet treacherous Judah her sister feared not; but she also went and played the harlot;
3.9 ט  וְהָיָה מִקֹּל זְנוּתָהּ, וַתֶּחֱנַף אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וַתִּנְאַף אֶת-הָאֶבֶן, וְאֶת-הָעֵץ.	9 and it came to pass through the lightness of her harlotry, that the land was polluted, and she committed adultery with stones and with stocks;
3.10 י  וְגַם-בְּכָל-זֹאת, לֹא-שָׁבָה אֵלַי בָּגוֹדָה אֲחוֹתָהּ יְהוּדָה--בְּכָל-לִבָּהּ:  כִּי אִם-בְּשֶׁקֶר, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	10 and yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not returned unto Me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the LORD-- {S}
3.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, צִדְּקָה נַפְשָׁהּ מְשֻׁבָה יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִבֹּגֵדָה, יְהוּדָה.	11 even the LORD said unto me--backsliding Israel hath proved herself more righteous than treacherous Judah.
3.12 יב  הָלֹךְ וְקָרָאתָ אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה צָפוֹנָה, וְאָמַרְתָּ שׁוּבָה מְשֻׁבָה יִשְׂרָאֵל נְאֻם-יְהוָה--לוֹא-אַפִּיל פָּנַי, בָּכֶם:  כִּי-חָסִיד אֲנִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לֹא אֶטּוֹר לְעוֹלָם.	12 Go, and proclaim these words toward the north, and say: return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the LORD; I will not frown upon you; for I am merciful, saith the LORD, I will not bear grudge for ever.
3.13 יג  אַךְ דְּעִי עֲוֺנֵךְ, כִּי בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהַיִךְ פָּשָׁעַתְּ; וַתְּפַזְּרִי אֶת-דְּרָכַיִךְ לַזָּרִים, תַּחַת כָּל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן, וּבְקוֹלִי לֹא-שְׁמַעְתֶּם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	13 Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the LORD thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under every leafy tree, and ye have not hearkened to My voice, saith the LORD.
3.14 יד  שׁוּבוּ בָנִים שׁוֹבָבִים נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי אָנֹכִי בָּעַלְתִּי בָכֶם; וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם אֶחָד מֵעִיר, וּשְׁנַיִם מִמִּשְׁפָּחָה, וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, צִיּוֹן.	14 Return, O backsliding children, saith the LORD; for I am a lord unto you, and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion;
3.15 טו  וְנָתַתִּי לָכֶם רֹעִים, כְּלִבִּי; וְרָעוּ אֶתְכֶם, דֵּעָה וְהַשְׂכֵּיל.	15 and I will give you shepherds according to My heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
3.16 טז  וְהָיָה כִּי תִרְבּוּ וּפְרִיתֶם בָּאָרֶץ בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--לֹא-יֹאמְרוּ עוֹד אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, וְלֹא יַעֲלֶה עַל-לֵב; וְלֹא יִזְכְּרוּ-בוֹ וְלֹא יִפְקֹדוּ, וְלֹא יֵעָשֶׂה עוֹד.	16 And it shall come to pass, when ye are multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the LORD, they shall say no more: The ark of the covenant of the LORD; neither shall it come to mind; neither shall they make mention of it; neither shall they miss it; neither shall it be made any more.
3.17 יז  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, יִקְרְאוּ לִירוּשָׁלִַם כִּסֵּא יְהוָה, וְנִקְווּ אֵלֶיהָ כָל-הַגּוֹיִם לְשֵׁם יְהוָה, לִירוּשָׁלִָם; וְלֹא-יֵלְכוּ עוֹד--אַחֲרֵי, שְׁרִרוּת לִבָּם הָרָע.  {ס}	17 At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the LORD; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the LORD, to Jerusalem; neither shall they walk any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart. {S}
3.18 יח  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה, יֵלְכוּ בֵית-יְהוּדָה עַל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְיָבֹאוּ יַחְדָּו, מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן, עַל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר הִנְחַלְתִּי אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.	18 In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers.'
3.19 יט  וְאָנֹכִי אָמַרְתִּי, אֵיךְ אֲשִׁיתֵךְ בַּבָּנִים, וְאֶתֶּן-לָךְ אֶרֶץ חֶמְדָּה, נַחֲלַת צְבִי צִבְאוֹת גּוֹיִם; וָאֹמַר, אָבִי תקראו- (תִּקְרְאִי-) לִי, וּמֵאַחֲרַי, לֹא תשובו (תָשׁוּבִי).	19 But I said: 'How would I put thee among the sons, and give thee a pleasant land, the goodliest heritage of the nations!' And I said: 'Thou shalt call Me, My father; and shalt not turn away from following Me.'
3.20 כ  אָכֵן בָּגְדָה אִשָּׁה, מֵרֵעָהּ; כֵּן בְּגַדְתֶּם בִּי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	20 Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with Me, O house of Israel, saith the LORD.
3.21 כא  קוֹל עַל-שְׁפָיִים נִשְׁמָע, בְּכִי תַחֲנוּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי הֶעֱווּ אֶת-דַּרְכָּם, שָׁכְחוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.	21 Hark! upon the high hills is heard the suppliant weeping of the children of Israel; for that they have perverted their way, they have forgotten the LORD their God.
3.22 כב  שׁוּבוּ בָּנִים שׁוֹבָבִים, אֶרְפָּה מְשׁוּבֹתֵיכֶם; הִנְנוּ אָתָנוּ לָךְ, כִּי אַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	22 Return, ye backsliding children, I will heal your backslidings.--'Here we are, we are come unto Thee; for Thou art the LORD our God.
3.23 כג  אָכֵן לַשֶּׁקֶר מִגְּבָעוֹת, הָמוֹן הָרִים; אָכֵן בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, תְּשׁוּעַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 Truly vain have proved the hills, the uproar on the mountains; truly in the LORD our God is the salvation of Israel.
3.24 כד  וְהַבֹּשֶׁת, אָכְלָה אֶת-יְגִיעַ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ--מִנְּעוּרֵינוּ:  אֶת-צֹאנָם, וְאֶת-בְּקָרָם, אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם, וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיהֶם.	24 But the shameful thing hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.
3.25 כה  נִשְׁכְּבָה בְּבָשְׁתֵּנוּ, וּתְכַסֵּנוּ כְּלִמָּתֵנוּ--כִּי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ חָטָאנוּ אֲנַחְנוּ וַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ, מִנְּעוּרֵינוּ וְעַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וְלֹא שָׁמַעְנוּ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {ס}	25 Let us lie down in our shame, and let our confusion cover us; for we have sinned against the LORD our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day; and we have not hearkened to the voice of the LORD our God.' {S}
4.1 א  אִם-תָּשׁוּב יִשְׂרָאֵל נְאֻם-יְהוָה אֵלַי, תָּשׁוּב; וְאִם-תָּסִיר שִׁקּוּצֶיךָ מִפָּנַי, וְלֹא תָנוּד.	1 If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the LORD, yea, return unto Me; and if thou wilt put away thy detestable things out of My sight, and wilt not waver;
4.2 ב  וְנִשְׁבַּעְתָּ, חַי-יְהוָה, בֶּאֱמֶת, בְּמִשְׁפָּט וּבִצְדָקָה; וְהִתְבָּרְכוּ בוֹ גּוֹיִם, וּבוֹ יִתְהַלָּלוּ.  {ס}	2 And wilt swear: 'As the LORD liveth' in truth, in justice, and in righteousness; then shall the nations bless themselves by Him, and in Him shall they glory. {S}
4.3 ג  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, לְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם, נִירוּ לָכֶם, נִיר; וְאַל-תִּזְרְעוּ, אֶל-קֹצִים.	3 For thus saith the LORD to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem: break up for you a fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.
4.4 ד  הִמֹּלוּ לַיהוָה, וְהָסִרוּ עָרְלוֹת לְבַבְכֶם, אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  פֶּן-תֵּצֵא כָאֵשׁ חֲמָתִי, וּבָעֲרָה וְאֵין מְכַבֶּה--מִפְּנֵי, רֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיכֶם.	4 Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem; lest My fury go forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
4.5 ה  הַגִּידוּ בִיהוּדָה, וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם הַשְׁמִיעוּ, וְאִמְרוּ, ותקעו (תִּקְעוּ) שׁוֹפָר בָּאָרֶץ; קִרְאוּ מַלְאוּ וְאִמְרוּ, הֵאָסְפוּ וְנָבוֹאָה אֶל-עָרֵי הַמִּבְצָר.	5 Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem, and say: 'Blow ye the horn in the land'; cry aloud and say: 'Assemble yourselves, and let us go into the fortified cities.'
4.6 ו  שְׂאוּ-נֵס צִיּוֹנָה, הָעִיזוּ אַל-תַּעֲמֹדוּ:  כִּי רָעָה, אָנֹכִי מֵבִיא מִצָּפוֹן--וְשֶׁבֶר גָּדוֹל.	6 Set up a standard toward Zion; put yourselves under covert, stay not; for I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.
4.7 ז  עָלָה אַרְיֵה, מִסֻּבְּכוֹ, וּמַשְׁחִית גּוֹיִם, נָסַע יָצָא מִמְּקֹמוֹ--לָשׂוּם אַרְצֵךְ לְשַׁמָּה, עָרַיִךְ תִּצֶּינָה מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב.	7 A lion is gone up from his thicket, and a destroyer of nations is set out, gone forth from his place; to make thy land desolate, that thy cities be laid waste, without inhabitant.
4.8 ח  עַל-זֹאת חִגְרוּ שַׂקִּים, סִפְדוּ וְהֵילִילוּ:  כִּי לֹא-שָׁב חֲרוֹן אַף-יְהוָה, מִמֶּנּוּ.  {פ}	8 For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and wail; for the fierce anger of the LORD is not turned back from us. {P}
4.9 ט  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא נְאֻם-יְהוָה, יֹאבַד לֵב-הַמֶּלֶךְ וְלֵב הַשָּׂרִים; וְנָשַׁמּוּ, הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְהַנְּבִאִים, יִתְמָהוּ.  {ס}	9 And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the LORD, that the heart of the king shall fail, and the heart of the princes; and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder. {S}
4.10 י  וָאֹמַר אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, אָכֵן הַשֵּׁא הִשֵּׁאתָ לָעָם הַזֶּה וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר, שָׁלוֹם, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם; וְנָגְעָה חֶרֶב, עַד-הַנָּפֶשׁ.	10 Then said I: 'Ah, Lord GOD! surely Thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying: Ye shall have peace; whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul.'
4.11 יא  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, יֵאָמֵר לָעָם-הַזֶּה וְלִירוּשָׁלִַם, רוּחַ צַח שְׁפָיִם בַּמִּדְבָּר, דֶּרֶךְ בַּת-עַמִּי--לוֹא לִזְרוֹת, וְלוֹא לְהָבַר.	11 At that time shall it be said of this people and of Jerusalem; a hot wind of the high hills in the wilderness toward the daughter of My people, not to fan, nor to cleanse;
4.12 יב  רוּחַ מָלֵא מֵאֵלֶּה, יָבוֹא לִי; עַתָּה, גַּם-אֲנִי אֲדַבֵּר מִשְׁפָּטִים אוֹתָם.	12 A wind too strong for this shall come for Me; now will I also utter judgments against them.
4.13 יג  הִנֵּה כַּעֲנָנִים יַעֲלֶה, וְכַסּוּפָה מַרְכְּבוֹתָיו--קַלּוּ מִנְּשָׁרִים, סוּסָיו; אוֹי לָנוּ, כִּי שֻׁדָּדְנוּ.	13 Behold, he cometh up as clouds, and his chariots are as the whirlwind; his horses are swifter than eagles.--'Woe unto us! for we are undone.'--
4.14 יד  כַּבְּסִי מֵרָעָה לִבֵּךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לְמַעַן תִּוָּשֵׁעִי:  עַד-מָתַי תָּלִין בְּקִרְבֵּךְ, מַחְשְׁבוֹת אוֹנֵךְ.	14 O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. How long shall thy baleful thoughts lodge within thee?
4.15 טו  כִּי קוֹל מַגִּיד, מִדָּן; וּמַשְׁמִיעַ אָוֶן, מֵהַר אֶפְרָיִם.	15 For hark! one declareth from Dan, and announceth calamity from the hills of Ephraim:
4.16 טז  הַזְכִּירוּ לַגּוֹיִם, הִנֵּה הַשְׁמִיעוּ עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, נֹצְרִים בָּאִים, מֵאֶרֶץ הַמֶּרְחָק; וַיִּתְּנוּ עַל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, קוֹלָם.	16 'Make ye mention to the nations: behold--publish concerning Jerusalem--watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah.'
4.17 יז  כְּשֹׁמְרֵי שָׂדַי, הָיוּ עָלֶיהָ מִסָּבִיב:  כִּי-אֹתִי מָרָתָה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	17 As keepers of a field are they against her round about; because she hath been rebellious against Me, saith the LORD.
4.18 יח  דַּרְכֵּךְ, וּמַעֲלָלַיִךְ, עָשׂוֹ אֵלֶּה, לָךְ; זֹאת רָעָתֵךְ כִּי מָר, כִּי נָגַע עַד-לִבֵּךְ.  {פ}	18 Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness; yea, it is bitter, yea, it reacheth unto thy heart. {P}
4.19 יט  מֵעַי מֵעַי אחולה (אֹחִילָה) קִירוֹת לִבִּי, הֹמֶה-לִּי לִבִּי--לֹא אַחֲרִשׁ:  כִּי קוֹל שׁוֹפָר שמעתי (שָׁמַעַתְּ) נַפְשִׁי, תְּרוּעַת מִלְחָמָה.	19 My bowels, my bowels! I writhe in pain! The chambers of my heart! My heart moaneth within me! I cannot hold my peace! because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the horn, the alarm of war.
4.20 כ  שֶׁבֶר עַל-שֶׁבֶר נִקְרָא, כִּי שֻׁדְּדָה כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; פִּתְאֹם שֻׁדְּדוּ אֹהָלַי, רֶגַע יְרִיעֹתָי.	20 Destruction followeth upon destruction, for the whole land is spoiled; suddenly are my tents spoiled, my curtains in a moment.
4.21 כא  עַד-מָתַי, אֶרְאֶה-נֵּס--אֶשְׁמְעָה, קוֹל שׁוֹפָר.  {פ}	21 How long shall I see the standard, shall I hear the sound of the horn? {P}
4.22 כב  כִּי אֱוִיל עַמִּי, אוֹתִי לֹא יָדָעוּ--בָּנִים סְכָלִים הֵמָּה, וְלֹא נְבוֹנִים הֵמָּה; חֲכָמִים הֵמָּה לְהָרַע, וּלְהֵיטִיב לֹא יָדָעוּ.	22 For My people is foolish, they know Me not; they are sottish children, and they have no understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.
4.23 כג  רָאִיתִי, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְהִנֵּה-תֹהוּ, וָבֹהוּ; וְאֶל-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְאֵין אוֹרָם.	23 I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was waste and void; and the heavens, and they had no light.
4.24 כד  רָאִיתִי, הֶהָרִים, וְהִנֵּה, רֹעֲשִׁים; וְכָל-הַגְּבָעוֹת, הִתְקַלְקָלוּ.	24 I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills moved to and fro.
4.25 כה  רָאִיתִי, וְהִנֵּה אֵין הָאָדָם; וְכָל-עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, נָדָדוּ.	25 I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the heavens were fled.
4.26 כו  רָאִיתִי, וְהִנֵּה הַכַּרְמֶל הַמִּדְבָּר; וְכָל-עָרָיו, נִתְּצוּ מִפְּנֵי יְהוָה--מִפְּנֵי, חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ.  {ס}	26 I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful field was a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the LORD, and before His fierce anger. {S}
4.27 כז  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, שְׁמָמָה תִהְיֶה כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וְכָלָה, לֹא אֶעֱשֶׂה.	27 For thus saith the LORD: The whole land shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full end.
4.28 כח  עַל-זֹאת תֶּאֱבַל הָאָרֶץ, וְקָדְרוּ הַשָּׁמַיִם מִמָּעַל--עַל כִּי-דִבַּרְתִּי זַמֹּתִי, וְלֹא נִחַמְתִּי וְלֹא-אָשׁוּב מִמֶּנָּה.	28 For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black; because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and I have not repented, neither will I turn back from it.
4.29 כט  מִקּוֹל פָּרָשׁ וְרֹמֵה קֶשֶׁת, בֹּרַחַת כָּל-הָעִיר--בָּאוּ בֶּעָבִים, וּבַכֵּפִים עָלוּ:  כָּל-הָעִיר עֲזוּבָה, וְאֵין-יוֹשֵׁב בָּהֵן אִישׁ.	29 For the noise of the horsemen and bowmen the whole city fleeth; they go into the thickets, and climb up upon the rocks; every city is forsaken, and not a man dwelleth therein.
4.30 ל  ואתי (וְאַתְּ) שָׁדוּד מַה-תַּעֲשִׂי, כִּי-תִלְבְּשִׁי שָׁנִי כִּי-תַעְדִּי עֲדִי-זָהָב כִּי-תִקְרְעִי בַפּוּךְ עֵינַיִךְ--לַשָּׁוְא, תִּתְיַפִּי:  מָאֲסוּ-בָךְ עֹגְבִים, נַפְשֵׁךְ יְבַקֵּשׁוּ.	30 And thou, that art spoiled, what doest thou, that thou clothest thyself with scarlet, that thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, that thou enlargest thine eyes with paint? In vain dost thou make thyself fair; thy lovers despise thee, they seek thy life.
4.31 לא  כִּי קוֹל כְּחוֹלָה שָׁמַעְתִּי, צָרָה כְּמַבְכִּירָה--קוֹל בַּת-צִיּוֹן תִּתְיַפֵּחַ, תְּפָרֵשׂ כַּפֶּיהָ:  אוֹי-נָא לִי, כִּי-עָיְפָה נַפְשִׁי לְהֹרְגִים.  {פ}	31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, that gaspeth for breath, that spreadeth her hands: 'Woe is me, now! for my soul fainteth before the murderers.' {P}
5.1 א  שׁוֹטְטוּ בְּחוּצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּרְאוּ-נָא וּדְעוּ וּבַקְשׁוּ בִרְחוֹבוֹתֶיהָ, אִם-תִּמְצְאוּ אִישׁ, אִם-יֵשׁ עֹשֶׂה מִשְׁפָּט מְבַקֵּשׁ אֱמוּנָה--וְאֶסְלַח, לָהּ.	1 Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that doeth justly, that seeketh truth; and I will pardon her.
5.2 ב  וְאִם חַי-יְהוָה, יֹאמֵרוּ; לָכֵן לַשֶּׁקֶר, יִשָּׁבֵעוּ.	2 And though they say: 'As the LORD liveth', surely they swear falsely.
5.3 ג  יְהוָה, עֵינֶיךָ הֲלוֹא לֶאֱמוּנָה--הִכִּיתָה אֹתָם וְלֹא-חָלוּ, כִּלִּיתָם מֵאֲנוּ קַחַת מוּסָר; חִזְּקוּ פְנֵיהֶם מִסֶּלַע, מֵאֲנוּ לָשׁוּב.	3 O LORD, are not Thine eyes upon truth? Thou hast stricken them, but they were not affected; Thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return.
5.4 ד  וַאֲנִי אָמַרְתִּי, אַךְ-דַּלִּים הֵם; נוֹאֲלוּ--כִּי לֹא יָדְעוּ דֶּרֶךְ יְהוָה, מִשְׁפַּט אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.	4 And I said: 'Surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the LORD, nor the ordinance of their God;
5.5 ה  אֵלְכָה-לִּי אֶל-הַגְּדֹלִים, וַאֲדַבְּרָה אוֹתָם--כִּי הֵמָּה יָדְעוּ דֶּרֶךְ יְהוָה, מִשְׁפַּט אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; אַךְ הֵמָּה יַחְדָּו שָׁבְרוּ עֹל, נִתְּקוּ מוֹסֵרוֹת.	5 I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they know the way of the LORD, and the ordinance of their God.' But these had altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bands.
5.6 ו  עַל-כֵּן הִכָּם אַרְיֵה מִיַּעַר, זְאֵב עֲרָבוֹת יְשָׁדְדֵם--נָמֵר שֹׁקֵד עַל-עָרֵיהֶם, כָּל-הַיּוֹצֵא מֵהֵנָּה יִטָּרֵף:  כִּי רַבּוּ פִּשְׁעֵיהֶם, עָצְמוּ מְשֻׁבוֹתֵיהֶם.	6 Wherefore a lion out of the forest doth slay them, a wolf of the deserts doth spoil them, a leopard watcheth over their cities, every one that goeth out thence is torn in pieces; because their transgressions are many, their backslidings are increased.
5.7 ז  אֵי לָזֹאת, אסלוח- (אֶסְלַח-) לָךְ--בָּנַיִךְ עֲזָבוּנִי, וַיִּשָּׁבְעוּ בְּלֹא אֱלֹהִים; וָאַשְׂבִּעַ אוֹתָם וַיִּנְאָפוּ, וּבֵית זוֹנָה יִתְגּוֹדָדוּ.	7 Wherefore should I pardon thee? The children have forsaken Me, and sworn by no-gods; and when I had fed them to the full, they committed adultery, and assembled themselves in troops at the harlots' houses.
5.8 ח  סוּסִים מְיֻזָּנִים, מַשְׁכִּים הָיוּ; אִישׁ אֶל-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ, יִצְהָלוּ.	8 They are become as well-fed horses, lusty stallions; every one neigheth after his neighbour's wife.
5.9 ט  הַעַל-אֵלֶּה לוֹא-אֶפְקֹד, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְאִם בְּגוֹי אֲשֶׁר-כָּזֶה, לֹא תִתְנַקֵּם נַפְשִׁי.  {ס}	9 Shall I not punish for these things? saith the LORD; and shall not My soul be avenged on such a nation as this? {S}
5.10 י  עֲלוּ בְשָׁרוֹתֶיהָ וְשַׁחֵתוּ, וְכָלָה אַל-תַּעֲשׂוּ; הָסִירוּ, נְטִישׁוֹתֶיהָ, כִּי לוֹא לַיהוָה, הֵמָּה.	10 Go ye up into her rows, and destroy, but make not a full end; take away her shoots; for they are not the LORD'S.
5.11 יא  כִּי בָגוֹד בָּגְדוּ בִּי, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבֵית יְהוּדָה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	11 For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against Me, saith the LORD.
5.12 יב  כִּחֲשׁוּ, בַּיהוָה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לוֹא-הוּא; וְלֹא-תָבוֹא עָלֵינוּ רָעָה, וְחֶרֶב וְרָעָב לוֹא נִרְאֶה.	12 They have belied the LORD, and said: 'It is not He, neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine;
5.13 יג  וְהַנְּבִיאִים יִהְיוּ לְרוּחַ, וְהַדִּבֵּר אֵין בָּהֶם; כֹּה יֵעָשֶׂה, לָהֶם.  {ס}	13 And the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them; thus be it done unto them.' {S}
5.14 יד  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת, יַעַן דַּבֶּרְכֶם, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה:  הִנְנִי נֹתֵן דְּבָרַי בְּפִיךָ לְאֵשׁ, וְהָעָם הַזֶּה עֵצִים--וַאֲכָלָתַם.	14 Wherefore thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts: Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make My words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.
5.15 טו  הִנְנִי מֵבִיא עֲלֵיכֶם גּוֹי מִמֶּרְחָק בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  גּוֹי אֵיתָן הוּא, גּוֹי מֵעוֹלָם הוּא--גּוֹי לֹא-תֵדַע לְשֹׁנוֹ, וְלֹא תִשְׁמַע מַה-יְדַבֵּר.	15 Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, saith the LORD; it is an enduring nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they say.
5.16 טז  אַשְׁפָּתוֹ, כְּקֶבֶר פָּתוּחַ; כֻּלָּם, גִּבּוֹרִים.	16 Their quiver is an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.
5.17 יז  וְאָכַל קְצִירְךָ וְלַחְמֶךָ, יֹאכְלוּ בָּנֶיךָ וּבְנוֹתֶיךָ--יֹאכַל צֹאנְךָ וּבְקָרֶךָ, יֹאכַל גַּפְנְךָ וּתְאֵנָתֶךָ; יְרֹשֵׁשׁ עָרֵי מִבְצָרֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה בֹּטֵחַ בָּהֵנָּה--בֶּחָרֶב.	17 And they shall eat up thy harvest, and thy bread, they shall eat up thy sons and thy daughters, they shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds, they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig-trees; they shall batter thy fortified cities, wherein thou trusteth, with the sword.
5.18 יח  וְגַם בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לֹא-אֶעֱשֶׂה אִתְּכֶם, כָּלָה.	18 But even in those days, saith the LORD, I will not make a full end with you.
5.19 יט  וְהָיָה, כִּי תֹאמְרוּ, תַּחַת מֶה עָשָׂה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ לָנוּ, אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר עֲזַבְתֶּם אוֹתִי וַתַּעַבְדוּ אֱלֹהֵי נֵכָר בְּאַרְצְכֶם--כֵּן תַּעַבְדוּ זָרִים, בְּאֶרֶץ לֹא לָכֶם.  {פ}	19 And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say: 'Wherefore hath the LORD our God done all these things unto us?' then shalt Thou say unto them: 'Like as ye have forsaken Me, and served strange gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours.' {P}
5.20 כ  הַגִּידוּ זֹאת, בְּבֵית יַעֲקֹב; וְהַשְׁמִיעוּהָ בִיהוּדָה, לֵאמֹר.	20 Declare ye this in the house of Jacob, and announce it in Judah, saying:
5.21 כא  שִׁמְעוּ-נָא זֹאת, עַם סָכָל וְאֵין לֵב:  עֵינַיִם לָהֶם וְלֹא יִרְאוּ, אָזְנַיִם לָהֶם וְלֹא יִשְׁמָעוּ.	21 Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding, that have eyes, and see not, that have ears, and hear not:
5.22 כב  הַאוֹתִי לֹא-תִירָאוּ נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אִם מִפָּנַי לֹא תָחִילוּ, אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי חוֹל גְּבוּל לַיָּם, חָק-עוֹלָם וְלֹא יַעַבְרֶנְהוּ; וַיִּתְגָּעֲשׁוּ וְלֹא יוּכָלוּ, וְהָמוּ גַלָּיו וְלֹא יַעַבְרֻנְהוּ.	22 Fear ye not Me? saith the LORD; will ye not tremble at My presence? who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea, an everlasting ordinance, which it cannot pass; and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it.
5.23 כג  וְלָעָם הַזֶּה הָיָה, לֵב סוֹרֵר וּמוֹרֶה:  סָרוּ, וַיֵּלֵכוּ.	23 But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted, and gone.
5.24 כד  וְלוֹא-אָמְרוּ בִלְבָבָם, נִירָא נָא אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הַנֹּתֵן גֶּשֶׁם וירה (יוֹרֶה) וּמַלְקוֹשׁ, בְּעִתּוֹ; שְׁבֻעֹת חֻקּוֹת קָצִיר, יִשְׁמָר-לָנוּ.	24 Neither say they in their heart: 'Let us now fear the LORD our God, that giveth the former rain, and the latter in due season; that keepeth for us the appointed weeks of the harvest.'
5.25 כה  עֲוֺנוֹתֵיכֶם, הִטּוּ-אֵלֶּה; וְחַטֹּאותֵיכֶם, מָנְעוּ הַטּוֹב מִכֶּם.	25 Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withholden good from you.
5.26 כו  כִּי-נִמְצְאוּ בְעַמִּי, רְשָׁעִים:  יָשׁוּר כְּשַׁךְ יְקוּשִׁים, הִצִּיבוּ מַשְׁחִית אֲנָשִׁים יִלְכֹּדוּ.	26 For among My people are found wicked men; they pry, as fowlers lie in wait; they set a trap, they catch men.
5.27 כז  כִּכְלוּב מָלֵא עוֹף, כֵּן בָּתֵּיהֶם מְלֵאִים מִרְמָה; עַל-כֵּן גָּדְלוּ, וַיַּעֲשִׁירוּ.	27 As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit; therefore they are become great, and waxen rich;
5.28 כח  שָׁמְנוּ עָשְׁתוּ, גַּם עָבְרוּ דִבְרֵי-רָע--דִּין לֹא-דָנוּ, דִּין יָתוֹם וְיַצְלִיחוּ; וּמִשְׁפַּט אֶבְיוֹנִים, לֹא שָׁפָטוּ.	28 They are waxen fat, they are become sleek; yea, they overpass in deeds of wickedness; they plead not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, that they might make it to prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge.
5.29 כט  הַעַל-אֵלֶּה לֹא-אֶפְקֹד, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; אִם בְּגוֹי אֲשֶׁר-כָּזֶה, לֹא תִתְנַקֵּם נַפְשִׁי.  {ס}	29 Shall I not punish for these things? saith the LORD; shall not My soul be avenged on such a nation as this? {S}
5.30 ל  שַׁמָּה, וְשַׁעֲרוּרָה, נִהְיְתָה, בָּאָרֶץ.	30 An appalling and horrible thing is come to pass in the land:
5.31 לא  הַנְּבִאִים נִבְּאוּ בַשֶּׁקֶר, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים יִרְדּוּ עַל-יְדֵיהֶם, וְעַמִּי, אָהֲבוּ כֵן; וּמַה-תַּעֲשׂוּ, לְאַחֲרִיתָהּ.	31 The prophets prophesy in the service of falsehood, and the priests bear rule at their beck; and My people love to have it so; what then will ye do in the end thereof?
6.1 א  הָעִזוּ בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, מִקֶּרֶב יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּבִתְקוֹעַ תִּקְעוּ שׁוֹפָר, וְעַל-בֵּית הַכֶּרֶם שְׂאוּ מַשְׂאֵת:  כִּי רָעָה נִשְׁקְפָה מִצָּפוֹן, וְשֶׁבֶר גָּדוֹל.	1 Put yourselves under covert, ye children of Benjamin, away from the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the horn in Tekoa, and set up a signal on Beth-cherem; for evil looketh forth from the north, and a great destruction.
6.2 ב  הַנָּוָה, וְהַמְּעֻנָּגָה, דָּמִיתִי, בַּת-צִיּוֹן.	2 The comely and delicate one, the daughter of Zion, will I cut off.
6.3 ג  אֵלֶיהָ יָבֹאוּ רֹעִים, וְעֶדְרֵיהֶם; תָּקְעוּ עָלֶיהָ אֹהָלִים סָבִיב, רָעוּ אִישׁ אֶת-יָדוֹ.	3 Shepherds with their flocks come unto her; they pitch their tents against her round about; they feed bare every one what is nigh at hand.
6.4 ד  קַדְּשׁוּ עָלֶיהָ מִלְחָמָה, קוּמוּ וְנַעֲלֶה בַצָּהֳרָיִם; אוֹי לָנוּ כִּי-פָנָה הַיּוֹם, כִּי יִנָּטוּ צִלְלֵי-עָרֶב.	4 'Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon!' 'Woe unto us! for the day declineth, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out!'
6.5 ה  קוּמוּ וְנַעֲלֶה בַלָּיְלָה, וְנַשְׁחִיתָה אַרְמְנוֹתֶיהָ.  {פ}	5 'Arise, and let us go up by night, and let us destroy her palaces.' {P}
6.6 ו  כִּי כֹה אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, כִּרְתוּ עֵצָה, וְשִׁפְכוּ עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם סֹלְלָה; הִיא הָעִיר הָפְקַד, כֻּלָּהּ עֹשֶׁק בְּקִרְבָּהּ.	6 For thus hath the LORD of hosts said: hew ye down her trees, and cast up a mound against Jerusalem; this is the city to be punished; everywhere there is oppression in the midst of her.
6.7 ז  כְּהָקִיר בור (בַּיִר) מֵימֶיהָ, כֵּן הֵקֵרָה רָעָתָהּ; חָמָס וָשֹׁד יִשָּׁמַע בָּהּ עַל-פָּנַי, תָּמִיד--חֳלִי וּמַכָּה.	7 As a cistern welleth with her waters, so she welleth with her wickedness; violence and spoil is heard in her; before Me continually is sickness and wounds.
6.8 ח  הִוָּסְרִי, יְרוּשָׁלִַם--פֶּן-תֵּקַע נַפְשִׁי, מִמֵּךְ:  פֶּן-אֲשִׂימֵךְ שְׁמָמָה, אֶרֶץ לוֹא נוֹשָׁבָה.  {פ}	8 Be thou corrected, O Jerusalem, lest My soul be alienated from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. {P}
6.9 ט  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עוֹלֵל יְעוֹלְלוּ כַגֶּפֶן שְׁאֵרִית יִשְׂרָאֵל; הָשֵׁב, יָדְךָ, כְּבוֹצֵר, עַל-סַלְסִלּוֹת.	9 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: They shall thoroughly glean as a vine the remnant of Israel; turn again thy hand as a grape-gatherer upon the shoots.
6.10 י  עַל-מִי אֲדַבְּרָה וְאָעִידָה, וְיִשְׁמָעוּ--הִנֵּה עֲרֵלָה אָזְנָם, וְלֹא יוּכְלוּ לְהַקְשִׁיב; הִנֵּה דְבַר-יְהוָה, הָיָה לָהֶם לְחֶרְפָּה--לֹא יַחְפְּצוּ-בוֹ.	10 To whom shall I speak and give warning, that they may hear? Behold, their ear is dull, and they cannot attend; behold, the word of the LORD is become unto them a reproach, they have no delight in it.
6.11 יא  וְאֵת חֲמַת יְהוָה מָלֵאתִי, נִלְאֵיתִי הָכִיל--שְׁפֹךְ עַל-עוֹלָל בַּחוּץ, וְעַל סוֹד בַּחוּרִים יַחְדָּו:  כִּי-גַם-אִישׁ עִם-אִשָּׁה יִלָּכֵדוּ, זָקֵן עִם-מְלֵא יָמִים.	11 Therefore I am full of the fury of the LORD, I am weary with holding in: pour it out upon the babes in the street, and upon the assembly of young men together; for even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of days.
6.12 יב  וְנָסַבּוּ בָתֵּיהֶם לַאֲחֵרִים, שָׂדוֹת וְנָשִׁים יַחְדָּו:  כִּי-אַטֶּה אֶת-יָדִי עַל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	12 And their houses shall be turned unto others, their fields and their wives together; for I will stretch out My hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD.
6.13 יג  כִּי מִקְּטַנָּם וְעַד-גְּדוֹלָם, כֻּלּוֹ בּוֹצֵעַ בָּצַע; וּמִנָּבִיא, וְעַד-כֹּהֵן--כֻּלּוֹ, עֹשֶׂה שָּׁקֶר.	13 For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is greedy for gain; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.
6.14 יד  וַיְרַפְּאוּ אֶת-שֶׁבֶר עַמִּי, עַל-נְקַלָּה--לֵאמֹר, שָׁלוֹם שָׁלוֹם; וְאֵין, שָׁלוֹם.	14 They have healed also the hurt of My people lightly, saying: 'Peace, peace', when there is no peace.
6.15 טו  הֹבִישׁוּ, כִּי תוֹעֵבָה עָשׂוּ; גַּם-בּוֹשׁ לֹא-יֵבוֹשׁוּ, גַּם-הַכְלִים לֹא יָדָעוּ--לָכֵן יִפְּלוּ בַנֹּפְלִים בְּעֵת-פְּקַדְתִּים יִכָּשְׁלוּ, אָמַר יְהוָה.  {ס}	15 They shall be put to shame because they have committed abomination; yea, they are not at all ashamed, neither know they how to blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall, at the time that I punish them they shall stumble, saith the LORD. {S}
6.16 טז  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה עִמְדוּ עַל-דְּרָכִים וּרְאוּ וְשַׁאֲלוּ לִנְתִבוֹת עוֹלָם, אֵי-זֶה דֶרֶךְ הַטּוֹב וּלְכוּ-בָהּ, וּמִצְאוּ מַרְגּוֹעַ, לְנַפְשְׁכֶם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֹא נֵלֵךְ.	16 Thus saith the LORD: stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said: 'We will not walk therein.'
6.17 יז  וַהֲקִמֹתִי עֲלֵיכֶם צֹפִים, הַקְשִׁיבוּ לְקוֹל שׁוֹפָר; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֹא נַקְשִׁיב.	17 And I set watchmen over you: 'Attend to the sound of the horn', but they said: 'We will not attend.'
6.18 יח  לָכֵן, שִׁמְעוּ הַגּוֹיִם; וּדְעִי עֵדָה, אֶת-אֲשֶׁר-בָּם.	18 Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is against them.
6.19 יט  שִׁמְעִי הָאָרֶץ--הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי מֵבִיא רָעָה אֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה, פְּרִי מַחְשְׁבוֹתָם:  כִּי עַל-דְּבָרַי לֹא הִקְשִׁיבוּ, וְתוֹרָתִי וַיִּמְאֲסוּ-בָהּ.	19 Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not attended unto My words, and as for My teaching, they have rejected it.
6.20 כ  לָמָּה-זֶּה לִי לְבוֹנָה מִשְּׁבָא תָבוֹא, וְקָנֶה הַטּוֹב מֵאֶרֶץ מֶרְחָק; עֹלוֹתֵיכֶם לֹא לְרָצוֹן, וְזִבְחֵיכֶם לֹא-עָרְבוּ לִי.	20 To what purpose is to Me the frankincense that cometh from Sheba, and the sweet cane, from a far country? Your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices pleasing unto Me.
6.21 כא  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי נֹתֵן אֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה, מִכְשֹׁלִים; וְכָשְׁלוּ בָם אָבוֹת וּבָנִים יַחְדָּו, שָׁכֵן וְרֵעוֹ--יאבדו (וְאָבָדוּ).  {פ}	21 Therefore thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall stumble against them, the neighbour and his friend, and they shall perish. {P}
6.22 כב  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה עַם בָּא מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן; וְגוֹי גָּדוֹל, יֵעוֹר מִיַּרְכְּתֵי-אָרֶץ.	22 Thus saith the LORD: Behold, a people cometh from the north country, and a great nation shall be roused from the uttermost parts of the earth.
6.23 כג  קֶשֶׁת וְכִידוֹן יַחֲזִיקוּ, אַכְזָרִי הוּא וְלֹא יְרַחֵמוּ, קוֹלָם כַּיָּם יֶהֱמֶה, וְעַל-סוּסִים יִרְכָּבוּ; עָרוּךְ, כְּאִישׁ לַמִּלְחָמָה, עָלַיִךְ, בַּת-צִיּוֹן.	23 They lay hold on bow and spear, they are cruel, and have no compassion; their voice is like the roaring sea, and they ride upon horses; set in array, as a man for war, against thee, O daughter of Zion.
6.24 כד  שָׁמַעְנוּ אֶת-שָׁמְעוֹ, רָפוּ יָדֵינוּ; צָרָה, הֶחֱזִקַתְנוּ--חִיל, כַּיּוֹלֵדָה.	24 'We have heard the fame thereof, our hands wax feeble, anguish hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail.'
6.25 כה  אַל-תצאי (תֵּצְאוּ) הַשָּׂדֶה, וּבַדֶּרֶךְ אַל-תלכי (תֵּלֵכוּ):  כִּי חֶרֶב לְאֹיֵב, מָגוֹר מִסָּבִיב.	25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for there is the sword of the enemy, and terror on every side.
6.26 כו  בַּת-עַמִּי חִגְרִי-שָׂק, וְהִתְפַּלְּשִׁי בָאֵפֶר--אֵבֶל יָחִיד עֲשִׂי לָךְ, מִסְפַּד תַּמְרוּרִים:  כִּי פִתְאֹם, יָבֹא הַשֹּׁדֵד עָלֵינוּ.	26 O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes; make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter lamentation; for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us.
6.27 כז  בָּחוֹן נְתַתִּיךָ בְעַמִּי, מִבְצָר; וְתֵדַע, וּבָחַנְתָּ אֶת-דַּרְכָּם.	27 I have made thee a tower and a fortress among My people; that thou mayest know and try their way.
6.28 כח  כֻּלָּם סָרֵי סוֹרְרִים, הֹלְכֵי רָכִיל נְחֹשֶׁת וּבַרְזֶל; כֻּלָּם מַשְׁחִיתִים, הֵמָּה.	28 They are all grievous revolters, going about with slanders; they are brass and iron; they all of them deal corruptly.
6.29 כט  נָחַר מַפֻּחַ, מאשתם (מֵאֵשׁ תַּם) עֹפָרֶת--לַשָּׁוְא צָרַף צָרוֹף, וְרָעִים לֹא נִתָּקוּ.	29 The bellows blow fiercely, the lead is consumed of the fire; in vain doth the founder refine, for the wicked are not separated.
6.30 ל  כֶּסֶף נִמְאָס, קָרְאוּ לָהֶם:  כִּי-מָאַס יְהוָה, בָּהֶם.  {פ}	30 Refuse silver shall men call them, because the LORD hath rejected them. {P}
7.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
7.2 ב  עֲמֹד, בְּשַׁעַר בֵּית יְהוָה, וְקָרָאתָ שָּׁם, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וְאָמַרְתָּ שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, כָּל-יְהוּדָה הַבָּאִים בַּשְּׁעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת, לַיהוָה.  {ס}	2 Stand in the gate of the LORD'S house, and proclaim there this word, and say: Hear the word of the LORD, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the LORD. {S}
7.3 ג  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֵיטִיבוּ דַרְכֵיכֶם, וּמַעַלְלֵיכֶם; וַאֲשַׁכְּנָה אֶתְכֶם, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	3 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.
7.4 ד  אַל-תִּבְטְחוּ לָכֶם, אֶל-דִּבְרֵי הַשֶּׁקֶר לֵאמֹר:  הֵיכַל יְהוָה הֵיכַל יְהוָה, הֵיכַל יְהוָה הֵמָּה.	4 Trust ye not in lying words, saying: 'The temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD, are these.'
7.5 ה  כִּי אִם-הֵיטֵיב תֵּיטִיבוּ, אֶת-דַּרְכֵיכֶם וְאֶת-מַעַלְלֵיכֶם:  אִם-עָשׂוֹ תַעֲשׂוּ מִשְׁפָּט, בֵּין אִישׁ וּבֵין רֵעֵהוּ.	5 Nay, but if ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye thoroughly execute justice between a man and his neighbour;
7.6 ו  גֵּר יָתוֹם וְאַלְמָנָה, לֹא תַעֲשֹׁקוּ, וְדָם נָקִי, אַל-תִּשְׁפְּכוּ בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה; וְאַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים לֹא תֵלְכוּ, לְרַע לָכֶם.	6 if ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt;
7.7 ז  וְשִׁכַּנְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה--בָּאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם:  לְמִן-עוֹלָם, וְעַד-עוֹלָם.	7 then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.
7.8 ח  הִנֵּה אַתֶּם בֹּטְחִים לָכֶם, עַל-דִּבְרֵי הַשָּׁקֶר--לְבִלְתִּי, הוֹעִיל.	8 Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.
7.9 ט  הֲגָנֹב רָצֹחַ וְנָאֹף, וְהִשָּׁבֵעַ לַשֶּׁקֶר וְקַטֵּר לַבָּעַל; וְהָלֹךְ, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְדַעְתֶּם.	9 Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and offer unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye have not known,
7.10 י  וּבָאתֶם וַעֲמַדְתֶּם לְפָנַי, בַּבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עָלָיו, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, נִצַּלְנוּ--לְמַעַן עֲשׂוֹת, אֵת כָּל-הַתּוֹעֵבוֹת הָאֵלֶּה.	10 and come and stand before Me in this house, whereupon My name is called, and say: 'We are delivered', that ye may do all these abominations?
7.11 יא  הַמְעָרַת פָּרִצִים, הָיָה הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר-נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עָלָיו--בְּעֵינֵיכֶם; גַּם אָנֹכִי הִנֵּה רָאִיתִי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	11 Is this house, whereupon My name is called, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, I, even I, have seen it, saith the LORD.
7.12 יב  כִּי לְכוּ-נָא, אֶל-מְקוֹמִי אֲשֶׁר בְּשִׁילוֹ, אֲשֶׁר שִׁכַּנְתִּי שְׁמִי שָׁם, בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה; וּרְאוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי לוֹ, מִפְּנֵי, רָעַת עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	12 For go ye now unto My place which was in Shiloh, where I caused My name to dwell at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of My people Israel.
7.13 יג  וְעַתָּה, יַעַן עֲשׂוֹתְכֶם אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּעֲשִׂים הָאֵלֶּה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וָאֲדַבֵּר אֲלֵיכֶם הַשְׁכֵּם וְדַבֵּר, וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם, וָאֶקְרָא אֶתְכֶם, וְלֹא עֲנִיתֶם.	13 And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the LORD, and I spoke unto you, speaking betimes and often, but ye heard not, and I called you, but ye answered not;
7.14 יד  וְעָשִׂיתִי לַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עָלָיו, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם בֹּטְחִים בּוֹ, וְלַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לָכֶם וְלַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי, לְשִׁלוֹ.	14 therefore will I do unto the house, whereupon My name is called, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.
7.15 טו  וְהִשְׁלַכְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, מֵעַל פָּנָי, כַּאֲשֶׁר הִשְׁלַכְתִּי אֶת-כָּל-אֲחֵיכֶם, אֵת כָּל-זֶרַע אֶפְרָיִם.  {פ}	15 And I will cast you out of My sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim. {P}
7.16 טז  וְאַתָּה אַל-תִּתְפַּלֵּל בְּעַד-הָעָם הַזֶּה, וְאַל-תִּשָּׂא בַעֲדָם רִנָּה וּתְפִלָּה--וְאַל-תִּפְגַּע-בִּי:  כִּי-אֵינֶנִּי שֹׁמֵעַ, אֹתָךְ.	16 Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to Me; for I will not hear thee.
7.17 יז  הַאֵינְךָ רֹאֶה, מָה הֵמָּה עֹשִׂים בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וּבְחֻצוֹת, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	17 Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
7.18 יח  הַבָּנִים מְלַקְּטִים עֵצִים, וְהָאָבוֹת מְבַעֲרִים אֶת-הָאֵשׁ, וְהַנָּשִׁים, לָשׁוֹת בָּצֵק:  לַעֲשׂוֹת כַּוָּנִים לִמְלֶכֶת הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְהַסֵּךְ נְסָכִים לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--לְמַעַן, הַכְעִסֵנִי.	18 The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke Me.
7.19 יט  הַאֹתִי הֵם מַכְעִסִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; הֲלוֹא אֹתָם, לְמַעַן בֹּשֶׁת פְּנֵיהֶם.	19 Do they provoke Me? saith the LORD; do they not provoke themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?
7.20 כ  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה אַפִּי וַחֲמָתִי נִתֶּכֶת אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, עַל-הָאָדָם וְעַל-הַבְּהֵמָה, וְעַל-עֵץ הַשָּׂדֶה וְעַל-פְּרִי הָאֲדָמָה; וּבָעֲרָה, וְלֹא תִכְבֶּה.  {פ}	20 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold, Mine anger and My fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the land; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched. {P}
7.21 כא  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עֹלוֹתֵיכֶם סְפוּ עַל-זִבְחֵיכֶם, וְאִכְלוּ בָשָׂר.	21 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Add your burnt-offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat ye flesh.
7.22 כב  כִּי לֹא-דִבַּרְתִּי אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, וְלֹא צִוִּיתִים, בְּיוֹם הוציא (הוֹצִיאִי) אוֹתָם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--עַל-דִּבְרֵי עוֹלָה, וָזָבַח.	22 For I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices;
7.23 כג  כִּי אִם-אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה צִוִּיתִי אוֹתָם לֵאמֹר, שִׁמְעוּ בְקוֹלִי--וְהָיִיתִי לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים, וְאַתֶּם תִּהְיוּ-לִי לְעָם; וַהֲלַכְתֶּם, בְּכָל-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר אֲצַוֶּה אֶתְכֶם, לְמַעַן, יִיטַב לָכֶם.	23 but this thing I commanded them, saying: 'Hearken unto My voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be My people; and walk ye in all the way that I command you, that it may be well with you.'
7.24 כד  וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, וְלֹא-הִטּוּ אֶת-אָזְנָם, וַיֵּלְכוּ בְּמֹעֵצוֹת, בִּשְׁרִרוּת לִבָּם הָרָע; וַיִּהְיוּ לְאָחוֹר, וְלֹא לְפָנִים.	24 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in their own counsels, even in the stubbornness of their evil heart, and went backward and not forward,
7.25 כה  לְמִן-הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יָצְאוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--וָאֶשְׁלַח אֲלֵיכֶם אֶת-כָּל-עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִיאִים, יוֹם הַשְׁכֵּם וְשָׁלֹחַ.	25 even since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day; and though I have sent unto you all My servants the prophets, sending them daily betimes and often,
7.26 כו  וְלוֹא שָׁמְעוּ אֵלַי, וְלֹא הִטּוּ אֶת-אָזְנָם; וַיַּקְשׁוּ, אֶת-עָרְפָּם--הֵרֵעוּ, מֵאֲבוֹתָם.	26 yet they hearkened not unto Me, nor inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff; they did worse than their fathers.
7.27 כז  וְדִבַּרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְלֹא יִשְׁמְעוּ אֵלֶיךָ; וְקָרָאתָ אֲלֵיהֶם, וְלֹא יַעֲנוּכָה.	27 And thou shalt speak all these words unto them, but they will not hearken to thee; thou shalt also call unto them, but they will not answer thee.
7.28 כח  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, זֶה הַגּוֹי אֲשֶׁר לוֹא-שָׁמְעוּ בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו, וְלֹא לָקְחוּ, מוּסָר; אָבְדָה, הָאֱמוּנָה, וְנִכְרְתָה, מִפִּיהֶם.  {ס}	28 Therefore thou shalt say unto them: This is the nation that hath not hearkened to the voice of the LORD their God, nor received correction; faithfulness is perished, and is cut off from their mouth. {S}
7.29 כט  גָּזִּי נִזְרֵךְ וְהַשְׁלִיכִי, וּשְׂאִי עַל-שְׁפָיִם קִינָה:  כִּי מָאַס יְהוָה, וַיִּטֹּשׁ אֶת-דּוֹר עֶבְרָתוֹ.	29 Cut off thy hair, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on the high hills; for the LORD hath rejected and forsaken the generation of His wrath.
7.30 ל  כִּי-עָשׂוּ בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה הָרַע בְּעֵינַי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  שָׂמוּ שִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם, בַּבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עָלָיו--לְטַמְּאוֹ.	30 For the children of Judah have done that which is evil in My sight, saith the LORD; they have set their detestable things in the house whereon My name is called, to defile it.
7.31 לא  וּבָנוּ בָּמוֹת הַתֹּפֶת, אֲשֶׁר בְּגֵיא בֶן-הִנֹּם, לִשְׂרֹף אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֵיהֶם, בָּאֵשׁ--אֲשֶׁר לֹא צִוִּיתִי, וְלֹא עָלְתָה עַל-לִבִּי.  {פ}	31 And they have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded not, neither came it into My mind. {P}
7.32 לב  לָכֵן הִנֵּה-יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְלֹא-יֵאָמֵר עוֹד הַתֹּפֶת וְגֵיא בֶן-הִנֹּם, כִּי אִם-גֵּיא הַהֲרֵגָה; וְקָבְרוּ בְתֹפֶת, מֵאֵין מָקוֹם.	32 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter; for they shall bury in Topheth, for lack of room.
7.33 לג  וְהָיְתָה נִבְלַת הָעָם הַזֶּה, לְמַאֲכָל, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, וּלְבֶהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ; וְאֵין, מַחֲרִיד.	33 And the carcasses of this people shall be food for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall frighten them away.
7.34 לד  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי מֵעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וּמֵחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, קוֹל שָׂשׂוֹן וְקוֹל שִׂמְחָה, קוֹל חָתָן וְקוֹל כַּלָּה:  כִּי לְחָרְבָּה, תִּהְיֶה הָאָרֶץ.	34 Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; for the land shall be desolate.
8.1 א  בָּעֵת הַהִיא נְאֻם-יְהוָה ויציאו (יוֹצִיאוּ) אֶת-עַצְמוֹת מַלְכֵי-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-עַצְמוֹת-שָׂרָיו וְאֶת-עַצְמוֹת הַכֹּהֲנִים וְאֵת עַצְמוֹת הַנְּבִיאִים, וְאֵת עַצְמוֹת יוֹשְׁבֵי-יְרוּשָׁלִָם--מִקִּבְרֵיהֶם.	1 At that time, saith the LORD, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves;
8.2 ב  וּשְׁטָחוּם לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ וְלַיָּרֵחַ וּלְכֹל צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, אֲשֶׁר אֲהֵבוּם וַאֲשֶׁר עֲבָדוּם וַאֲשֶׁר הָלְכוּ אַחֲרֵיהֶם, וַאֲשֶׁר דְּרָשׁוּם, וַאֲשֶׁר הִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם:  לֹא יֵאָסְפוּ וְלֹא יִקָּבֵרוּ, לְדֹמֶן עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה יִהְיוּ.	2 and they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped; they shall not be gathered, nor be buried, they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.
8.3 ג  וְנִבְחַר מָוֶת, מֵחַיִּים, לְכֹל הַשְּׁאֵרִית הַנִּשְׁאָרִים, מִן-הַמִּשְׁפָּחָה הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת--בְּכָל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת הַנִּשְׁאָרִים אֲשֶׁר הִדַּחְתִּים שָׁם, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {ס}	3 And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue that remain of this evil family, that remain in all the places whither I have driven them, saith the LORD of hosts. {S}
8.4 ד  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הֲיִפְּלוּ, וְלֹא יָקוּמוּ; אִם-יָשׁוּב, וְלֹא יָשׁוּב.	4 Moreover thou shalt say unto them: Thus saith the LORD: do men fall, and not rise up again? Doth one turn away, and not return?
8.5 ה  מַדּוּעַ שׁוֹבְבָה הָעָם הַזֶּה, יְרוּשָׁלִַם--מְשֻׁבָה נִצַּחַת; הֶחֱזִיקוּ, בַּתַּרְמִת--מֵאֲנוּ, לָשׁוּב.	5 Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.
8.6 ו  הִקְשַׁבְתִּי וָאֶשְׁמָע, לוֹא-כֵן יְדַבֵּרוּ--אֵין אִישׁ נִחָם עַל-רָעָתוֹ, לֵאמֹר מֶה עָשִׂיתִי; כֻּלֹּה, שָׁב במרצותם (בִּמְרוּצָתָם), כְּסוּס שׁוֹטֵף, בַּמִּלְחָמָה.	6 I attended and listened, but they spoke not aright; no man repenteth him of his wickedness, saying: 'What have I done?' Every one turneth away in his course, as a horse that rusheth headlong in the battle.
8.7 ז  גַּם-חֲסִידָה בַשָּׁמַיִם, יָדְעָה מוֹעֲדֶיהָ, וְתֹר וסוס (וְסִיס) וְעָגוּר, שָׁמְרוּ אֶת-עֵת בֹּאָנָה; וְעַמִּי--לֹא יָדְעוּ, אֵת מִשְׁפַּט יְהוָה.	7 Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the swallow and the crane observe the time of their coming; but My people know not the ordinance of the LORD.
8.8 ח  אֵיכָה תֹאמְרוּ חֲכָמִים אֲנַחְנוּ, וְתוֹרַת יְהוָה אִתָּנוּ; אָכֵן הִנֵּה לַשֶּׁקֶר עָשָׂה, עֵט שֶׁקֶר סֹפְרִים.	8 How do ye say: 'We are wise, and the Law of the LORD is with us'? Lo, certainly in vain hath wrought the vain pen of the scribes.
8.9 ט  הֹבִשׁוּ חֲכָמִים, חַתּוּ וַיִּלָּכֵדוּ; הִנֵּה בִדְבַר-יְהוָה מָאָסוּ, וְחָכְמַת מֶה לָהֶם.	9 The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken; lo, they have rejected the word of the LORD; and what wisdom is in them?
8.10 י  לָכֵן אֶתֵּן אֶת-נְשֵׁיהֶם לַאֲחֵרִים, שְׂדוֹתֵיהֶם לְיוֹרְשִׁים--כִּי מִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל, כֻּלֹּה בֹּצֵעַ בָּצַע:  מִנָּבִיא, וְעַד-כֹּהֵן--כֻּלֹּה, עֹשֶׂה שָּׁקֶר.	10 Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields to them that shall possess them; for from the least even unto the greatest every one is greedy for gain, from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.
8.11 יא  וַיְרַפּוּ אֶת-שֶׁבֶר בַּת-עַמִּי, עַל-נְקַלָּה--לֵאמֹר, שָׁלוֹם שָׁלוֹם; וְאֵין, שָׁלוֹם.	11 And they have healed the hurt of the daughter of My people lightly, saying: 'Peace, peace', when there is no peace.
8.12 יב  הֹבִשׁוּ, כִּי תוֹעֵבָה עָשׂוּ; גַּם-בּוֹשׁ לֹא-יֵבֹשׁוּ, וְהִכָּלֵם לֹא יָדָעוּ--לָכֵן יִפְּלוּ בַנֹּפְלִים בְּעֵת פְּקֻדָּתָם יִכָּשְׁלוּ, אָמַר יְהוָה.  {פ}	12 They shall be put to shame because they have committed abomination; yea, they are not at all ashamed, neither know they how to blush; therefore shall they fall among them that fall, in the time of their visitation they shall stumble, saith the LORD. {P}
8.13 יג  אָסֹף אֲסִיפֵם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; אֵין עֲנָבִים בַּגֶּפֶן וְאֵין תְּאֵנִים בַּתְּאֵנָה, וְהֶעָלֶה נָבֵל--וָאֶתֵּן לָהֶם, יַעַבְרוּם.	13 I will utterly consume them, saith the LORD; there are no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig-tree, and the leaf is faded; and I gave them that which they transgress.
8.14 יד  עַל-מָה, אֲנַחְנוּ יֹשְׁבִים--הֵאָסְפוּ וְנָבוֹא אֶל-עָרֵי הַמִּבְצָר, וְנִדְּמָה-שָּׁם:  כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ הֲדִמָּנוּ וַיַּשְׁקֵנוּ מֵי-רֹאשׁ, כִּי חָטָאנוּ לַיהוָה.	14 'Why do we sit still? Assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the fortified cities, and let us be cut off there; for the LORD our God hath cut us off, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the LORD.
8.15 טו  קַוֵּה לְשָׁלוֹם, וְאֵין טוֹב; לְעֵת מַרְפֵּה, וְהִנֵּה בְעָתָה.	15 We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of healing, and behold terror!'
8.16 טז  מִדָּן נִשְׁמַע, נַחְרַת סוּסָיו--מִקּוֹל מִצְהֲלוֹת אַבִּירָיו, רָעֲשָׁה כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וַיָּבוֹאוּ, וַיֹּאכְלוּ אֶרֶץ וּמְלוֹאָהּ--עִיר, וְיֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ.  {פ}	16 The snorting of his horses is heard from Dan; at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones the whole land trembleth; for they are come, and have devoured the land and all that is in it, the city and those that dwell therein. {P}
8.17 יז  כִּי הִנְנִי מְשַׁלֵּחַ בָּכֶם, נְחָשִׁים צִפְעֹנִים, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לָהֶם, לָחַשׁ; וְנִשְּׁכוּ אֶתְכֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	17 For, behold, I will send serpents, basilisks, among you, which will not be charmed; and they shall bite you, saith the LORD. {S}
8.18 יח  מַבְלִיגִיתִי, עֲלֵי יָגוֹן; עָלַי, לִבִּי דַוָּי.	18 Though I would take comfort against sorrow, my heart is faint within me.
8.19 יט  הִנֵּה-קוֹל שַׁוְעַת בַּת-עַמִּי, מֵאֶרֶץ מַרְחַקִּים, הַיהוָה אֵין בְּצִיּוֹן, אִם-מַלְכָּהּ אֵין בָּהּ; מַדּוּעַ, הִכְעִסוּנִי בִּפְסִלֵיהֶם--בְּהַבְלֵי נֵכָר.	19 Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people from a land far off: 'Is not the LORD in Zion? Is not her King in her?'--'Why have they provoked Me with their graven images, and with strange vanities?'--
8.20 כ  עָבַר קָצִיר, כָּלָה קָיִץ; וַאֲנַחְנוּ, לוֹא נוֹשָׁעְנוּ.	20 'The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.'
8.21 כא  עַל-שֶׁבֶר בַּת-עַמִּי, הָשְׁבָּרְתִּי; קָדַרְתִּי, שַׁמָּה הֶחֱזִקָתְנִי.	21 For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I seized with anguish; I am black, appalment hath taken hold on me.
8.22 כב  הַצֳּרִי אֵין בְּגִלְעָד, אִם-רֹפֵא אֵין שָׁם:  כִּי, מַדּוּעַ לֹא עָלְתָה, אֲרֻכַת, בַּת-עַמִּי.  {ס}	22 Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? {S}
9.1 א  מִי-יִתֵּן רֹאשִׁי מַיִם, וְעֵינִי מְקוֹר דִּמְעָה; וְאֶבְכֶּה יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, אֵת חַלְלֵי בַת-עַמִּי.  {ס}	1 Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! {S}
9.2 ב  מִי-יִתְּנֵנִי בַמִּדְבָּר, מְלוֹן אֹרְחִים, וְאֶעֶזְבָה אֶת-עַמִּי, וְאֵלְכָה מֵאִתָּם:  כִּי כֻלָּם מְנָאֲפִים, עֲצֶרֶת בֹּגְדִים.	2 Oh that I were in the wilderness, in a lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them! For they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.
9.3 ג  וַיַּדְרְכוּ אֶת-לְשׁוֹנָם קַשְׁתָּם שֶׁקֶר, וְלֹא לֶאֱמוּנָה גָּבְרוּ בָאָרֶץ:  כִּי מֵרָעָה אֶל-רָעָה יָצָאוּ וְאֹתִי לֹא-יָדָעוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	3 And they bend their tongue, their bow of falsehood; and they are grown mighty in the land, but not for truth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and Me they know not, saith the LORD.
9.4 ד  אִישׁ מֵרֵעֵהוּ הִשָּׁמֵרוּ, וְעַל-כָּל-אָח אַל-תִּבְטָחוּ:  כִּי כָל-אָח עָקוֹב יַעְקֹב, וְכָל-רֵעַ רָכִיל יַהֲלֹךְ.	4 Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother acteth subtly, and every neighbour goeth about with slanders.
9.5 ה  וְאִישׁ בְּרֵעֵהוּ יְהָתֵלּוּ, וֶאֱמֶת לֹא יְדַבֵּרוּ; לִמְּדוּ לְשׁוֹנָם דַּבֶּר-שֶׁקֶר, הַעֲוֵה נִלְאוּ.	5 And they deceive every one his neighbour, and truth they speak not; they have taught their tongue to speak lies, they weary themselves to commit iniquity.
9.6 ו  שִׁבְתְּךָ, בְּתוֹךְ מִרְמָה; בְּמִרְמָה מֵאֲנוּ דַעַת-אוֹתִי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	6 Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know Me, saith the LORD. {S}
9.7 ז  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הִנְנִי צוֹרְפָם, וּבְחַנְתִּים:  כִּי-אֵיךְ אֶעֱשֶׂה, מִפְּנֵי בַּת-עַמִּי.	7 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts: behold, I will smelt them, and try them; for how else should I do, because of the daughter of My people?
9.8 ח  חֵץ שוחט (שָׁחוּט) לְשׁוֹנָם, מִרְמָה דִבֵּר; בְּפִיו, שָׁלוֹם אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ יְדַבֵּר, וּבְקִרְבּוֹ, יָשִׂים אָרְבּוֹ.	8 Their tongue is a sharpened arrow, it speaketh deceit; one speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in his heart he layeth wait for him.
9.9 ט  הַעַל-אֵלֶּה לֹא-אֶפְקָד-בָּם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; אִם בְּגוֹי אֲשֶׁר-כָּזֶה, לֹא תִתְנַקֵּם נַפְשִׁי.  {ס}	9 Shall I not punish them for these things? saith the LORD; shall not My soul be avenged on such a nation as this? {S}
9.10 י  עַל-הֶהָרִים אֶשָּׂא בְכִי וָנֶהִי, וְעַל-נְאוֹת מִדְבָּר קִינָה--כִּי נִצְּתוּ מִבְּלִי-אִישׁ עֹבֵר, וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ קוֹל מִקְנֶה; מֵעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה, נָדְדוּ הָלָכוּ.	10 For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the pastures of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none passeth through. And they hear not the voice of the cattle; both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled, and gone.
9.11 יא  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם לְגַלִּים, מְעוֹן תַּנִּים; וְאֶת-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה אֶתֵּן שְׁמָמָה, מִבְּלִי יוֹשֵׁב.  {ס}	11 And I will make Jerusalem heaps, a lair of jackals; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without an inhabitant. {S}
9.12 יב  מִי-הָאִישׁ הֶחָכָם וְיָבֵן אֶת-זֹאת, וַאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר פִּי-יְהוָה אֵלָיו וְיַגִּדָהּ; עַל-מָה אָבְדָה הָאָרֶץ, נִצְּתָה כַמִּדְבָּר מִבְּלִי עֹבֵר.  {ס}	12 Who is the wise man, that he may understand this? And who is he to whom the mouth of the LORD hath spoken, that he may declare it? Wherefore is the land perished and laid waste like a wilderness, so that none passeth through? {S}
9.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה--עַל-עָזְבָם אֶת-תּוֹרָתִי, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לִפְנֵיהֶם; וְלֹא-שָׁמְעוּ בְקוֹלִי, וְלֹא-הָלְכוּ בָהּ.	13 And the LORD saith: Because they have forsaken My law which I set before them, and have not hearkened to My voice, neither walked therein;
9.14 יד  וַיֵּלְכוּ, אַחֲרֵי שְׁרִרוּת לִבָּם--וְאַחֲרֵי, הַבְּעָלִים, אֲשֶׁר לִמְּדוּם, אֲבוֹתָם.  {פ}	14 But have walked after the stubbornness of their own heart, and after the Baalim, which their fathers taught them. {P}
9.15 טו  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מַאֲכִילָם אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, לַעֲנָה; וְהִשְׁקִיתִים, מֵי-רֹאשׁ.	15 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.
9.16 טז  וַהֲפִצוֹתִים, בַּגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא יָדְעוּ, הֵמָּה וַאֲבוֹתָם; וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי אַחֲרֵיהֶם אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, עַד כַּלּוֹתִי אוֹתָם.  {פ}	16 I will scatter them also among the nations, whom neither they nor their fathers have known; and I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them. {P}
9.17 יז  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הִתְבּוֹנְנוּ וְקִרְאוּ לַמְקוֹנְנוֹת וּתְבוֹאֶינָה; וְאֶל-הַחֲכָמוֹת שִׁלְחוּ, וְתָבוֹאנָה.	17 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for the wise women, that they may come;
9.18 יח  וּתְמַהֵרְנָה, וְתִשֶּׂנָה עָלֵינוּ נֶהִי; וְתֵרַדְנָה עֵינֵינוּ דִּמְעָה, וְעַפְעַפֵּינוּ יִזְּלוּ-מָיִם.	18 And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.
9.19 יט  כִּי קוֹל נְהִי נִשְׁמַע מִצִּיּוֹן, אֵיךְ שֻׁדָּדְנוּ; בֹּשְׁנוּ מְאֹד כִּי-עָזַבְנוּ אָרֶץ, כִּי הִשְׁלִיכוּ מִשְׁכְּנוֹתֵינוּ.  {ס}	19 For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion: 'How are we undone! We are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast us out.' {S}
9.20 כ   כִּי-שְׁמַעְנָה נָשִׁים דְּבַר-יְהוָה, וְתִקַּח אָזְנְכֶם דְּבַר-פִּיו; וְלַמֵּדְנָה בְנוֹתֵיכֶם נֶהִי, וְאִשָּׁה רְעוּתָהּ קִינָה.	20 Yea, hear the word of the LORD, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of His mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbour lamentation:
9.21 כא  כִּי-עָלָה מָוֶת בְּחַלּוֹנֵינוּ, בָּא בְּאַרְמְנוֹתֵינוּ--לְהַכְרִית עוֹלָל מִחוּץ, בַּחוּרִים מֵרְחֹבוֹת.	21 'For death is come up into our windows, it is entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from the street, and the young men from the broad places.--
9.22 כב  דַּבֵּר, כֹּה נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְנָפְלָה נִבְלַת הָאָדָם, כְּדֹמֶן עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה; וּכְעָמִיר מֵאַחֲרֵי הַקֹּצֵר, וְאֵין מְאַסֵּף.  {ס}	22 Speak: Thus saith the LORD--And the carcasses of men fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, which none gathereth.' {S}
9.23 כג  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אַל-יִתְהַלֵּל חָכָם בְּחָכְמָתוֹ, וְאַל-יִתְהַלֵּל הַגִּבּוֹר, בִּגְבוּרָתוֹ; אַל-יִתְהַלֵּל עָשִׁיר, בְּעָשְׁרוֹ.	23 Thus saith the LORD: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches;
9.24 כד  כִּי אִם-בְּזֹאת יִתְהַלֵּל הַמִּתְהַלֵּל, הַשְׂכֵּל וְיָדֹעַ אוֹתִי--כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, עֹשֶׂה חֶסֶד מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה בָּאָרֶץ:  כִּי-בְאֵלֶּה חָפַצְתִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	24 But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth, and knoweth Me, that I am the LORD who exercise mercy, justice, and righteousness, in the earth; for in these things I delight, saith the LORD. {S}
9.25 כה  הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וּפָקַדְתִּי, עַל-כָּל-מוּל בְּעָרְלָה.	25 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will punish all them that are circumcised in their uncircumcision:
9.26 כו  עַל-מִצְרַיִם וְעַל-יְהוּדָה, וְעַל-אֱדוֹם וְעַל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן וְעַל-מוֹאָב, וְעַל כָּל-קְצוּצֵי פֵאָה, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בַּמִּדְבָּר--כִּי כָל-הַגּוֹיִם עֲרֵלִים, וְכָל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל עַרְלֵי-לֵב.  {פ}	26 Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that have the corners of their hair polled, that dwell in the wilderness; for all the nations are uncircumcised, but all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart. {P}
10.1 א  שִׁמְעוּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם--בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.	1 Hear ye the word which the LORD speaketh unto you, O house of Israel;
10.2 ב  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אֶל-דֶּרֶךְ הַגּוֹיִם אַל-תִּלְמָדוּ, וּמֵאֹתוֹת הַשָּׁמַיִם, אַל-תֵּחָתּוּ:  כִּי-יֵחַתּוּ הַגּוֹיִם, מֵהֵמָּה.	2 thus saith the LORD: Learn not the way of the nations, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the nations are dismayed at them.
10.3 ג  כִּי-חֻקּוֹת הָעַמִּים, הֶבֶל הוּא:  כִּי-עֵץ מִיַּעַר כְּרָתוֹ, מַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵי-חָרָשׁ בַּמַּעֲצָד.	3 For the customs of the peoples are vanity; for it is but a tree which one cutteth out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman with the axe.
10.4 ד  בְּכֶסֶף וּבְזָהָב, יְיַפֵּהוּ; בְּמַסְמְרוֹת וּבְמַקָּבוֹת יְחַזְּקוּם, וְלוֹא יָפִיק.	4 They deck it with silver and with gold, they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not.
10.5 ה  כְּתֹמֶר מִקְשָׁה הֵמָּה וְלֹא יְדַבֵּרוּ, נָשׂוֹא יִנָּשׂוּא כִּי לֹא יִצְעָדוּ; אַל-תִּירְאוּ מֵהֶם כִּי-לֹא יָרֵעוּ, וְגַם-הֵיטֵיב אֵין אוֹתָם.  {פ}	5 They are like a pillar in a garden of cucumbers, and speak not; they must needs be borne, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, neither is it in them to do good. {P}
10.6 ו  מֵאֵין כָּמוֹךָ, יְהוָה:  גָּדוֹל אַתָּה וְגָדוֹל שִׁמְךָ, בִּגְבוּרָה.	6 There is none like unto Thee, O LORD; Thou art great, and Thy name is great in might.
10.7 ז  מִי לֹא יִרָאֲךָ מֶלֶךְ הַגּוֹיִם, כִּי לְךָ יָאָתָה:  כִּי בְכָל-חַכְמֵי הַגּוֹיִם וּבְכָל-מַלְכוּתָם, מֵאֵין כָּמוֹךָ.	7 Who would not fear Thee, O king of the nations? For it befitteth Thee; forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their royalty, there is none like unto Thee.
10.8 ח  וּבְאַחַת, יִבְעֲרוּ וְיִכְסָלוּ; מוּסַר הֲבָלִים, עֵץ הוּא.	8 But they are altogether brutish and foolish: the vanities by which they are instructed are but a stock;
10.9 ט  כֶּסֶף מְרֻקָּע מִתַּרְשִׁישׁ יוּבָא, וְזָהָב מֵאוּפָז--מַעֲשֵׂה חָרָשׁ, וִידֵי צוֹרֵף; תְּכֵלֶת וְאַרְגָּמָן לְבוּשָׁם, מַעֲשֵׂה חֲכָמִים כֻּלָּם.	9 Silver beaten into plates which is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the craftsman and of the hands of the goldsmith; blue and purple is their clothing; they are all the work of skilful men.
10.10 י  וַיהוָה אֱלֹהִים אֱמֶת, הוּא-אֱלֹהִים חַיִּים וּמֶלֶךְ עוֹלָם; מִקִּצְפּוֹ תִּרְעַשׁ הָאָרֶץ, וְלֹא-יָכִלוּ גוֹיִם זַעְמוֹ.  {פ}	10 But the LORD God is the true God, He is the living God, and the everlasting King; at His wrath the earth trembleth, and the nations are not able to abide His indignation. {P}
10.11 יא  כִּדְנָה, תֵּאמְרוּן לְהוֹם, אֱלָהַיָּא, דִּי-שְׁמַיָּא וְאַרְקָא לָא עֲבַדוּ; יֵאבַדוּ מֵאַרְעָא וּמִן-תְּחוֹת שְׁמַיָּא, אֵלֶּה.  {ס}	11 Thus shall ye say unto them: 'The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, these shall perish from the earth, and from under the heavens.' {S}
10.12 יב  עֹשֵׂה אֶרֶץ בְּכֹחוֹ, מֵכִין תֵּבֵל בְּחָכְמָתוֹ; וּבִתְבוּנָתוֹ, נָטָה שָׁמָיִם.	12 He that hath made the earth by His power, that hath established the world by His wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by His understanding;
10.13 יג  לְקוֹל תִּתּוֹ הֲמוֹן מַיִם, בַּשָּׁמַיִם, וַיַּעֲלֶה נְשִׂאִים, מִקְצֵה ארץ (הָאָרֶץ); בְּרָקִים לַמָּטָר עָשָׂה, וַיּוֹצֵא רוּחַ מֵאֹצְרֹתָיו.	13 At the sound of His giving a multitude of waters in the heavens, when He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; when He maketh lightnings with the rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of His treasuries;
10.14 יד  נִבְעַר כָּל-אָדָם מִדַּעַת, הֹבִישׁ כָּל-צוֹרֵף מִפָּסֶל:  כִּי שֶׁקֶר נִסְכּוֹ, וְלֹא-רוּחַ בָּם.	14 Every man is proved to be brutish, without knowledge, every goldsmith is put to shame by the graven image, his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.
10.15 טו  הֶבֶל הֵמָּה, מַעֲשֵׂה תַּעְתֻּעִים; בְּעֵת פְּקֻדָּתָם, יֹאבֵדוּ.	15 They are vanity, a work of delusion; in the time of their visitation they shall perish.
10.16 טז  לֹא-כְאֵלֶּה חֵלֶק יַעֲקֹב, כִּי-יוֹצֵר הַכֹּל הוּא, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, שֵׁבֶט נַחֲלָתוֹ:  יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ.  {ס}	16 Not like these is the portion of Jacob; for He is the former of all things, and Israel is the tribe of His inheritance; the LORD of hosts is His name. {S}
10.17 יז  אִסְפִּי מֵאֶרֶץ, כִּנְעָתֵךְ--ישבתי (יֹשֶׁבֶת), בַּמָּצוֹר.  {ס}	17 Gather up thy wares from the ground, O thou that abidest in the siege. {S}
10.18 יח  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי קוֹלֵעַ אֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ בַּפַּעַם הַזֹּאת; וַהֲצֵרֹתִי לָהֶם, לְמַעַן יִמְצָאוּ.  {ס}	18 For thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this time, and will distress them, that they may feel it. {S}
10.19 יט  אוֹי לִי עַל-שִׁבְרִי, נַחְלָה מַכָּתִי; וַאֲנִי אָמַרְתִּי, אַךְ זֶה חֳלִי וְאֶשָּׂאֶנּוּ.	19 Woe is me for my hurt! My wound is grievous; but I said: 'This is but a sickness, and I must bear it.'
10.20 כ  אָהֳלִי שֻׁדָּד, וְכָל-מֵיתָרַי נִתָּקוּ; בָּנַי יְצָאֻנִי, וְאֵינָם--אֵין-נֹטֶה עוֹד אָהֳלִי, וּמֵקִים יְרִיעוֹתָי.	20 My tent is spoiled, and all my cords are broken; my children are gone forth of me, and they are not; there is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.
10.21 כא  כִּי נִבְעֲרוּ הָרֹעִים, וְאֶת-יְהוָה לֹא דָרָשׁוּ; עַל-כֵּן לֹא הִשְׂכִּילוּ, וְכָל-מַרְעִיתָם נָפוֹצָה.  {פ}	21 For the shepherds are become brutish, and have not inquired of the LORD; therefore they have not prospered, and all their flocks are scattered. {P}
10.22 כב  קוֹל שְׁמוּעָה הִנֵּה בָאָה, וְרַעַשׁ גָּדוֹל מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן:  לָשׂוּם אֶת-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, שְׁמָמָה--מְעוֹן תַּנִּים.  {ס}	22 Hark! a report, behold, it cometh, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, a dwelling-place of jackals. {S}
10.23 כג  יָדַעְתִּי יְהוָה, כִּי לֹא לָאָדָם דַּרְכּוֹ; לֹא-לְאִישׁ הֹלֵךְ, וְהָכִין אֶת-צַעֲדוֹ.	23 O LORD, I know that man's way is not his own; it is not in man to direct his steps as he walketh.
10.24 כד  יַסְּרֵנִי יְהוָה, אַךְ-בְּמִשְׁפָּט:  אַל-בְּאַפְּךָ, פֶּן-תַּמְעִטֵנִי.	24 O LORD, correct me, but in measure; not in Thine anger, lest Thou diminish me.
10.25 כה  שְׁפֹךְ חֲמָתְךָ, עַל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְדָעוּךָ, וְעַל מִשְׁפָּחוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בְּשִׁמְךָ לֹא קָרָאוּ:  כִּי-אָכְלוּ אֶת-יַעֲקֹב, וַאֲכָלֻהוּ וַיְכַלֻּהוּ, וְאֶת-נָוֵהוּ, הֵשַׁמּוּ.  {פ}	25 Pour out Thy wrath upon the nations that know Thee not, and upon the families that call not on Thy name; for they have devoured Jacob, yea, they have devoured him and consumed him, and have laid waste his habitation. {P}
11.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
11.2 ב  שִׁמְעוּ, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית הַזֹּאת; וְדִבַּרְתֶּם אֶל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וְעַל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	2 'Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
11.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אָרוּר הָאִישׁ--אֲשֶׁר לֹא יִשְׁמַע, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית הַזֹּאת.	3 and say thou unto them: Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Cursed be the man that heareth not the words of this covenant,
11.4 ד  אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם בְּיוֹם הוֹצִיאִי-אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם מִכּוּר הַבַּרְזֶל לֵאמֹר, שִׁמְעוּ בְקוֹלִי וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אוֹתָם, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-אֲצַוֶּה, אֶתְכֶם; וִהְיִיתֶם לִי, לְעָם, וְאָנֹכִי, אֶהְיֶה לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים.	4 which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, saying: Hearken to My voice, and do them, according to all which I command you; so shall ye be My people, and I will be your God;
11.5 ה  לְמַעַן הָקִים אֶת-הַשְּׁבוּעָה אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי לַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, לָתֵת לָהֶם אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבַשׁ--כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וָאַעַן וָאֹמַר, אָמֵן יְהוָה.  {פ}	5 that I may establish the oath which I swore unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this day.' Then answered I, and said: 'Amen, O LORD.' {P}
11.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלַי, קְרָא אֶת-כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וּבְחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר:  שִׁמְעוּ, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית הַזֹּאת, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם, אוֹתָם.	6 And the LORD said unto me: 'Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying: Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them.
11.7 ז  כִּי הָעֵד הַעִדֹתִי בַּאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּיוֹם הַעֲלוֹתִי אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם וְעַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, הַשְׁכֵּם וְהָעֵד, לֵאמֹר:  שִׁמְעוּ, בְּקוֹלִי.	7 For I earnestly forewarned your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, forewarning betimes and often, saying: Hearken to My voice.
11.8 ח  וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, וְלֹא-הִטּוּ אֶת-אָזְנָם, וַיֵּלְכוּ, אִישׁ בִּשְׁרִירוּת לִבָּם הָרָע; וָאָבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית-הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתִי לַעֲשׂוֹת--וְלֹא עָשׂוּ.  {ס}	8 Yet they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one in the stubbornness of their evil heart; therefore I brought upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do, but they did them not.' {S}
11.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלָי:  נִמְצָא-קֶשֶׁר בְּאִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וּבְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	9 And the LORD said unto me: 'A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
11.10 י  שָׁבוּ עַל-עֲוֺנֹת אֲבוֹתָם הָרִאשֹׁנִים, אֲשֶׁר מֵאֲנוּ לִשְׁמוֹעַ אֶת-דְּבָרַי, וְהֵמָּה הָלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, לְעָבְדָם; הֵפֵרוּ בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבֵית יְהוּדָה, אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, אֲשֶׁר כָּרַתִּי אֶת-אֲבוֹתָם.  {ס}	10 They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, who refused to hear My words; and they are gone after other gods to serve them; the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken My covenant which I made with their fathers. {S}
11.11 יא  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא אֲלֵיהֶם רָעָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יוּכְלוּ לָצֵאת מִמֶּנָּה; וְזָעֲקוּ אֵלַי, וְלֹא אֶשְׁמַע אֲלֵיהֶם.	11 Therefore thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto Me, I will not hearken unto them.
11.12 יב  וְהָלְכוּ עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְזָעֲקוּ אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר הֵם מְקַטְּרִים לָהֶם; וְהוֹשֵׁעַ לֹא-יוֹשִׁיעוּ לָהֶם, בְּעֵת רָעָתָם.	12 Then shall the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem go and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer; but they shall not save them at all in the time of their trouble.
11.13 יג  כִּי מִסְפַּר עָרֶיךָ, הָיוּ אֱלֹהֶיךָ יְהוּדָה; וּמִסְפַּר חֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, שַׂמְתֶּם מִזְבְּחוֹת לַבֹּשֶׁת--מִזְבְּחוֹת, לְקַטֵּר לַבָּעַל.  {ס}	13 For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah; and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to the shameful thing, even altars to offer unto Baal. {S}
11.14 יד  וְאַתָּה, אַל-תִּתְפַּלֵּל בְּעַד-הָעָם הַזֶּה, וְאַל-תִּשָּׂא בַעֲדָם, רִנָּה וּתְפִלָּה:  כִּי אֵינֶנִּי שֹׁמֵעַ, בְּעֵת קָרְאָם אֵלַי--בְּעַד רָעָתָם.  {ס}	14 Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them; for I will not hear them in the time that they cry unto Me for their trouble.' {S}
11.15 טו  מֶה לִידִידִי בְּבֵיתִי, עֲשׂוֹתָהּ הַמְזִמָּתָה הָרַבִּים, וּבְשַׂר-קֹדֶשׁ, יַעַבְרוּ מֵעָלָיִךְ:  כִּי רָעָתֵכִי, אָז תַּעֲלֹזִי.	15 What hath My beloved to do in My house, seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the hallowed flesh is passed from thee? When thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.
11.16 טז  זַיִת רַעֲנָן יְפֵה פְרִי-תֹאַר, קָרָא יְהוָה שְׁמֵךְ--לְקוֹל הֲמוּלָּה גְדֹלָה, הִצִּית אֵשׁ עָלֶיהָ, וְרָעוּ, דָּלִיּוֹתָיו.	16 The LORD called thy name a leafy olive-tree, fair with goodly fruit; with the noise of a great tumult He hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken.
11.17 יז  וַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת הַנּוֹטֵעַ אוֹתָךְ, דִּבֶּר עָלַיִךְ רָעָה:  בִּגְלַל רָעַת בֵּית-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבֵית יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לָהֶם לְהַכְעִסֵנִי--לְקַטֵּר לַבָּעַל.  {פ}	17 For the LORD of hosts, that planted thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, because of the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have wrought for themselves in provoking Me by offering unto Baal. {P}
11.18 יח  וַיהוָה הוֹדִיעַנִי, וָאֵדָעָה; אָז, הִרְאִיתַנִי מַעַלְלֵיהֶם.	18 And the LORD gave me knowledge of it, and I knew it; then Thou showedst me their doings.
11.19 יט  וַאֲנִי, כְּכֶבֶשׂ אַלּוּף יוּבַל לִטְבוֹחַ; וְלֹא-יָדַעְתִּי כִּי-עָלַי חָשְׁבוּ מַחֲשָׁבוֹת, נַשְׁחִיתָה עֵץ בְּלַחְמוֹ וְנִכְרְתֶנּוּ מֵאֶרֶץ חַיִּים--וּשְׁמוֹ, לֹא-יִזָּכֵר עוֹד.	19 But I was like a docile lamb that is led to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me: 'Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.'
11.20 כ  וַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת שֹׁפֵט צֶדֶק, בֹּחֵן כְּלָיוֹת וָלֵב; אֶרְאֶה נִקְמָתְךָ מֵהֶם, כִּי אֵלֶיךָ גִּלִּיתִי אֶת-רִיבִי.  {ס}	20 But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see Thy vengeance on them; for unto Thee have I revealed my cause. {S}
11.21 כא  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה עַל-אַנְשֵׁי עֲנָתוֹת, הַמְבַקְשִׁים אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ, לֵאמֹר:  לֹא תִנָּבֵא בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה, וְלֹא תָמוּת בְּיָדֵנוּ.  {פ}	21 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying: 'Thou shalt not prophesy in the name of the LORD, that thou die not by our hand'; {P}
11.22 כב  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הִנְנִי פֹקֵד, עֲלֵיהֶם:  הַבַּחוּרִים, יָמֻתוּ בַחֶרֶב, בְּנֵיהֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיהֶם, יָמֻתוּ בָּרָעָב.	22 therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts: Behold, I will punish them; the young men shall die by the sword, their sons and their daughters shall die by famine;
11.23 כג  וּשְׁאֵרִית, לֹא תִהְיֶה לָהֶם:  כִּי-אָבִיא רָעָה אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי עֲנָתוֹת, שְׁנַת פְּקֻדָּתָם.  {ס}	23 And there shall be no remnant unto them; for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation. {S}
12.1 א  צַדִּיק אַתָּה יְהוָה, כִּי אָרִיב אֵלֶיךָ; אַךְ מִשְׁפָּטִים, אֲדַבֵּר אֹתָךְ, מַדּוּעַ דֶּרֶךְ רְשָׁעִים צָלֵחָה, שָׁלוּ כָּל-בֹּגְדֵי בָגֶד.	1 Right wouldest Thou be, O LORD, were I to contend with Thee, yet will I reason with Thee: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they secure that deal very treacherously?
12.2 ב  נְטַעְתָּם, גַּם-שֹׁרָשׁוּ--יֵלְכוּ, גַּם-עָשׂוּ פֶרִי; קָרוֹב אַתָּה בְּפִיהֶם, וְרָחוֹק מִכִּלְיוֹתֵיהֶם.	2 Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root; they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit; Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.
12.3 ג  וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, יְדַעְתָּנִי--תִּרְאֵנִי, וּבָחַנְתָּ לִבִּי אִתָּךְ; הַתִּקֵם כְּצֹאן לְטִבְחָה, וְהַקְדִּשֵׁם לְיוֹם הֲרֵגָה.  {פ}	3 But Thou, O LORD, knowest me, Thou seest me, and triest my heart toward Thee; pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter. {P}
12.4 ד  עַד-מָתַי תֶּאֱבַל הָאָרֶץ, וְעֵשֶׂב כָּל-הַשָּׂדֶה יִיבָשׁ; מֵרָעַת יֹשְׁבֵי-בָהּ, סָפְתָה בְהֵמוֹת וָעוֹף--כִּי אָמְרוּ, לֹא יִרְאֶה אֶת-אַחֲרִיתֵנוּ.	4 How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of the whole field wither? For the wickedness of them that dwell therein, the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said: 'He seeth not our end.'
12.5 ה  כִּי אֶת-רַגְלִים רַצְתָּה וַיַּלְאוּךָ, וְאֵיךְ תְּתַחֲרֶה אֶת-הַסּוּסִים; וּבְאֶרֶץ שָׁלוֹם אַתָּה בוֹטֵחַ, וְאֵיךְ תַּעֲשֶׂה בִּגְאוֹן הַיַּרְדֵּן.	5 'If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? And though in a land of peace thou art secure, yet how wilt thou do in the thickets of the Jordan?
12.6 ו  כִּי גַם-אַחֶיךָ וּבֵית-אָבִיךָ, גַּם-הֵמָּה בָּגְדוּ בָךְ--גַּם-הֵמָּה קָרְאוּ אַחֲרֶיךָ, מָלֵא; אַל-תַּאֲמֵן בָּם, כִּי-יְדַבְּרוּ אֵלֶיךָ טוֹבוֹת.  {ס}	6 For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee, even they have cried aloud after thee; believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee.' {S}
12.7 ז  עָזַבְתִּי, אֶת-בֵּיתִי--נָטַשְׁתִּי, אֶת-נַחֲלָתִי; נָתַתִּי אֶת-יְדִדוּת נַפְשִׁי, בְּכַף אֹיְבֶיהָ.	7 I have forsaken My house, I have cast off My heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of My soul into the hand of her enemies.
12.8 ח  הָיְתָה-לִּי נַחֲלָתִי, כְּאַרְיֵה בַיָּעַר; נָתְנָה עָלַי בְּקוֹלָהּ, עַל-כֵּן שְׂנֵאתִיהָ.	8 My heritage is become unto Me as a lion in the forest; she hath uttered her voice against Me; therefore have I hated her.
12.9 ט  הַעַיִט צָבוּעַ נַחֲלָתִי לִי, הַעַיִט סָבִיב עָלֶיהָ; לְכוּ, אִסְפוּ כָּל-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה--הֵתָיוּ לְאָכְלָה.	9 Is My heritage unto Me as a speckled bird of prey? Are the birds of prey against her round about? Come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, bring them to devour.
12.10 י  רֹעִים רַבִּים שִׁחֲתוּ כַרְמִי, בֹּסְסוּ אֶת-חֶלְקָתִי; נָתְנוּ אֶת-חֶלְקַת חֶמְדָּתִי, לְמִדְבַּר שְׁמָמָה.	10 Many shepherds have destroyed My vineyard, they have trodden My portion under foot, they have made My pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.
12.11 יא  שָׂמָהּ, לִשְׁמָמָה--אָבְלָה עָלַי, שְׁמֵמָה; נָשַׁמָּה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, כִּי אֵין אִישׁ, שָׂם עַל-לֵב.	11 They have made it a desolation, it mourneth unto Me, being desolate; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart.
12.12 יב  עַל-כָּל-שְׁפָיִם בַּמִּדְבָּר, בָּאוּ שֹׁדְדִים, כִּי חֶרֶב לַיהוָה אֹכְלָה, מִקְצֵה-אֶרֶץ וְעַד-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ:  אֵין שָׁלוֹם, לְכָל-בָּשָׂר.  {ס}	12 Upon all the high hills in the wilderness spoilers are come; for the sword of the LORD devoureth from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land, no flesh hath peace. {S}
12.13 יג  זָרְעוּ חִטִּים וְקֹצִים קָצָרוּ, נֶחְלוּ לֹא יוֹעִלוּ; וּבֹשׁוּ, מִתְּבוּאֹתֵיכֶם, מֵחֲרוֹן, אַף-יְהוָה.  {פ}	13 They have sown wheat, and have reaped thorns; they have put themselves to pain, they profit not; be ye then ashamed of your increase, because of the fierce anger of the LORD. {P}
12.14 יד  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, עַל-כָּל-שְׁכֵנַי הָרָעִים, הַנֹּגְעִים בַּנַּחֲלָה, אֲשֶׁר-הִנְחַלְתִּי אֶת-עַמִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הִנְנִי נֹתְשָׁם מֵעַל אַדְמָתָם, וְאֶת-בֵּית יְהוּדָה אֶתּוֹשׁ מִתּוֹכָם.	14 Thus saith the LORD: As for all Mine evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused My people Israel to inherit, behold, I will pluck them up from off their land, and will pluck up the house of Judah from among them.
12.15 טו  וְהָיָה, אַחֲרֵי נָתְשִׁי אוֹתָם, אָשׁוּב, וְרִחַמְתִּים; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִים אִישׁ לְנַחֲלָתוֹ, וְאִישׁ לְאַרְצוֹ.	15 And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them up, I will again have compassion on them; and I will bring them back, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land.
12.16 טז  וְהָיָה אִם-לָמֹד יִלְמְדוּ אֶת-דַּרְכֵי עַמִּי לְהִשָּׁבֵעַ בִּשְׁמִי, חַי-יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר לִמְּדוּ אֶת-עַמִּי, לְהִשָּׁבֵעַ בַּבָּעַל--וְנִבְנוּ, בְּתוֹךְ עַמִּי.	16 And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of My people to swear by My name: 'As the LORD liveth,' even as they taught My people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built up in the midst of My people.
12.17 יז  וְאִם, לֹא יִשְׁמָעוּ:  וְנָתַשְׁתִּי אֶת-הַגּוֹי הַהוּא, נָתוֹשׁ וְאַבֵּד--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	17 But if they will not hearken, then will I pluck up that nation, plucking up and destroying it, saith the LORD. {S}
13.1 א  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֵלַי, הָלוֹךְ וְקָנִיתָ לְּךָ אֵזוֹר פִּשְׁתִּים, וְשַׂמְתּוֹ, עַל-מָתְנֶיךָ; וּבַמַּיִם, לֹא תְבִאֵהוּ.	1 Thus said the LORD unto me: 'Go, and get thee a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water.'
13.2 ב  וָאֶקְנֶה אֶת-הָאֵזוֹר, כִּדְבַר יְהוָה; וָאָשִׂם, עַל-מָתְנָי.  {פ}	2 So I got a girdle according to the word of the LORD, and put it upon my loins. {P}
13.3 ג  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֵלַי, שֵׁנִית לֵאמֹר.	3 And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying:
13.4 ד  קַח אֶת-הָאֵזוֹר אֲשֶׁר קָנִיתָ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-מָתְנֶיךָ; וְקוּם לֵךְ פְּרָתָה, וְטָמְנֵהוּ שָׁם בִּנְקִיק הַסָּלַע.	4 'Take the girdle that thou hast gotten, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to Perath, and hide it there in a cleft of the rock.'
13.5 ה  וָאֵלֵךְ, וָאֶטְמְנֵהוּ בִּפְרָת, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אוֹתִי.	5 So I went, and hid it in Perath, as the LORD commanded me.
13.6 ו  וַיְהִי, מִקֵּץ יָמִים רַבִּים; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, קוּם לֵךְ פְּרָתָה, וְקַח מִשָּׁם אֶת-הָאֵזוֹר, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִיךָ לְטָמְנוֹ-שָׁם.	6 And it came to pass after many days, that the LORD said unto me: 'Arise, go to Perath, and take the girdle from thence, which I commanded thee to hide there.'
13.7 ז  וָאֵלֵךְ פְּרָתָה--וָאֶחְפֹּר וָאֶקַּח אֶת-הָאֵזוֹר, מִן-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-טְמַנְתִּיו שָׁמָּה; וְהִנֵּה נִשְׁחַת הָאֵזוֹר, לֹא יִצְלַח לַכֹּל.  {פ}	7 Then I went to Perath, and digged, and took the girdle from the place where I had hid it; and, behold, the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing. {P}
13.8 ח  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.	8 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
13.9 ט  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה:  כָּכָה אַשְׁחִית אֶת-גְּאוֹן יְהוּדָה, וְאֶת-גְּאוֹן יְרוּשָׁלִַם--הָרָב.	9 Thus saith the LORD: After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem,
13.10 י  הָעָם הַזֶּה הָרָע הַמֵּאֲנִים לִשְׁמוֹעַ אֶת-דְּבָרַי, הַהֹלְכִים בִּשְׁרִרוּת לִבָּם, וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, לְעָבְדָם וּלְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת לָהֶם; וִיהִי כָּאֵזוֹר הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִצְלַח לַכֹּל.  {ס}	10 even this evil people, that refuse to hear My words, that walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and are gone after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, that it be as this girdle, which is profitable for nothing. {S}
13.11 יא  כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר יִדְבַּק הָאֵזוֹר אֶל-מָתְנֵי-אִישׁ, כֵּן הִדְבַּקְתִּי אֵלַי אֶת-כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאֶת-כָּל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לִהְיוֹת לִי לְעָם, וּלְשֵׁם וְלִתְהִלָּה וּלְתִפְאָרֶת; וְלֹא, שָׁמֵעוּ.	11 For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto Me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the LORD, that they might be unto Me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory; but they would not hearken.
13.12 יב  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה,  {ס}  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כָּל-נֵבֶל, יִמָּלֵא יָיִן; וְאָמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ--הֲיָדֹעַ לֹא נֵדַע, כִּי כָל-נֵבֶל יִמָּלֵא יָיִן.	12 Moreover thou shalt speak unto them this word: {S} Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: 'Every bottle is filled with wine'; and when they shall say unto thee: 'Do we not know that every bottle is filled with wine?'
13.13 יג  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מְמַלֵּא אֶת-כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת וְאֶת-הַמְּלָכִים הַיֹּשְׁבִים לְדָוִד עַל-כִּסְאוֹ וְאֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְאֶת-הַנְּבִאִים וְאֵת כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם--שִׁכָּרוֹן.	13 Then shalt thou say unto them: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.
13.14 יד  וְנִפַּצְתִּים אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו וְהָאָבוֹת וְהַבָּנִים, יַחְדָּו--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; לֹא-אֶחְמוֹל וְלֹא-אָחוּס וְלֹא אֲרַחֵם, מֵהַשְׁחִיתָם.	14 And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the LORD; I will not pity, nor spare, nor have compassion, that I should not destroy them.
13.15 טו  שִׁמְעוּ וְהַאֲזִינוּ, אַל-תִּגְבָּהוּ:  כִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֵּר.	15 Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud; for the LORD hath spoken.
13.16 טז  תְּנוּ לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם כָּבוֹד בְּטֶרֶם יַחְשִׁךְ, וּבְטֶרֶם יִתְנַגְּפוּ רַגְלֵיכֶם עַל-הָרֵי נָשֶׁף; וְקִוִּיתֶם לְאוֹר וְשָׂמָהּ לְצַלְמָוֶת, ישית (וְשִׁית) לַעֲרָפֶל.	16 Give glory to the LORD your God, before it grow dark, and before your feet stumble upon the mountains of twilight, and, while ye look for light, He turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.
13.17 יז  וְאִם לֹא תִשְׁמָעוּהָ, בְּמִסְתָּרִים תִּבְכֶּה-נַפְשִׁי מִפְּנֵי גֵוָה; וְדָמֹעַ תִּדְמַע וְתֵרַד עֵינִי, דִּמְעָה, כִּי נִשְׁבָּה, עֵדֶר יְהוָה.  {ס}	17 But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride; and mine eyes shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the LORD'S flock is carried away captive. {S}
13.18 יח  אֱמֹר לַמֶּלֶךְ וְלַגְּבִירָה, הַשְׁפִּילוּ שֵׁבוּ:  כִּי יָרַד מַרְאֲשׁוֹתֵיכֶם, עֲטֶרֶת תִּפְאַרְתְּכֶם.	18 Say thou unto the king and to the queen-mother: 'Sit ye down low; for your headtires are come down, even your beautiful crown.'
13.19 יט  עָרֵי הַנֶּגֶב סֻגְּרוּ, וְאֵין פֹּתֵחַ; הָגְלָת יְהוּדָה כֻּלָּהּ, הָגְלָת שְׁלוֹמִים.  {ס}	19 The cities of the South are shut up, and there is none to open them; Judah is carried away captive all of it; it is wholly carried away captive. {S}
13.20 כ  שאי (שְׂאוּ) עֵינֵיכֶם וראי (וּרְאוּ), הַבָּאִים מִצָּפוֹן; אַיֵּה, הָעֵדֶר נִתַּן-לָךְ--צֹאן, תִּפְאַרְתֵּךְ.	20 Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north; where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?
13.21 כא  מַה-תֹּאמְרִי, כִּי-יִפְקֹד עָלַיִךְ, וְאַתְּ לִמַּדְתְּ אֹתָם עָלַיִךְ אַלֻּפִים, לְרֹאשׁ; הֲלוֹא חֲבָלִים יֹאחֱזוּךְ, כְּמוֹ אֵשֶׁת לֵדָה.	21 What wilt thou say, when He shall set the friends over thee as head, whom thou thyself hast trained against thee? Shall not pangs take hold of thee, as of a woman in travail?
13.22 כב  וְכִי תֹאמְרִי בִּלְבָבֵךְ, מַדּוּעַ קְרָאֻנִי אֵלֶּה; בְּרֹב עֲוֺנֵךְ נִגְלוּ שׁוּלַיִךְ, נֶחְמְסוּ עֲקֵבָיִךְ.	22 And if thou say in thy heart: 'Wherefore are these things befallen me?'--for the greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts uncovered, and thy heels suffer violence.
13.23 כג  הֲיַהֲפֹךְ כּוּשִׁי עוֹרוֹ, וְנָמֵר חֲבַרְבֻּרֹתָיו; גַּם-אַתֶּם תּוּכְלוּ לְהֵיטִיב, לִמֻּדֵי הָרֵעַ.	23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
13.24 כד  וַאֲפִיצֵם, כְּקַשׁ-עוֹבֵר, לְרוּחַ, מִדְבָּר.	24 Therefore will I scatter them, as the stubble that passeth away by the wind of the wilderness.
13.25 כה  זֶה גוֹרָלֵךְ מְנָת-מִדַּיִךְ מֵאִתִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר שָׁכַחַתְּ אוֹתִי, וַתִּבְטְחִי בַּשָּׁקֶר.	25 This is thy lot, the portion measured unto thee from Me, saith the LORD; because thou hast forgotten Me, and trusted in falsehood.
13.26 כו  וְגַם-אֲנִי חָשַׂפְתִּי שׁוּלַיִךְ, עַל-פָּנָיִךְ; וְנִרְאָה, קְלוֹנֵךְ.	26 Therefore will I also uncover thy skirts upon thy face, and thy shame shall appear.
13.27 כז  נִאֻפַיִךְ וּמִצְהֲלוֹתַיִךְ, זִמַּת זְנוּתֵךְ, עַל-גְּבָעוֹת בַּשָּׂדֶה, רָאִיתִי שִׁקּוּצָיִךְ; אוֹי לָךְ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם--לֹא תִטְהֲרִי, אַחֲרֵי מָתַי עֹד.  {ס}	27 Thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy harlotry, on the hills in the field have I seen thy detestable acts. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! thou wilt not be made clean! When shall it ever be? {S}
14.1 א  אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, עַל-דִּבְרֵי הַבַּצָּרוֹת.	1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts.
14.2 ב  אָבְלָה יְהוּדָה, וּשְׁעָרֶיהָ אֻמְלְלוּ קָדְרוּ לָאָרֶץ; וְצִוְחַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, עָלָתָה.	2 Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish, they bow down in black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.
14.3 ג  וְאַדִּרֵיהֶם, שָׁלְחוּ צעוריהם (צְעִירֵיהֶם) לַמָּיִם; בָּאוּ עַל-גֵּבִים לֹא-מָצְאוּ מַיִם, שָׁבוּ כְלֵיהֶם רֵיקָם--בֹּשׁוּ וְהָכְלְמוּ, וְחָפוּ רֹאשָׁם.	3 And their nobles send their lads for water: they come to the pits, and find no water; their vessels return empty; they are ashamed and confounded, and cover their heads.
14.4 ד  בַּעֲבוּר הָאֲדָמָה חַתָּה, כִּי לֹא-הָיָה גֶשֶׁם בָּאָרֶץ; בֹּשׁוּ אִכָּרִים, חָפוּ רֹאשָׁם.	4 Because of the ground which is cracked, for there hath been no rain in the land, the plowmen are ashamed, they cover their heads.
14.5 ה  כִּי גַם-אַיֶּלֶת בַּשָּׂדֶה, יָלְדָה וְעָזוֹב:  כִּי לֹא-הָיָה, דֶּשֶׁא.	5 Yea, the hind also in the field calveth, and forsaketh her young, because there is no grass,
14.6 ו  וּפְרָאִים עָמְדוּ עַל-שְׁפָיִם, שָׁאֲפוּ רוּחַ כַּתַּנִּים; כָּלוּ עֵינֵיהֶם, כִּי-אֵין עֵשֶׂב.	6 And the wild asses stand on the high hills, they gasp for air like jackals; their eyes fail, because there is no herbage.
14.7 ז  אִם-עֲוֺנֵינוּ, עָנוּ בָנוּ--יְהוָה, עֲשֵׂה לְמַעַן שְׁמֶךָ:  כִּי-רַבּוּ מְשׁוּבֹתֵינוּ, לְךָ חָטָאנוּ.	7 Though our iniquities testify against us, O LORD, work Thou for Thy name's sake; for our backslidings are many, we have sinned against Thee.
14.8 ח  מִקְוֵה, יִשְׂרָאֵל, מוֹשִׁיעוֹ, בְּעֵת צָרָה--לָמָּה תִהְיֶה כְּגֵר בָּאָרֶץ, וּכְאֹרֵחַ נָטָה לָלוּן.	8 O Thou hope of Israel, the Saviour thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest Thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?
14.9 ט  לָמָּה תִהְיֶה כְּאִישׁ נִדְהָם, כְּגִבּוֹר לֹא-יוּכַל לְהוֹשִׁיעַ; וְאַתָּה בְקִרְבֵּנוּ יְהוָה, וְשִׁמְךָ עָלֵינוּ נִקְרָא--אַל-תַּנִּחֵנוּ.  {ס}	9 Why shouldest thou be as a man overcome, as a mighty man that cannot save? Yet Thou, O LORD, art in the midst of us, and Thy name is called upon us; leave us not. {S}
14.10 י  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה לָעָם הַזֶּה, כֵּן אָהֲבוּ לָנוּעַ--רַגְלֵיהֶם, לֹא חָשָׂכוּ; וַיהוָה, לֹא רָצָם--עַתָּה יִזְכֹּר עֲוֺנָם, וְיִפְקֹד חַטֹּאתָם.  {פ}	10 Thus saith the LORD unto this people: Even so have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet; therefore the LORD doth not accept them, now will He remember their iniquity, and punish their sins. {P}
14.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלָי:  אַל-תִּתְפַּלֵּל בְּעַד-הָעָם הַזֶּה, לְטוֹבָה.	11 And the LORD said unto me: 'Pray not for this people for their good.
14.12 יב  כִּי יָצֻמוּ, אֵינֶנִּי שֹׁמֵעַ אֶל-רִנָּתָם, וְכִי יַעֲלוּ עֹלָה וּמִנְחָה, אֵינֶנִּי רֹצָם:  כִּי, בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב וּבַדֶּבֶר, אָנֹכִי, מְכַלֶּה אוֹתָם.  {ס}	12 When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt-offering and meal-offering, I will not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.' {S}
14.13 יג  וָאֹמַר אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה הַנְּבִאִים אֹמְרִים לָהֶם לֹא-תִרְאוּ חֶרֶב, וְרָעָב, לֹא-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם:  כִּי-שְׁלוֹם אֱמֶת אֶתֵּן לָכֶם, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	13 Then said I: 'Ah, Lord GOD! behold, the prophets say unto them: Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.' {S}
14.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, שֶׁקֶר הַנְּבִאִים נִבְּאִים בִּשְׁמִי--לֹא שְׁלַחְתִּים וְלֹא צִוִּיתִים, וְלֹא דִבַּרְתִּי אֲלֵיהֶם; חֲזוֹן שֶׁקֶר וְקֶסֶם ואלול (וֶאֱלִיל), ותרמות (וְתַרְמִית) לִבָּם, הֵמָּה, מִתְנַבְּאִים לָכֶם.  {ס}	14 Then the LORD said unto me: 'The prophets prophesy lies in My name; I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I unto them; they prophesy unto you a lying vision, and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their own heart. {S}
14.15 טו  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, עַל-הַנְּבִאִים הַנִּבְּאִים בִּשְׁמִי וַאֲנִי לֹא-שְׁלַחְתִּים, וְהֵמָּה אֹמְרִים, חֶרֶב וְרָעָב לֹא יִהְיֶה בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת:  בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב יִתַּמּוּ, הַנְּבִאִים הָהֵמָּה.	15 Therefore thus saith the LORD: As for the prophets that prophesy in My name, and I sent them not, yet they say: Sword and famine shall not be in this land, by sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed;
14.16 טז  וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה נִבְּאִים לָהֶם יִהְיוּ מֻשְׁלָכִים בְּחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם מִפְּנֵי הָרָעָב וְהַחֶרֶב, וְאֵין מְקַבֵּר לָהֵמָּה--הֵמָּה נְשֵׁיהֶם, וּבְנֵיהֶם וּבְנֹתֵיהֶם; וְשָׁפַכְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת-רָעָתָם.	16 and the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters; for I will pour their evil upon them.'
14.17 יז  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, תֵּרַדְנָה עֵינַי דִּמְעָה לַיְלָה וְיוֹמָם וְאַל-תִּדְמֶינָה:  כִּי שֶׁבֶר גָּדוֹל נִשְׁבְּרָה, בְּתוּלַת בַּת-עַמִּי--מַכָּה, נַחְלָה מְאֹד.	17 And thou shalt say this word unto them: Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease; for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow.
14.18 יח  אִם-יָצָאתִי הַשָּׂדֶה, וְהִנֵּה חַלְלֵי-חֶרֶב, וְאִם בָּאתִי הָעִיר, וְהִנֵּה תַּחֲלוּאֵי רָעָב:  כִּי-גַם-נָבִיא גַם-כֹּהֵן סָחֲרוּ אֶל-אֶרֶץ, וְלֹא יָדָעוּ.  {ס}	18 If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword! And if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with famine! For both the prophet and the priest are gone about to a land, and knew it not. {S}
14.19 יט  הֲמָאֹס מָאַסְתָּ אֶת-יְהוּדָה, אִם-בְּצִיּוֹן גָּעֲלָה נַפְשֶׁךָ--מַדּוּעַ הִכִּיתָנוּ, וְאֵין לָנוּ מַרְפֵּא; קַוֵּה לְשָׁלוֹם וְאֵין טוֹב, וּלְעֵת מַרְפֵּא וְהִנֵּה בְעָתָה.	19 Hast Thou utterly rejected Judah? Hath Thy soul loathed Zion? Why hast Thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of healing, and behold terror!
14.20 כ  יָדַעְנוּ יְהוָה רִשְׁעֵנוּ, עֲוֺן אֲבוֹתֵינוּ:  כִּי חָטָאנוּ, לָךְ.	20 We acknowledge, O LORD, our wickedness, even the iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against Thee.
14.21 כא  אַל-תִּנְאַץ לְמַעַן שִׁמְךָ, אַל-תְּנַבֵּל כִּסֵּא כְבוֹדֶךָ; זְכֹר, אַל-תָּפֵר בְּרִיתְךָ אִתָּנוּ.	21 Do not contemn us, for Thy name's sake, do not dishonour the throne of Thy glory; remember, break not Thy covenant with us.
14.22 כב  הֲיֵשׁ בְּהַבְלֵי הַגּוֹיִם מַגְשִׁמִים, וְאִם-הַשָּׁמַיִם יִתְּנוּ רְבִבִים; הֲלֹא אַתָּה-הוּא יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וּנְקַוֶּה-לָּךְ--כִּי-אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ, אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה.  {פ}	22 Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Art not Thou He, O LORD our God, and do we not wait for Thee? For Thou hast made all these things. {P}
15.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֵלַי, אִם-יַעֲמֹד מֹשֶׁה וּשְׁמוּאֵל לְפָנַי, אֵין נַפְשִׁי אֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה; שַׁלַּח מֵעַל-פָּנַי, וְיֵצֵאוּ.	1 Then said the LORD unto me: 'Though Moses and Samuel stood before Me, yet My mind could not be toward this people; cast them out of My sight, and let them go forth.
15.2 ב  וְהָיָה כִּי-יֹאמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ, אָנָה נֵצֵא; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לַמָּוֶת לַמָּוֶת וַאֲשֶׁר לַחֶרֶב לַחֶרֶב, וַאֲשֶׁר לָרָעָב לָרָעָב, וַאֲשֶׁר לַשְּׁבִי לַשֶּׁבִי.	2 And it shall come to pass, when they say unto thee: Whither shall we go forth? then thou shall tell them: Thus saith the LORD: Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for captivity, to captivity.
15.3 ג  וּפָקַדְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם אַרְבַּע מִשְׁפָּחוֹת, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֶת-הַחֶרֶב לַהֲרֹג, וְאֶת-הַכְּלָבִים לִסְחֹב; וְאֶת-עוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-בֶּהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ, לֶאֱכֹל וּלְהַשְׁחִית.	3 And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the LORD: the sword to slay, and the dogs to drag, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and to destroy.
15.4 ד  וּנְתַתִּים לזועה (לְזַעֲוָה), לְכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ--בִּגְלַל מְנַשֶּׁה בֶן-יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, עַל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	4 And I will cause them to be a horror among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.
15.5 ה  כִּי מִי-יַחְמֹל עָלַיִךְ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּמִי, יָנוּד לָךְ; וּמִי יָסוּר, לִשְׁאֹל לְשָׁלֹם לָךְ.	5 For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? Or who shall bemoan thee? Or who shall turn aside to ask of thy welfare?
15.6 ו  אַתְּ נָטַשְׁתְּ אֹתִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אָחוֹר תֵּלֵכִי; וָאַט אֶת-יָדִי עָלַיִךְ וָאַשְׁחִיתֵךְ, נִלְאֵיתִי הִנָּחֵם.	6 Thou hast cast Me off, saith the LORD, thou art gone backward; therefore do I stretch out My hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting.
15.7 ז  וָאֶזְרֵם בְּמִזְרֶה, בְּשַׁעֲרֵי הָאָרֶץ; שִׁכַּלְתִּי אִבַּדְתִּי אֶת-עַמִּי, מִדַּרְכֵיהֶם לוֹא-שָׁבוּ.	7 And I fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I bereave them of children, I destroy My people, since they return not from their ways.
15.8 ח  עָצְמוּ-לִי אַלְמְנוֹתָו מֵחוֹל יַמִּים, הֵבֵאתִי לָהֶם עַל-אֵם בָּחוּר שֹׁדֵד בַּצָּהֳרָיִם; הִפַּלְתִּי עָלֶיהָ פִּתְאֹם, עִיר וּבֶהָלוֹת.	8 Their widows are increased to Me above the sand of the seas; I bring upon them, against the mother, a chosen one, even a spoiler at noonday; I cause anguish and terrors to fall upon her suddenly.
15.9 ט  אֻמְלְלָה יֹלֶדֶת הַשִּׁבְעָה, נָפְחָה נַפְשָׁהּ באה (בָּא) שִׁמְשָׁהּ בְּעֹד יוֹמָם--בּוֹשָׁה וְחָפֵרָה; וּשְׁאֵרִיתָם, לַחֶרֶב אֶתֵּן לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיהֶם--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	9 She that hath borne seven languisheth; her spirit droopeth; her sun is gone down while it was yet day, she is ashamed and confounded; and the residue of them will I deliver to the sword before their enemies, saith the LORD.' {S}
15.10 י  אוֹי-לִי אִמִּי--כִּי יְלִדְתִּנִי אִישׁ רִיב וְאִישׁ מָדוֹן, לְכָל-הָאָרֶץ; לֹא-נָשִׁיתִי וְלֹא-נָשׁוּ-בִי, כֻּלֹּה מְקַלְלַוְנִי.  {ס}	10 Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have not lent, neither have men lent to me; yet every one of them doth curse me. {S}
15.11 יא  אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-לֹא שרותך (שֵׁרִיתִיךָ) לְטוֹב; אִם-לוֹא הִפְגַּעְתִּי בְךָ, בְּעֵת רָעָה וּבְעֵת צָרָה--אֶת-הָאֹיֵב.	11 The LORD said: 'Verily I will release thee for good; verily I will cause the enemy to make supplication unto thee in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.
15.12 יב  הֲיָרֹעַ בַּרְזֶל בַּרְזֶל מִצָּפוֹן, וּנְחֹשֶׁת.	12 Can iron break iron from the north and brass?
15.13 יג  חֵילְךָ וְאוֹצְרוֹתֶיךָ לָבַז אֶתֵּן, לֹא בִמְחִיר; וּבְכָל-חַטֹּאותֶיךָ, וּבְכָל-גְּבוּלֶיךָ.	13 Thy substance and thy treasures will I give for a spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.
15.14 יד  וְהַעֲבַרְתִּי, אֶת-אֹיְבֶיךָ, בְּאֶרֶץ, לֹא יָדָעְתָּ:  כִּי-אֵשׁ קָדְחָה בְאַפִּי, עֲלֵיכֶם תּוּקָד.  {ס}	14 And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou knowest not; for a fire is kindled in My nostril, which shall burn upon you.' {S}
15.15 טו  אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ יְהוָה, זָכְרֵנִי וּפָקְדֵנִי וְהִנָּקֶם לִי מֵרֹדְפַי--אַל-לְאֶרֶךְ אַפְּךָ, תִּקָּחֵנִי; דַּע, שְׂאֵתִי עָלֶיךָ חֶרְפָּה.	15 Thou, O LORD, knowest; remember me, and think of me, and avenge me of my persecutors; take me not away because of Thy long-suffering; know that for Thy sake I have suffered taunts.
15.16 טז  נִמְצְאוּ דְבָרֶיךָ, וָאֹכְלֵם, וַיְהִי דבריך (דְבָרְךָ) לִי, לְשָׂשׂוֹן וּלְשִׂמְחַת לְבָבִי:  כִּי-נִקְרָא שִׁמְךָ עָלַי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת.  {ס}	16 Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and Thy words were unto me a joy and the rejoicing of my heart; because Thy name was called on me, O LORD God of hosts. {S}
15.17 יז  לֹא-יָשַׁבְתִּי בְסוֹד-מְשַׂחֲקִים, וָאֶעְלֹז:  מִפְּנֵי יָדְךָ בָּדָד יָשַׁבְתִּי, כִּי-זַעַם מִלֵּאתָנִי.	17 I sat not in the assembly of them that make merry, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of Thy hand; for Thou hast filled me with indignation.
15.18 יח  לָמָּה הָיָה כְאֵבִי נֶצַח, וּמַכָּתִי אֲנוּשָׁה; מֵאֲנָה, הֵרָפֵא--הָיוֹ תִהְיֶה לִי כְּמוֹ אַכְזָב, מַיִם לֹא נֶאֱמָנוּ.  {ס}	18 Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, so that it refuseth to be healed? Wilt Thou indeed be unto me as a deceitful brook, as waters that fail? {S}
15.19 יט  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-תָּשׁוּב וַאֲשִׁיבְךָ לְפָנַי תַּעֲמֹד, וְאִם-תּוֹצִיא יָקָר מִזּוֹלֵל, כְּפִי תִהְיֶה; יָשֻׁבוּ הֵמָּה אֵלֶיךָ, וְאַתָּה לֹא-תָשׁוּב אֲלֵיהֶם.	19 Therefore thus saith the LORD: if thou return, and I bring thee back, thou shalt stand before Me; and if thou bring forth the precious out of the vile, thou shalt be as My mouth; let them return unto thee, but thou shalt not return unto them.
15.20 כ  וּנְתַתִּיךָ לָעָם הַזֶּה, לְחוֹמַת נְחֹשֶׁת בְּצוּרָה, וְנִלְחֲמוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וְלֹא-יוּכְלוּ לָךְ:  כִּי-אִתְּךָ אֲנִי לְהוֹשִׁיעֲךָ וּלְהַצִּילֶךָ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	20 And I will make thee unto this people a fortified brazen wall; and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the LORD.
15.21 כא  וְהִצַּלְתִּיךָ, מִיַּד רָעִים; וּפְדִתִיךָ, מִכַּף עָרִצִים.  {ס}	21 And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible. {S}
16.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.	1 The word of the LORD came also unto me, saying:
16.2 ב  לֹא-תִקַּח לְךָ, אִשָּׁה; וְלֹא-יִהְיוּ לְךָ בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	2 Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place. {S}
16.3 ג  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, עַל-הַבָּנִים וְעַל-הַבָּנוֹת, הַיִּלּוֹדִים, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה; וְעַל-אִמֹּתָם הַיֹּלְדוֹת אוֹתָם, וְעַל-אֲבוֹתָם הַמּוֹלִדִים אוֹתָם--בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת.	3 For thus saith the LORD concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bore them, and concerning their fathers that begot them in this land:
16.4 ד  מְמוֹתֵי תַחֲלֻאִים יָמֻתוּ, לֹא יִסָּפְדוּ וְלֹא יִקָּבֵרוּ--לְדֹמֶן עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה, יִהְיוּ; וּבַחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב, יִכְלוּ, וְהָיְתָה נִבְלָתָם לְמַאֲכָל, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וּלְבֶהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}	4 They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buried, they shall be as dung upon the face of the ground; and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine; and their carcasses shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. {S}
16.5 ה  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, אַל-תָּבוֹא בֵּית מַרְזֵחַ, וְאַל-תֵּלֵךְ לִסְפּוֹד, וְאַל-תָּנֹד לָהֶם:  כִּי-אָסַפְתִּי אֶת-שְׁלוֹמִי מֵאֵת הָעָם הַזֶּה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--אֶת-הַחֶסֶד, וְאֶת-הָרַחֲמִים.	5 For thus saith the LORD: Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament, neither bemoan them; for I have taken away My peace from this people, saith the LORD, even mercy and compassion.
16.6 ו  וּמֵתוּ גְדֹלִים וּקְטַנִּים בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לֹא יִקָּבֵרוּ; וְלֹא-יִסְפְּדוּ לָהֶם--וְלֹא יִתְגֹּדַד, וְלֹא יִקָּרֵחַ לָהֶם.	6 Both the great and the small shall die in this land; they shall not be buried; neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them;
16.7 ז  וְלֹא-יִפְרְסוּ לָהֶם עַל-אֵבֶל, לְנַחֲמוֹ עַל-מֵת; וְלֹא-יַשְׁקוּ אוֹתָם כּוֹס תַּנְחוּמִים, עַל-אָבִיו וְעַל-אִמּוֹ.	7 neither shall men break bread for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.
16.8 ח  וּבֵית-מִשְׁתֶּה לֹא-תָבוֹא, לָשֶׁבֶת אוֹתָם, לֶאֱכֹל, וְלִשְׁתּוֹת.  {פ}	8 And thou shalt not go into the house of feasting to sit with them, to eat and to drink. {P}
16.9 ט  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מַשְׁבִּית מִן-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה לְעֵינֵיכֶם, וּבִימֵיכֶם--קוֹל שָׂשׂוֹן וְקוֹל שִׂמְחָה, קוֹל חָתָן וְקוֹל כַּלָּה.	9 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.
16.10 י  וְהָיָה, כִּי תַגִּיד לָעָם הַזֶּה, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה; וְאָמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ, עַל-מֶה דִבֶּר יְהוָה עָלֵינוּ אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת, וּמֶה עֲוֺנֵנוּ וּמֶה חַטָּאתֵנוּ, אֲשֶׁר חָטָאנוּ לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	10 And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt tell this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee: 'Wherefore hath the LORD pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against the LORD our God?'
16.11 יא  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, עַל אֲשֶׁר-עָזְבוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם אוֹתִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיַּעַבְדוּם וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם; וְאֹתִי עָזָבוּ, וְאֶת-תּוֹרָתִי לֹא שָׁמָרוּ.	11 then shalt thou say unto them: 'Because your fathers have forsaken Me, saith the LORD, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken Me, and have not kept My law;
16.12 יב  וְאַתֶּם הֲרֵעֹתֶם לַעֲשׂוֹת, מֵאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם; וְהִנְּכֶם הֹלְכִים, אִישׁ אַחֲרֵי שְׁרִרוּת לִבּוֹ-הָרָע, לְבִלְתִּי, שְׁמֹעַ אֵלָי.	12 and ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the stubbornness of his evil heart, so that ye hearken not unto Me;
16.13 יג  וְהֵטַלְתִּי אֶתְכֶם, מֵעַל הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, עַל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא יְדַעְתֶּם אַתֶּם וַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם; וַעֲבַדְתֶּם-שָׁם אֶת-אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-אֶתֵּן לָכֶם, חֲנִינָה.  {פ}	13 therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye have not known, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; forasmuch as I will show you no favour.' {P}
16.14 יד  לָכֵן הִנֵּה-יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְלֹא-יֵאָמֵר עוֹד חַי-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	14 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall no more be said: 'As the LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt,'
16.15 טו  כִּי אִם-חַי-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן, וּמִכֹּל הָאֲרָצוֹת, אֲשֶׁר הִדִּיחָם שָׁמָּה; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִים, עַל-אַדְמָתָם, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי, לַאֲבוֹתָם.  {פ}	15 but: 'As the LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the countries whither He had driven them'; and I will bring them back into their land that I gave unto their fathers. {P}
16.16 טז  הִנְנִי שֹׁלֵחַ לדוגים (לְדַיָּגִים) רַבִּים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--וְדִיגוּם; וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, אֶשְׁלַח לְרַבִּים צַיָּדִים, וְצָדוּם מֵעַל כָּל-הַר וּמֵעַל כָּל-גִּבְעָה, וּמִנְּקִיקֵי הַסְּלָעִים.	16 Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the LORD, and they shall fish them; and afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks.
16.17 יז  כִּי עֵינַי עַל-כָּל-דַּרְכֵיהֶם, לֹא נִסְתְּרוּ מִלְּפָנָי; וְלֹא-נִצְפַּן עֲוֺנָם, מִנֶּגֶד עֵינָי.	17 For Mine eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from My face; neither is their iniquity concealed from Mine eyes.
16.18 יח  וְשִׁלַּמְתִּי רִאשׁוֹנָה, מִשְׁנֵה עֲוֺנָם וְחַטָּאתָם, עַל, חַלְּלָם אֶת-אַרְצִי:  בְּנִבְלַת שִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם וְתוֹעֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, מָלְאוּ אֶת-נַחֲלָתִי.  {פ}	18 And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double; because they have profaned My land; they have filled Mine inheritance with the carcasses of their detestable things and their abominations. {P}
16.19 יט  יְהוָה עֻזִּי וּמָעֻזִּי, וּמְנוּסִי--בְּיוֹם צָרָה; אֵלֶיךָ, גּוֹיִם יָבֹאוּ מֵאַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ, וְיֹאמְרוּ אַךְ-שֶׁקֶר נָחֲלוּ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, הֶבֶל וְאֵין-בָּם מוֹעִיל.	19 O LORD, my strength, and my stronghold, and my refuge, in the day of affliction, unto Thee shall the nations come from the ends of the earth, and shall say: 'Our fathers have inherited nought but lies, vanity and things wherein there is no profit.'
16.20 כ  הֲיַעֲשֶׂה-לּוֹ אָדָם, אֱלֹהִים; וְהֵמָּה, לֹא אֱלֹהִים.	20 Shall a man make unto himself gods, and they are no gods?
16.21 כא  לָכֵן, הִנְנִי מוֹדִיעָם, בַּפַּעַם הַזֹּאת, אוֹדִיעֵם אֶת-יָדִי וְאֶת-גְּבוּרָתִי; וְיָדְעוּ, כִּי-שְׁמִי יְהוָה.  {ס}	21 Therefore, behold, I will cause them to know, this once will I cause them to know My hand and My might; and they shall know that My name is the LORD. {S}
17.1 א  חַטַּאת יְהוּדָה, כְּתוּבָה בְּעֵט בַּרְזֶל--בְּצִפֹּרֶן שָׁמִיר:  חֲרוּשָׁה עַל-לוּחַ לִבָּם, וּלְקַרְנוֹת מִזְבְּחוֹתֵיכֶם.	1 The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond; it is graven upon the tablet of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars.
17.2 ב  כִּזְכֹּר בְּנֵיהֶם מִזְבְּחוֹתָם, וַאֲשֵׁרֵיהֶם עַל-עֵץ רַעֲנָן, עַל, גְּבָעוֹת הַגְּבֹהוֹת.	2 Like the symbols of their sons are their altars, and their Asherim are by the leafy trees, upon the high hills.
17.3 ג  הֲרָרִי, בַּשָּׂדֶה--חֵילְךָ כָל-אוֹצְרוֹתֶיךָ, לָבַז אֶתֵּן; בָּמֹתֶיךָ, בְּחַטָּאת בְּכָל-גְּבוּלֶיךָ.	3 O thou that sittest upon the mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy treasures for a spoil, and thy high places, because of sin, throughout all thy borders.
17.4 ד  וְשָׁמַטְתָּה, וּבְךָ מִנַּחֲלָתְךָ אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָךְ, וְהַעֲבַדְתִּיךָ אֶת-אֹיְבֶיךָ, בָּאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדָעְתָּ:  כִּי-אֵשׁ קְדַחְתֶּם בְּאַפִּי, עַד-עוֹלָם תּוּקָד.  {ס}	4 And thou, even of thyself, shalt discontinue from thy heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not; for ye have kindled a fire in My nostril, which shall burn for ever. {S}
17.5 ה  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אָרוּר הַגֶּבֶר אֲשֶׁר יִבְטַח בָּאָדָם, וְשָׂם בָּשָׂר, זְרֹעוֹ; וּמִן-יְהוָה, יָסוּר לִבּוֹ.	5 Thus saith the LORD: Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the LORD.
17.6 ו  וְהָיָה כְּעַרְעָר בָּעֲרָבָה, וְלֹא יִרְאֶה כִּי-יָבוֹא טוֹב; וְשָׁכַן חֲרֵרִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, אֶרֶץ מְלֵחָה וְלֹא תֵשֵׁב.  {ס}	6 For he shall be like a tamarisk in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited. {S}
17.7 ז  בָּרוּךְ הַגֶּבֶר, אֲשֶׁר יִבְטַח בַּיהוָה; וְהָיָה יְהוָה, מִבְטַחוֹ.	7 Blessed is the man that trusteth in the LORD, and whose trust the LORD is.
17.8 ח  וְהָיָה כְּעֵץ שָׁתוּל עַל-מַיִם, וְעַל-יוּבַל יְשַׁלַּח שָׁרָשָׁיו, וְלֹא ירא (יִרְאֶה) כִּי-יָבֹא חֹם, וְהָיָה עָלֵהוּ רַעֲנָן; וּבִשְׁנַת בַּצֹּרֶת לֹא יִדְאָג, וְלֹא יָמִישׁ מֵעֲשׂוֹת פֶּרִי.	8 For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out its roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but its foliage shall be luxuriant; and shall not be anxious in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.
17.9 ט  עָקֹב הַלֵּב מִכֹּל, וְאָנֻשׁ הוּא; מִי, יֵדָעֶנּוּ.	9 The heart is deceitful above all things, and it is exceeding weak--who can know it?
17.10 י  אֲנִי יְהוָה חֹקֵר לֵב, בֹּחֵן כְּלָיוֹת:  וְלָתֵת לְאִישׁ כִּדְרָכָו, כִּפְרִי מַעֲלָלָיו.  {ס}	10 I the LORD search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his doings. {S}
17.11 יא  קֹרֵא דָגַר וְלֹא יָלָד, עֹשֶׂה עֹשֶׁר וְלֹא בְמִשְׁפָּט; בַּחֲצִי יָמָו יַעַזְבֶנּוּ, וּבְאַחֲרִיתוֹ יִהְיֶה נָבָל.	11 As the partridge that broodeth over young which she hath not brought forth, so is he that getteth riches, and not by right; in the midst of his days he shall leave them, and at his end he shall be a fool.
17.12 יב  כִּסֵּא כָבוֹד, מָרוֹם מֵרִאשׁוֹן--מְקוֹם, מִקְדָּשֵׁנוּ.	12 Thou throne of glory, on high from the beginning, thou place of our sanctuary,
17.13 יג  מִקְוֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל יְהוָה, כָּל-עֹזְבֶיךָ יֵבֹשׁוּ; יסורי (וְסוּרַי) בָּאָרֶץ יִכָּתֵבוּ, כִּי עָזְבוּ מְקוֹר מַיִם-חַיִּים אֶת-יְהוָה.  {פ}	13 Thou hope of Israel, the LORD! All that forsake Thee shall be ashamed; they that depart from Thee shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the LORD, the fountain of living waters. {P}
17.14 יד  רְפָאֵנִי יְהוָה וְאֵרָפֵא, הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי וְאִוָּשֵׁעָה:  כִּי תְהִלָּתִי, אָתָּה.	14 Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved; for Thou art my praise.
17.15 טו  הִנֵּה-הֵמָּה, אֹמְרִים אֵלָי:  אַיֵּה דְבַר-יְהוָה, יָבוֹא נָא.	15 Behold, they say unto me: 'Where is the word of the LORD? let it come now.'
17.16 טז  וַאֲנִי לֹא-אַצְתִּי מֵרֹעֶה אַחֲרֶיךָ, וְיוֹם אָנוּשׁ לֹא הִתְאַוֵּיתִי--אַתָּה יָדָעְתָּ; מוֹצָא שְׂפָתַי, נֹכַח פָּנֶיךָ הָיָה.	16 As for me, I have not hastened from being a shepherd after Thee; neither have I desired the woeful day; Thou knowest it; that which came out of my lips was manifest before Thee.
17.17 יז  אַל-תִּהְיֵה-לִי, לִמְחִתָּה; מַחֲסִי-אַתָּה, בְּיוֹם רָעָה.	17 Be not a ruin unto me; thou art my refuge in the day of evil.
17.18 יח  יֵבֹשׁוּ רֹדְפַי, וְאַל-אֵבֹשָׁה אָנִי--יֵחַתּוּ הֵמָּה, וְאַל-אֵחַתָּה אָנִי; הָבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם יוֹם רָעָה, וּמִשְׁנֶה שִׁבָּרוֹן שָׁבְרֵם.  {ס}	18 Let them be ashamed that persecute me, but let not me be ashamed; let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed; bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction. {S}
17.19 יט  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֵלַי, הָלֹךְ וְעָמַדְתָּ בְּשַׁעַר בְּנֵי-עם (הָעָם), אֲשֶׁר יָבֹאוּ בוֹ מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וַאֲשֶׁר יֵצְאוּ בוֹ; וּבְכֹל, שַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	19 Thus said the LORD unto me: Go, and stand in the gate of the children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem;
17.20 כ  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וְכָל-יְהוּדָה, וְכֹל, יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם--הַבָּאִים, בַּשְּׁעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	20 and say unto them: Hear ye the word of the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates;
17.21 כא  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִשָּׁמְרוּ בְּנַפְשׁוֹתֵיכֶם; וְאַל-תִּשְׂאוּ מַשָּׂא בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, וַהֲבֵאתֶם בְּשַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	21 thus saith the LORD: Take heed for the sake of your souls, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem;
17.22 כב  וְלֹא-תוֹצִיאוּ מַשָּׂא מִבָּתֵּיכֶם בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, וְכָל-מְלָאכָה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ; וְקִדַּשְׁתֶּם אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.	22 neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work; but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers;
17.23 כג  וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, וְלֹא הִטּוּ אֶת-אָזְנָם; וַיַּקְשׁוּ, אֶת-עָרְפָּם, לְבִלְתִּי שומע (שְׁמוֹעַ), וּלְבִלְתִּי קַחַת מוּסָר.	23 but they hearkened not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction.
17.24 כד  וְהָיָה אִם-שָׁמֹעַ תִּשְׁמְעוּן אֵלַי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לְבִלְתִּי הָבִיא מַשָּׂא בְּשַׁעֲרֵי הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת; וּלְקַדֵּשׁ אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת-בֹּה כָּל-מְלָאכָה.	24 And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto Me, saith the LORD, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but to hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;
17.25 כה  וּבָאוּ בְשַׁעֲרֵי הָעִיר הַזֹּאת מְלָכִים וְשָׂרִים יֹשְׁבִים עַל-כִּסֵּא דָוִד רֹכְבִים בָּרֶכֶב וּבַסּוּסִים, הֵמָּה וְשָׂרֵיהֶם--אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְיָשְׁבָה הָעִיר-הַזֹּאת, לְעוֹלָם.	25 then shall there enter in by the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city shall be inhabited for ever.
17.26 כו  וּבָאוּ מֵעָרֵי-יְהוּדָה וּמִסְּבִיבוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם וּמֵאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן, וּמִן-הַשְּׁפֵלָה וּמִן-הָהָר וּמִן-הַנֶּגֶב, מְבִאִים עוֹלָה וְזֶבַח, וּמִנְחָה וּלְבוֹנָה--וּמְבִאֵי תוֹדָה, בֵּית יְהוָה.	26 And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places round about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the Lowland, and from the mountains, and from the South, bringing burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, and meal-offerings, and frankincense, and bringing sacrifices of thanksgiving, unto the house of the LORD.
17.27 כז  וְאִם-לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ אֵלַי, לְקַדֵּשׁ אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, וּלְבִלְתִּי שְׂאֵת מַשָּׂא וּבֹא בְּשַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת:  וְהִצַּתִּי אֵשׁ בִּשְׁעָרֶיהָ, וְאָכְלָה אַרְמְנוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם--וְלֹא תִכְבֶּה.  {פ}	27 But if ye will not hearken unto Me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden and enter in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. {P}
18.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	1 The word which came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
18.2 ב  קוּם וְיָרַדְתָּ, בֵּית הַיּוֹצֵר; וְשָׁמָּה, אַשְׁמִיעֲךָ אֶת-דְּבָרָי.	2 'Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear My words.'
18.3 ג  וָאֵרֵד, בֵּית הַיּוֹצֵר; והנהו (וְהִנֵּה-הוּא) עֹשֶׂה מְלָאכָה, עַל-הָאָבְנָיִם.	3 Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he was at his work on the wheels.
18.4 ד  וְנִשְׁחַת הַכְּלִי, אֲשֶׁר הוּא עֹשֶׂה בַּחֹמֶר--בְּיַד הַיּוֹצֵר; וְשָׁב, וַיַּעֲשֵׂהוּ כְּלִי אַחֵר, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָשַׁר בְּעֵינֵי הַיּוֹצֵר, לַעֲשׂוֹת.  {ס}	4 And whensoever the vessel that he made of the clay was marred in the hand of the potter, he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it. {S}
18.5 ה  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמוֹר.	5 Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying:
18.6 ו  הֲכַיּוֹצֵר הַזֶּה לֹא-אוּכַל לַעֲשׂוֹת לָכֶם, בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; הִנֵּה כַחֹמֶר בְּיַד הַיּוֹצֵר, כֵּן-אַתֶּם בְּיָדִי בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	6 'O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the LORD. Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so are ye in My hand, O house of Israel. {S}
18.7 ז  רֶגַע אֲדַבֵּר, עַל-גּוֹי וְעַל-מַמְלָכָה, לִנְתוֹשׁ וְלִנְתוֹץ, וּלְהַאֲבִיד.	7 At one instant I may speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy it;
18.8 ח  וְשָׁב, הַגּוֹי הַהוּא, מֵרָעָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי עָלָיו--וְנִחַמְתִּי, עַל-הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר חָשַׁבְתִּי, לַעֲשׂוֹת לוֹ.  {ס}	8 but if that nation turn from their evil, because of which I have spoken against it, I repent of the evil that I thought to do unto it. {S}
18.9 ט  וְרֶגַע אֲדַבֵּר, עַל-גּוֹי וְעַל-מַמְלָכָה, לִבְנוֹת, וְלִנְטוֹעַ.	9 And at one instant I may speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it;
18.10 י  וְעָשָׂה הרעה (הָרַע) בְּעֵינַי, לְבִלְתִּי שְׁמֹעַ בְּקוֹלִי--וְנִחַמְתִּי, עַל-הַטּוֹבָה, אֲשֶׁר אָמַרְתִּי, לְהֵיטִיב אוֹתוֹ.  {ס}	10 but if it do evil in My sight, that it hearken not to My voice, then I repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit it. {S}
18.11 יא  וְעַתָּה אֱמָר-נָא אֶל-אִישׁ-יְהוּדָה וְעַל-יוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי יוֹצֵר עֲלֵיכֶם רָעָה, וְחֹשֵׁב עֲלֵיכֶם מַחֲשָׁבָה; שׁוּבוּ נָא, אִישׁ מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה, וְהֵיטִיבוּ דַרְכֵיכֶם, וּמַעַלְלֵיכֶם.	11 Now therefore do thou speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you; return ye now every one from his evil way, and amend your ways and your doings.
18.12 יב  וְאָמְרוּ, נוֹאָשׁ:  כִּי-אַחֲרֵי מַחְשְׁבוֹתֵינוּ נֵלֵךְ, וְאִישׁ שְׁרִרוּת לִבּוֹ-הָרָע נַעֲשֶׂה.  {פ}	12 But they say: There is no hope; but we will walk after our own devices, and we will do every one after the stubbornness of his evil heart.' {P}
18.13 יג  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, שַׁאֲלוּ-נָא בַּגּוֹיִם, מִי שָׁמַע כָּאֵלֶּה:  שַׁעֲרֻרִת עָשְׂתָה מְאֹד, בְּתוּלַת יִשְׂרָאֵל.	13 Therefore thus saith the LORD: Ask ye now among the nations, who hath heard such things; the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing.
18.14 יד  הֲיַעֲזֹב מִצּוּר שָׂדַי, שֶׁלֶג לְבָנוֹן:  אִם-יִנָּתְשׁוּ, מַיִם זָרִים קָרִים--נוֹזְלִים.	14 Doth the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of the field? or are the strange cold flowing waters plucked up?
18.15 טו  כִּי-שְׁכֵחֻנִי עַמִּי, לַשָּׁוְא יְקַטֵּרוּ; וַיַּכְשִׁלוּם בְּדַרְכֵיהֶם, שְׁבִילֵי עוֹלָם, לָלֶכֶת נְתִיבוֹת, דֶּרֶךְ לֹא סְלוּלָה.	15 For My people hath forgotten Me, they offer unto vanity; and they have been made to stumble in their ways, in the ancient paths, to walk in bypaths, in a way not cast up;
18.16 טז  לָשׂוּם אַרְצָם לְשַׁמָּה, שרוקת (שְׁרִיקֹת) עוֹלָם; כֹּל עוֹבֵר עָלֶיהָ, יִשֹּׁם וְיָנִיד בְּרֹאשׁוֹ.	16 To make their land an astonishment, and a perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and shake his head.
18.17 יז  כְּרוּחַ-קָדִים אֲפִיצֵם, לִפְנֵי אוֹיֵב; עֹרֶף וְלֹא-פָנִים אֶרְאֵם, בְּיוֹם אֵידָם.  {ס}	17 I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will look upon their back, and not their face, in the day of their calamity. {S}
18.18 יח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לְכוּ וְנַחְשְׁבָה עַל-יִרְמְיָהוּ מַחֲשָׁבוֹת--כִּי לֹא-תֹאבַד תּוֹרָה מִכֹּהֵן וְעֵצָה מֵחָכָם, וְדָבָר מִנָּבִיא; לְכוּ וְנַכֵּהוּ בַלָּשׁוֹן, וְאַל-נַקְשִׁיבָה אֶל-כָּל-דְּבָרָיו.	18 Then said they: 'Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for instruction shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.'
18.19 יט  הַקְשִׁיבָה יְהוָה, אֵלָי; וּשְׁמַע, לְקוֹל יְרִיבָי.	19 Give heed to me, O LORD, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me.
18.20 כ  הַיְשֻׁלַּם תַּחַת-טוֹבָה רָעָה, כִּי-כָרוּ שׁוּחָה לְנַפְשִׁי; זְכֹר עָמְדִי לְפָנֶיךָ, לְדַבֵּר עֲלֵיהֶם טוֹבָה, לְהָשִׁיב אֶת-חֲמָתְךָ, מֵהֶם.	20 Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember how I stood before Thee to speak good for them, to turn away Thy wrath from them.
18.21 כא  לָכֵן תֵּן אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם לָרָעָב, וְהַגִּרֵם עַל-יְדֵי-חֶרֶב, וְתִהְיֶנָה נְשֵׁיהֶם שַׁכֻּלוֹת וְאַלְמָנוֹת, וְאַנְשֵׁיהֶם יִהְיוּ הֲרֻגֵי מָוֶת; בַּחוּרֵיהֶם, מֻכֵּי-חֶרֶב בַּמִּלְחָמָה.	21 Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and hurl them to the power of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and widows; and let their men be slain of death, and their young men smitten of the sword in battle.
18.22 כב  תִּשָּׁמַע זְעָקָה מִבָּתֵּיהֶם, כִּי-תָבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם גְּדוּד פִּתְאֹם:  כִּי-כָרוּ שיחה (שׁוּחָה) לְלָכְדֵנִי, וּפַחִים טָמְנוּ לְרַגְלָי.	22 Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them; for they have digged a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet.
18.23 כג  וְאַתָּה יְהוָה יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-כָּל-עֲצָתָם עָלַי, לַמָּוֶת--אַל-תְּכַפֵּר עַל-עֲוֺנָם, וְחַטָּאתָם מִלְּפָנֶיךָ אַל-תֶּמְחִי; והיו (וְיִהְיוּ) מֻכְשָׁלִים לְפָנֶיךָ, בְּעֵת אַפְּךָ עֲשֵׂה בָהֶם.  {ס}	23 Yet, LORD, Thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me; forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from Thy sight; but let them be made to stumble before Thee; deal Thou with them in the time of Thine anger. {S}
19.1 א  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הָלֹךְ וְקָנִיתָ בַקְבֻּק יוֹצֵר חָרֶשׂ; וּמִזִּקְנֵי הָעָם, וּמִזִּקְנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים.	1 Thus said the LORD: Go, and get a potter's earthen bottle, and take of the elders of the people, and of the elders of the priests;
19.2 ב  וְיָצָאתָ, אֶל-גֵּיא בֶן-הִנֹּם, אֲשֶׁר, פֶּתַח שַׁעַר החרסות (הַחַרְסִית); וְקָרָאתָ שָּׁם, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר-אֲדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ.	2 and go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the gate Harsith, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee;
19.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ, שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם; כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא רָעָה עַל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר כָּל-שֹׁמְעָהּ, תִּצַּלְנָה אָזְנָיו.	3 and say: Hear ye the word of the LORD, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle;
19.4 ד  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר עֲזָבֻנִי, וַיְנַכְּרוּ אֶת-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה וַיְקַטְּרוּ-בוֹ לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְדָעוּם הֵמָּה וַאֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, וּמַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה; וּמָלְאוּ אֶת-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, דַּם נְקִיִּם.	4 because they have forsaken Me, and have estranged this place, and have offered in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah; and have filled this place with the blood of innocents;
19.5 ה  וּבָנוּ אֶת-בָּמוֹת הַבַּעַל, לִשְׂרֹף אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם בָּאֵשׁ--עֹלוֹת לַבָּעַל:  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-צִוִּיתִי וְלֹא דִבַּרְתִּי, וְלֹא עָלְתָה עַל-לִבִּי.  {פ}	5 and have built the high places of Baal, to burn their sons in the fire for burnt-offerings unto Baal; which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into My mind. {P}
19.6 ו  לָכֵן הִנֵּה-יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְלֹא-יִקָּרֵא לַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה עוֹד הַתֹּפֶת, וְגֵיא בֶן-הִנֹּם--כִּי, אִם-גֵּיא הַהֲרֵגָה.	6 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter;
19.7 ז  וּבַקֹּתִי אֶת-עֲצַת יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וְהִפַּלְתִּים בַּחֶרֶב לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וּבְיַד מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם; וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-נִבְלָתָם לְמַאֲכָל, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וּלְבֶהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ.	7 and I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of them that seek their life; and their carcasses will I give to be food for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth;
19.8 ח  וְשַׂמְתִּי אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, לְשַׁמָּה וְלִשְׁרֵקָה:  כֹּל עֹבֵר עָלֶיהָ, יִשֹּׁם וְיִשְׁרֹק עַל-כָּל-מַכֹּתֶהָ.	8 and I will make this city an astonishment, and a hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof;
19.9 ט  וְהַאֲכַלְתִּים אֶת-בְּשַׂר בְּנֵיהֶם, וְאֵת בְּשַׂר בְּנֹתֵיהֶם, וְאִישׁ בְּשַׂר-רֵעֵהוּ, יֹאכֵלוּ; בְּמָצוֹר, וּבְמָצוֹק, אֲשֶׁר יָצִיקוּ לָהֶם אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וּמְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם.	9 and I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their life, shall straiten them.
19.10 י  וְשָׁבַרְתָּ, הַבַּקְבֻּק--לְעֵינֵי, הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַהֹלְכִים, אוֹתָךְ.	10 Then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that go with thee,
19.11 יא  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, כָּכָה אֶשְׁבֹּר אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה וְאֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִשְׁבֹּר אֶת-כְּלִי הַיּוֹצֵר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יוּכַל לְהֵרָפֵה עוֹד; וּבְתֹפֶת יִקְבְּרוּ, מֵאֵין מָקוֹם לִקְבּוֹר.	11 and shalt say unto them: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again; and they shall bury in Topheth, for want of room to bury.
19.12 יב  כֵּן-אֶעֱשֶׂה לַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--וּלְיוֹשְׁבָיו; וְלָתֵת אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, כְּתֹפֶת.	12 Thus will I do unto this place, saith the LORD, and to the inhabitants thereof, even making this city as Topheth;
19.13 יג  וְהָיוּ בָּתֵּי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּבָתֵּי מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, כִּמְקוֹם הַתֹּפֶת, הַטְּמֵאִים--לְכֹל הַבָּתִּים, אֲשֶׁר קִטְּרוּ עַל-גַּגֹּתֵיהֶם לְכֹל צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְהַסֵּךְ נְסָכִים, לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.  {פ}	13 and the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, which are defiled, shall be as the place of Topheth, even all the houses upon whose roofs they have offered unto all the host of heaven, and have poured out drink-offerings unto other gods. {P}
19.14 יד  וַיָּבֹא יִרְמְיָהוּ מֵהַתֹּפֶת, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ יְהוָה שָׁם לְהִנָּבֵא; וַיַּעֲמֹד בַּחֲצַר בֵּית-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם.  {ס}	14 Then came Jeremiah from Topheth, whither the LORD had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of the LORD'S house, and said to all the people: {S}
19.15 טו  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מֵבִי אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת וְעַל-כָּל-עָרֶיהָ, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי עָלֶיהָ:  כִּי הִקְשׁוּ אֶת-עָרְפָּם, לְבִלְתִּי שְׁמוֹעַ אֶת-דְּבָרָי.	15 'Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it; because they have made their neck stiff, that they might not hear My words.'
20.1 א  וַיִּשְׁמַע פַּשְׁחוּר בֶּן-אִמֵּר הַכֹּהֵן, וְהוּא-פָקִיד נָגִיד בְּבֵית יְהוָה, אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, נִבָּא אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	1 Now Pashhur the son of Immer the priest, who was chief officer in the house of the LORD, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things.
20.2 ב  וַיַּכֶּה פַשְׁחוּר, אֵת יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא; וַיִּתֵּן אֹתוֹ עַל-הַמַּהְפֶּכֶת, אֲשֶׁר בְּשַׁעַר בִּנְיָמִן הָעֶלְיוֹן, אֲשֶׁר, בְּבֵית יְהוָה.	2 Then Pashhur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of the LORD.
20.3 ג  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיֹּצֵא פַשְׁחוּר אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מִן-הַמַּהְפָּכֶת; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֹא פַשְׁחוּר קָרָא יְהוָה שְׁמֶךָ--כִּי, אִם-מָגוֹר מִסָּבִיב.  {ס}	3 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashhur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him: 'The LORD hath not called thy name Pashhur, but Magormissabib. {S}
20.4 ד  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה הִנְנִי נֹתֶנְךָ לְמָגוֹר לְךָ וּלְכָל-אֹהֲבֶיךָ, וְנָפְלוּ בְּחֶרֶב אֹיְבֵיהֶם--וְעֵינֶיךָ רֹאוֹת; וְאֶת-כָּל-יְהוּדָה, אֶתֵּן בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וְהִגְלָם בָּבֶלָה, וְהִכָּם בֶּחָרֶב.	4 For thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends; and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it; and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them captive to Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.
20.5 ה  וְנָתַתִּי, אֶת-כָּל-חֹסֶן הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְאֶת-כָּל-יְגִיעָהּ, וְאֶת-כָּל-יְקָרָהּ; וְאֵת כָּל-אוֹצְרוֹת מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, אֶתֵּן בְּיַד אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וּבְזָזוּם וּלְקָחוּם, וֶהֱבִיאוּם בָּבֶלָה.	5 Moreover I will give all the store of this city, and all the gains thereof, and all the wealth thereof, yea, all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their enemies, who shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to Babylon.
20.6 ו  וְאַתָּה פַשְׁחוּר, וְכֹל יֹשְׁבֵי בֵיתֶךָ, תֵּלְכוּ, בַּשֶּׁבִי; וּבָבֶל תָּבוֹא, וְשָׁם תָּמוּת וְשָׁם תִּקָּבֵר--אַתָּה וְכָל-אֹהֲבֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר-נִבֵּאתָ לָהֶם בַּשָּׁקֶר.  {פ}	6 And thou, Pashhur, and all that dwell in thy house shall go into captivity; and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and there shalt thou be buried, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied falsely.' {P}
20.7 ז  פִּתִּיתַנִי יְהוָה וָאֶפָּת, חֲזַקְתַּנִי וַתּוּכָל; הָיִיתִי לִשְׂחוֹק כָּל-הַיּוֹם, כֻּלֹּה לֹעֵג לִי.	7 O LORD, Thou hast enticed me, and I was enticed, Thou hast overcome me, and hast prevailed; I am become a laughing-stock all the day, every one mocketh me.
20.8 ח  כִּי-מִדֵּי אֲדַבֵּר אֶזְעָק, חָמָס וָשֹׁד אֶקְרָא:  כִּי-הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה לִי לְחֶרְפָּה וּלְקֶלֶס, כָּל-הַיּוֹם.	8 For as often as I speak, I cry out, I cry: 'Violence and spoil'; because the word of the LORD is made a reproach unto me, and a derision, all the day.
20.9 ט  וְאָמַרְתִּי לֹא-אֶזְכְּרֶנּוּ, וְלֹא-אֲדַבֵּר עוֹד בִּשְׁמוֹ, וְהָיָה בְלִבִּי כְּאֵשׁ בֹּעֶרֶת, עָצֻר בְּעַצְמֹתָי; וְנִלְאֵיתִי כַּלְכֵל, וְלֹא אוּכָל.	9 And if I say: 'I will not make mention of Him, nor speak any more in His name', then there is in my heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I weary myself to hold it in, but cannot.
20.10 י  כִּי שָׁמַעְתִּי דִּבַּת רַבִּים, מָגוֹר מִסָּבִיב, הַגִּידוּ וְנַגִּידֶנּוּ, כֹּל אֱנוֹשׁ שְׁלֹמִי שֹׁמְרֵי צַלְעִי; אוּלַי יְפֻתֶּה וְנוּכְלָה לוֹ, וְנִקְחָה נִקְמָתֵנוּ מִמֶּנּוּ.	10 For I have heard the whispering of many, terror on every side: 'Denounce, and we will denounce him'; even of all my familiar friends, them that watch for my halting: 'Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.'
20.11 יא  וַיהוָה אוֹתִי כְּגִבּוֹר עָרִיץ, עַל-כֵּן רֹדְפַי יִכָּשְׁלוּ וְלֹא יֻכָלוּ; בֹּשׁוּ מְאֹד כִּי-לֹא הִשְׂכִּילוּ, כְּלִמַּת עוֹלָם לֹא תִשָּׁכֵחַ.	11 But the LORD is with me as a mighty warrior; therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail; they shall be greatly ashamed, because they have not prospered, even with an everlasting confusion which shall never be forgotten.
20.12 יב  וַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת בֹּחֵן צַדִּיק, רֹאֶה כְלָיוֹת וָלֵב; אֶרְאֶה נִקְמָתְךָ מֵהֶם, כִּי אֵלֶיךָ גִּלִּיתִי אֶת-רִיבִי.  {ס}	12 But, O LORD of hosts, that triest the righteous, that seest the reins and the heart, let me see Thy vengeance on them; for unto Thee have I revealed my cause. {S}
20.13 יג  שִׁירוּ, לַיהוָה--הַלְלוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה:  כִּי הִצִּיל אֶת-נֶפֶשׁ אֶבְיוֹן, מִיַּד מְרֵעִים.  {ס}	13 Sing unto the LORD, praise ye the LORD; for He hath delivered the soul of the needy from the hand of evil-doers. {S}
20.14 יד  אָרוּר הַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יֻלַּדְתִּי בּוֹ:  יוֹם אֲשֶׁר-יְלָדַתְנִי אִמִּי, אַל-יְהִי בָרוּךְ.	14 Cursed be the day wherein I was born; the day wherein my mother bore me, let it not be blessed.
20.15 טו  אָרוּר הָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר בִּשַּׂר אֶת-אָבִי לֵאמֹר, יֻלַּד-לְךָ, בֵּן זָכָר--שַׂמֵּחַ, שִׂמְּחָהוּ.	15 Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying: 'A man-child is born unto thee'; making him very glad.
20.16 טז  וְהָיָה הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, כֶּעָרִים אֲשֶׁר-הָפַךְ יְהוָה וְלֹא נִחָם; וְשָׁמַע זְעָקָה בַּבֹּקֶר, וּתְרוּעָה בְּעֵת צָהֳרָיִם.	16 And let that man be as the cities which the LORD overthrew, and repented not; and let him hear a cry in the morning, and an alarm at noontide;
20.17 יז  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מוֹתְתַנִי, מֵרָחֶם; וַתְּהִי-לִי אִמִּי קִבְרִי, וְרַחְמָה הֲרַת עוֹלָם.	17 Because He slew me not from the womb; and so my mother would have been my grave, and her womb always great.
20.18 יח  לָמָּה זֶּה מֵרֶחֶם יָצָאתִי, לִרְאוֹת עָמָל וְיָגוֹן; וַיִּכְלוּ בְּבֹשֶׁת, יָמָי.  {פ}	18 Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed in shame? {P}
21.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה--בִּשְׁלֹחַ אֵלָיו הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ, אֶת-פַּשְׁחוּר בֶּן-מַלְכִּיָּה, וְאֶת-צְפַנְיָה בֶן-מַעֲשֵׂיָה הַכֹּהֵן, לֵאמֹר.	1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashhur the son of Malchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying:
21.2 ב  דְּרָשׁ-נָא בַעֲדֵנוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, כִּי נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל נִלְחָם עָלֵינוּ; אוּלַי יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה אוֹתָנוּ כְּכָל-נִפְלְאֹתָיו, וְיַעֲלֶה מֵעָלֵינוּ.	2 'Inquire, I pray thee, of the LORD for us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; peradventure the LORD will deal with us according to all His wondrous works, that he may go up from us.'
21.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֲלֵיהֶם:  כֹּה תֹאמְרֻן, אֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ.  {ס}	3 Then said Jeremiah unto them: Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah: {S}
21.4 ד  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מֵסֵב אֶת-כְּלֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה אֲשֶׁר בְּיֶדְכֶם, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם נִלְחָמִים בָּם אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל וְאֶת-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, הַצָּרִים עֲלֵיכֶם מִחוּץ לַחוֹמָה; וְאָסַפְתִּי אוֹתָם, אֶל-תּוֹךְ הָעִיר הַזֹּאת.	4 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, that besiege you without the walls, and I will gather them into the midst of this city.
21.5 ה  וְנִלְחַמְתִּי אֲנִי אִתְּכֶם, בְּיָד נְטוּיָה וּבִזְרוֹעַ חֲזָקָה, וּבְאַף וּבְחֵמָה, וּבְקֶצֶף גָּדוֹל.	5 And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.
21.6 ו  וְהִכֵּיתִי, אֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְאֶת-הָאָדָם, וְאֶת-הַבְּהֵמָה:  בְּדֶבֶר גָּדוֹל, יָמֻתוּ.	6 And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; they shall die of a great pestilence.
21.7 ז  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן נְאֻם-יְהוָה אֶתֵּן אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-עֲבָדָיו וְאֶת-הָעָם וְאֶת-הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת מִן-הַדֶּבֶר מִן-הַחֶרֶב וּמִן-הָרָעָב, בְּיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וּבְיַד אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וּבְיַד מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם; וְהִכָּם לְפִי-חֶרֶב--לֹא-יָחוּס עֲלֵיהֶם, וְלֹא יַחְמֹל וְלֹא יְרַחֵם.	7 And afterward, saith the LORD, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life; and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have compassion.
21.8 ח  וְאֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה תֹּאמַר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  הִנְנִי נֹתֵן לִפְנֵיכֶם, אֶת-דֶּרֶךְ הַחַיִּים וְאֶת-דֶּרֶךְ הַמָּוֶת.	8 And unto this people thou shalt say: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death.
21.9 ט  הַיֹּשֵׁב, בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת, יָמוּת, בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר; וְהַיּוֹצֵא וְנָפַל עַל-הַכַּשְׂדִּים הַצָּרִים עֲלֵיכֶם, יחיה (וְחָיָה), וְהָיְתָה-לּוֹ נַפְשׁוֹ, לְשָׁלָל.	9 He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he that goeth out, and falleth away to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey.
21.10 י  כִּי שַׂמְתִּי פָנַי בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת לְרָעָה, וְלֹא לְטוֹבָה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; בְּיַד-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל תִּנָּתֵן, וּשְׂרָפָהּ בָּאֵשׁ.  {ס}	10 For I have set My face against this city for evil, and not for good, saith the LORD; it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire. {S}
21.11 יא  וּלְבֵית מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, שִׁמְעוּ דְּבַר-יְהוָה.	11 And unto the house of the king of Judah: Hear ye the word of the LORD;
21.12 יב  בֵּית דָּוִד, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, דִּינוּ לַבֹּקֶר מִשְׁפָּט, וְהַצִּילוּ גָזוּל מִיַּד עוֹשֵׁק:  פֶּן-תֵּצֵא כָאֵשׁ חֲמָתִי, וּבָעֲרָה וְאֵין מְכַבֶּה, מִפְּנֵי, רֹעַ מעלליהם (מַעַלְלֵיכֶם).	12 O house of David, thus saith the LORD: Execute justice in the morning, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest My fury go forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
21.13 יג  הִנְנִי אֵלַיִךְ יֹשֶׁבֶת הָעֵמֶק, צוּר הַמִּישֹׁר--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; הָאֹמְרִים מִי-יֵחַת עָלֵינוּ, וּמִי יָבוֹא בִּמְעוֹנוֹתֵינוּ.	13 Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the LORD; ye that say: 'Who shall come down against us? or who shall enter into our habitations?'
21.14 יד  וּפָקַדְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם כִּפְרִי מַעַלְלֵיכֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְהִצַּתִּי אֵשׁ בְּיַעְרָהּ, וְאָכְלָה כָּל-סְבִיבֶיהָ.	14 And I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the LORD; and I will kindle a fire in her forest, and it shall devour all that is round about her.
22.1 א  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, רֵד בֵּית-מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וְדִבַּרְתָּ שָׁם, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	1 Thus said the LORD: Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,
22.2 ב  וְאָמַרְתָּ, שְׁמַע דְּבַר-יְהוָה, מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, הַיֹּשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא דָוִד:  אַתָּה וַעֲבָדֶיךָ וְעַמְּךָ, הַבָּאִים בַּשְּׁעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	2 and say: Hear the word of the LORD, O king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates.
22.3 ג  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, עֲשׂוּ מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה, וְהַצִּילוּ גָזוּל, מִיַּד עָשׁוֹק; וְגֵר יָתוֹם וְאַלְמָנָה אַל-תֹּנוּ, אַל-תַּחְמֹסוּ, וְדָם נָקִי, אַל-תִּשְׁפְּכוּ בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	3 Thus saith the LORD: Execute ye justice and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; and do no wrong, do no violence, to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.
22.4 ד  כִּי אִם-עָשׂוֹ תַּעֲשׂוּ, אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה--וּבָאוּ בְשַׁעֲרֵי הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה מְלָכִים יֹשְׁבִים לְדָוִד עַל-כִּסְאוֹ, רֹכְבִים בָּרֶכֶב וּבַסּוּסִים, הוּא וַעֲבָדָו, וְעַמּוֹ.	4 For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.
22.5 ה  וְאִם לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה--בִּי נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי-לְחָרְבָּה יִהְיֶה הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה.  {פ}	5 But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by Myself, saith the LORD, that this house shall become a desolation. {P}
22.6 ו  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, עַל-בֵּית מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, גִּלְעָד אַתָּה לִי, רֹאשׁ הַלְּבָנוֹן; אִם-לֹא אֲשִׁיתְךָ מִדְבָּר, עָרִים לֹא נושבה (נוֹשָׁבוּ).	6 For thus saith the LORD concerning the house of the king of Judah: Thou art Gilead unto Me, the head of Lebanon; yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, cities which are not inhabited.
22.7 ז  וְקִדַּשְׁתִּי עָלֶיךָ מַשְׁחִתִים, אִישׁ וְכֵלָיו; וְכָרְתוּ מִבְחַר אֲרָזֶיךָ, וְהִפִּילוּ עַל-הָאֵשׁ.	7 And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his weapons; and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into the fire.
22.8 ח  וְעָבְרוּ גּוֹיִם רַבִּים, עַל הָעִיר הַזֹּאת; וְאָמְרוּ, אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ, עַל-מֶה עָשָׂה יְהוָה כָּכָה, לָעִיר הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת.	8 And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his neighbour: 'Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this great city?'
22.9 ט  וְאָמְרוּ--עַל אֲשֶׁר עָזְבוּ, אֶת-בְּרִית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיַּעַבְדוּם.  {ס}	9 Then they shall answer: 'Because they forsook the covenant of the LORD their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them.' {S}
22.10 י  אַל-תִּבְכּוּ לְמֵת, וְאַל-תָּנֻדוּ לוֹ; בְּכוּ בָכוֹ, לַהֹלֵךְ--כִּי לֹא יָשׁוּב עוֹד, וְרָאָה אֶת-אֶרֶץ מוֹלַדְתּוֹ.	10 Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him; but weep sore for him that goeth away, for he shall return no more, nor see his native country.
22.11 יא  כִּי כֹה אָמַר-יְהוָה אֶל-שַׁלֻּם בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, הַמֹּלֵךְ תַּחַת יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ אָבִיו, אֲשֶׁר יָצָא, מִן-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה:  לֹא-יָשׁוּב שָׁם, עוֹד.	11 For thus saith the LORD touching Shallum the son of Josiah, king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his father, and who went forth out of this place: He shall not return thither any more;
22.12 יב  כִּי, בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-הִגְלוּ אֹתוֹ--שָׁם יָמוּת; וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לֹא-יִרְאֶה עוֹד.  {ס}	12 but in the place whither they have led him captive, there shall he die, and he shall see this land no more. {S}
22.13 יג  הוֹי בֹּנֶה בֵיתוֹ בְּלֹא-צֶדֶק, וַעֲלִיּוֹתָיו בְּלֹא מִשְׁפָּט; בְּרֵעֵהוּ יַעֲבֹד חִנָּם, וּפֹעֲלוֹ לֹא יִתֶּן-לוֹ.	13 Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by injustice; that useth his neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not his hire;
22.14 יד  הָאֹמֵר, אֶבְנֶה-לִּי בֵּית מִדּוֹת, וַעֲלִיּוֹת, מְרֻוָּחִים; וְקָרַע לוֹ, חַלּוֹנָי, וְסָפוּן בָּאָרֶז, וּמָשׁוֹחַ בַּשָּׁשַׁר.	14 That saith: 'I will build me a wide house and spacious chambers', and cutteth him out windows, and it is ceiled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.
22.15 טו  הֲתִמְלֹךְ, כִּי אַתָּה מְתַחֲרֶה בָאָרֶז; אָבִיךָ הֲלוֹא אָכַל וְשָׁתָה, וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה--אָז, טוֹב לוֹ.	15 Shalt thou reign, because thou strivest to excel in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do justice and righteousness? Then it was well with him.
22.16 טז  דָּן דִּין-עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן, אָז טוֹב; הֲלוֹא-הִיא הַדַּעַת אֹתִי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	16 He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well. Is not this to know Me? saith the LORD.
22.17 יז  כִּי אֵין עֵינֶיךָ וְלִבְּךָ, כִּי אִם-עַל-בִּצְעֶךָ; וְעַל דַּם-הַנָּקִי לִשְׁפּוֹךְ, וְעַל-הָעֹשֶׁק וְעַל-הַמְּרוּצָה לַעֲשׂוֹת.  {ס}	17 But thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for shedding innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it. {S}
22.18 יח  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, לֹא-יִסְפְּדוּ לוֹ, הוֹי אָחִי וְהוֹי אָחוֹת; לֹא-יִסְפְּדוּ לוֹ, הוֹי אָדוֹן וְהוֹי הֹדֹה.	18 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah: They shall not lament for him: 'Ah my brother!' or: 'Ah sister!' They shall not lament for him: 'Ah lord!' or: 'Ah his glory!'
22.19 יט  קְבוּרַת חֲמוֹר, יִקָּבֵר; סָחוֹב וְהַשְׁלֵךְ, מֵהָלְאָה לְשַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	19 He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. {S}
22.20 כ  עֲלִי הַלְּבָנוֹן וּצְעָקִי, וּבַבָּשָׁן תְּנִי קוֹלֵךְ; וְצַעֲקִי, מֵעֲבָרִים, כִּי נִשְׁבְּרוּ, כָּל-מְאַהֲבָיִךְ.	20 Go up to Lebanon, and cry, and lift up thy voice in Bashan; and cry from Abarim, for all thy lovers are destroyed.
22.21 כא  דִּבַּרְתִּי אֵלַיִךְ בְּשַׁלְוֺתַיִךְ, אָמַרְתְּ לֹא אֶשְׁמָע; זֶה דַרְכֵּךְ מִנְּעוּרַיִךְ, כִּי לֹא-שָׁמַעַתְּ בְּקוֹלִי.	21 I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou saidst: 'I will not hear.' This hath been thy manner from thy youth, that thou hearkenedst not to My voice.
22.22 כב  כָּל-רֹעַיִךְ תִּרְעֶה-רוּחַ, וּמְאַהֲבַיִךְ בַּשְּׁבִי יֵלֵכוּ:  כִּי אָז תֵּבֹשִׁי וְנִכְלַמְתְּ, מִכֹּל רָעָתֵךְ.	22 The wind shall feed upon all thy shepherds, and thy lovers shall go into captivity; surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.
22.23 כג  ישבתי (יֹשַׁבְתְּ) בַּלְּבָנוֹן, מקננתי (מְקֻנַּנְתְּ) בָּאֲרָזִים:  מַה-נֵּחַנְתְּ בְּבֹא-לָךְ חֲבָלִים, חִיל כַּיֹּלֵדָה.	23 O inhabitant of Lebanon, that art nestled in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!
22.24 כד  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי אִם-יִהְיֶה כָּנְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, חוֹתָם עַל-יַד יְמִינִי:  כִּי מִשָּׁם, אֶתְּקֶנְךָּ.	24 As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon My right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence;
22.25 כה  וּנְתַתִּיךָ, בְּיַד מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשֶׁךָ, וּבְיַד אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה יָגוֹר, מִפְּנֵיהֶם--וּבְיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וּבְיַד הַכַּשְׂדִּים.	25 and I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them of whom thou art afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.
22.26 כו  וְהֵטַלְתִּי אֹתְךָ, וְאֶת-אִמְּךָ אֲשֶׁר יְלָדַתְךָ, עַל הָאָרֶץ אַחֶרֶת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֻלַּדְתֶּם שָׁם; וְשָׁם, תָּמוּתוּ.	26 And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bore thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die.
22.27 כז  וְעַל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-הֵם מְנַשְּׂאִים אֶת-נַפְשָׁם--לָשׁוּב שָׁם:  שָׁמָּה, לֹא יָשׁוּבוּ.  {פ}	27 But to the land whereunto they long to return, thither shall they not return. {P}
22.28 כח  הַעֶצֶב נִבְזֶה נָפוּץ, הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה כָּנְיָהוּ, אִם-כְּלִי, אֵין חֵפֶץ בּוֹ; מַדּוּעַ הוּטְלוּ, הוּא וְזַרְעוֹ, וְהֻשְׁלְכוּ, עַל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדָעוּ.	28 Is this man Coniah a despised, broken image? Is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure? Wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into the land which they know not?
22.29 כט  אֶרֶץ אֶרֶץ, אָרֶץ--שִׁמְעִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה.	29 O land, land, land, hear the word of the LORD.
22.30 ל  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, כִּתְבוּ אֶת-הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה עֲרִירִי--גֶּבֶר, לֹא-יִצְלַח בְּיָמָיו:  כִּי לֹא יִצְלַח מִזַּרְעוֹ, אִישׁ יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא דָוִד, וּמֹשֵׁל עוֹד, בִּיהוּדָה.  {פ}	30 Thus saith the LORD: Write ye this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days; for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah. {P}
23.1 א  הוֹי רֹעִים, מְאַבְּדִים וּמְפִצִים אֶת-צֹאן מַרְעִיתִי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	1 Woe unto the shepherds that destroy and scatter the sheep of My pasture! saith the LORD. {S}
23.2 ב  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-הָרֹעִים הָרֹעִים אֶת-עַמִּי, אַתֶּם הֲפִצֹתֶם אֶת-צֹאנִי וַתַּדִּחוּם, וְלֹא פְקַדְתֶּם אֹתָם; הִנְנִי פֹקֵד עֲלֵיכֶם אֶת-רֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיכֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	2 Therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, against the shepherds that feed My people: Ye have scattered My flock, and driven them away, and have not taken care of them; behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the LORD.
23.3 ג  וַאֲנִי, אֲקַבֵּץ אֶת-שְׁאֵרִית צֹאנִי, מִכֹּל הָאֲרָצוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-הִדַּחְתִּי אֹתָם שָׁם; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי אֶתְהֶן עַל-נְוֵהֶן, וּפָרוּ וְרָבוּ.	3 And I will gather the remnant of My flock out of all the countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them back to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and multiply.
23.4 ד  וַהֲקִמֹתִי עֲלֵיהֶם רֹעִים, וְרָעוּם; וְלֹא-יִירְאוּ עוֹד וְלֹא-יֵחַתּוּ וְלֹא יִפָּקֵדוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	4 And I will set up shepherds over them, who shall feed them; and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall any be lacking, saith the LORD. {S}
23.5 ה  הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַהֲקִמֹתִי לְדָוִד צֶמַח צַדִּיק; וּמָלַךְ מֶלֶךְ וְהִשְׂכִּיל, וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה בָּאָרֶץ.	5 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will raise unto David a righteous shoot, and he shall reign as king and prosper, and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
23.6 ו  בְּיָמָיו תִּוָּשַׁע יְהוּדָה, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל יִשְׁכֹּן לָבֶטַח; וְזֶה-שְּׁמוֹ אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרְאוֹ, יְהוָה צִדְקֵנוּ.  {פ}	6 In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his name whereby he shall be called, The LORD is our righteousness. {P}
23.7 ז  לָכֵן הִנֵּה-יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְלֹא-יֹאמְרוּ עוֹד חַי-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	7 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that they shall no more say: 'As the LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt';
23.8 ח  כִּי אִם-חַי-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶעֱלָה וַאֲשֶׁר הֵבִיא אֶת-זֶרַע בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹנָה, וּמִכֹּל הָאֲרָצוֹת, אֲשֶׁר הִדַּחְתִּים שָׁם; וְיָשְׁבוּ, עַל-אַדְמָתָם.  {פ}	8 but: 'As the LORD liveth, that brought up and that led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all the countries whither I had driven them'; and they shall dwell in their own land. {P}
23.9 ט  לַנְּבִאִים נִשְׁבַּר לִבִּי בְקִרְבִּי, רָחֲפוּ כָּל-עַצְמוֹתַי--הָיִיתִי כְּאִישׁ שִׁכּוֹר, וּכְגֶבֶר עֲבָרוֹ יָיִן:  מִפְּנֵי יְהוָה, וּמִפְּנֵי דִּבְרֵי קָדְשׁוֹ.	9 Concerning the prophets. My heart within me is broken, all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome; because of the LORD, and because of His holy words.
23.10 י  כִּי מְנָאֲפִים, מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ--כִּי-מִפְּנֵי אָלָה אָבְלָה הָאָרֶץ, יָבְשׁוּ נְאוֹת מִדְבָּר; וַתְּהִי מְרוּצָתָם רָעָה, וּגְבוּרָתָם לֹא-כֵן.	10 For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourneth, the pastures of the wilderness are dried up; and their course is evil, and their force is not right.
23.11 יא  כִּי-גַם-נָבִיא גַם-כֹּהֵן, חָנֵפוּ; גַּם-בְּבֵיתִי מָצָאתִי רָעָתָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	11 For both prophet and priest are ungodly; yea, in My house have I found their wickedness, saith the LORD.
23.12 יב  לָכֵן יִהְיֶה דַרְכָּם לָהֶם, כַּחֲלַקְלַקּוֹת בָּאֲפֵלָה, יִדַּחוּ, וְנָפְלוּ בָהּ:  כִּי-אָבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם רָעָה שְׁנַת פְּקֻדָּתָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	12 Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery places in the darkness, they shall be thrust, and fall therein; for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the LORD.
23.13 יג  וּבִנְבִיאֵי שֹׁמְרוֹן, רָאִיתִי תִפְלָה; הִנַּבְּאוּ בַבַּעַל, וַיַּתְעוּ אֶת-עַמִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	13 And I have seen unseemliness in the prophets of Samaria: they prophesied by Baal, and caused My people Israel to err.
23.14 יד  וּבִנְבִאֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם רָאִיתִי שַׁעֲרוּרָה, נָאוֹף וְהָלֹךְ בַּשֶּׁקֶר וְחִזְּקוּ יְדֵי מְרֵעִים, לְבִלְתִּי-שָׁבוּ, אִישׁ מֵרָעָתוֹ; הָיוּ-לִי כֻלָּם כִּסְדֹם, וְיֹשְׁבֶיהָ כַּעֲמֹרָה.  {פ}	14 But in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen a horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies, and they strengthen the hands of evil-doers, that none doth return from his wickedness; they are all of them become unto Me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah. {P}
23.15 טו  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עַל-הַנְּבִאִים, הִנְנִי מַאֲכִיל אוֹתָם לַעֲנָה, וְהִשְׁקִתִים מֵי-רֹאשׁ:  כִּי, מֵאֵת נְבִיאֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, יָצְאָה חֲנֻפָּה, לְכָל-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	15 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the prophets: Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall; for from the prophets of Jerusalem is ungodliness gone forth into all the land. {P}
23.16 טז  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ עַל-דִּבְרֵי הַנְּבִאִים הַנִּבְּאִים לָכֶם--מַהְבִּלִים הֵמָּה, אֶתְכֶם:  חֲזוֹן לִבָּם יְדַבֵּרוּ, לֹא מִפִּי יְהוָה.	16 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you, they lead you unto vanity; they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the LORD.
23.17 יז  אֹמְרִים אָמוֹר, לִמְנַאֲצַי, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, שָׁלוֹם יִהְיֶה לָכֶם; וְכֹל הֹלֵךְ בִּשְׁרִרוּת לִבּוֹ, אָמְרוּ, לֹא-תָבוֹא עֲלֵיכֶם, רָעָה.	17 They say continually unto them that despise Me: 'The LORD hath said: Ye shall have peace'; and unto every one that walketh in the stubbornness of his own heart they say: 'No evil shall come upon you';
23.18 יח  כִּי מִי עָמַד בְּסוֹד יְהוָה, וְיֵרֶא וְיִשְׁמַע אֶת-דְּבָרוֹ; מִי-הִקְשִׁיב דברי (דְּבָרוֹ), וַיִּשְׁמָע.  {ס}	18 For who hath stood in the council of the LORD, that he should perceive and hear His word? Who hath attended to His word, and heard it? {S}
23.19 יט  הִנֵּה סַעֲרַת יְהוָה, חֵמָה יָצְאָה, וְסַעַר, מִתְחוֹלֵל; עַל רֹאשׁ רְשָׁעִים, יָחוּל.	19 Behold, a storm of the LORD is gone forth in fury, yea, a whirling storm; it shall whirl upon the head of the wicked.
23.20 כ  לֹא יָשׁוּב אַף-יְהוָה, עַד-עֲשֹׂתוֹ וְעַד-הֲקִימוֹ מְזִמּוֹת לִבּוֹ; בְּאַחֲרִית, הַיָּמִים, תִּתְבּוֹנְנוּ בָהּ, בִּינָה.	20 The anger of the LORD shall not return, until He have executed, and till He have performed the purposes of His heart; in the end of days ye shall consider it perfectly.
23.21 כא  לֹא-שָׁלַחְתִּי אֶת-הַנְּבִאִים, וְהֵם רָצוּ; לֹא-דִבַּרְתִּי אֲלֵיהֶם, וְהֵם נִבָּאוּ.	21 I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.
23.22 כב  וְאִם-עָמְדוּ, בְּסוֹדִי--וְיַשְׁמִעוּ דְבָרַי, אֶת-עַמִּי, וִישִׁבוּם מִדַּרְכָּם הָרָע, וּמֵרֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיהֶם.  {ס}	22 But if they have stood in My council, then let them cause My people to hear My words, and turn them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings. {S}
23.23 כג  הַאֱלֹהֵי מִקָּרֹב אָנִי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  וְלֹא אֱלֹהֵי, מֵרָחֹק.	23 Am I a God near at hand, saith the LORD, and not a God afar off?
23.24 כד  אִם-יִסָּתֵר אִישׁ בַּמִּסְתָּרִים וַאֲנִי לֹא-אֶרְאֶנּוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  הֲלוֹא אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ אֲנִי מָלֵא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	24 Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the LORD. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the LORD.
23.25 כה  שָׁמַעְתִּי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-אָמְרוּ הַנְּבִאִים, הַנִּבְּאִים בִּשְׁמִי שֶׁקֶר, לֵאמֹר:  חָלַמְתִּי, חָלָמְתִּי.	25 I have heard what the prophets have said, that prophesy lies in My name, saying: 'I have dreamed, I have dreamed.'
23.26 כו  עַד-מָתַי, הֲיֵשׁ בְּלֵב הַנְּבִאִים--נִבְּאֵי הַשָּׁקֶר; וּנְבִיאֵי, תַּרְמִת לִבָּם.	26 How long shall this be? Is it in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies, and the prophets of the deceit of their own heart?
23.27 כז  הַחֹשְׁבִים, לְהַשְׁכִּיחַ אֶת-עַמִּי שְׁמִי, בַּחֲלוֹמֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר יְסַפְּרוּ אִישׁ לְרֵעֵהוּ--כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁכְחוּ אֲבוֹתָם אֶת-שְׁמִי, בַּבָּעַל.	27 That think to cause My people to forget My name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers forgot My name for Baal.
23.28 כח  הַנָּבִיא אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ חֲלוֹם, יְסַפֵּר חֲלוֹם, וַאֲשֶׁר דְּבָרִי אִתּוֹ, יְדַבֵּר דְּבָרִי אֱמֶת:  מַה-לַתֶּבֶן אֶת-הַבָּר, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	28 The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath My word; let him speak My word faithfully. What hath the straw to do with the wheat? saith the LORD.
23.29 כט  הֲלוֹא כֹה דְבָרִי כָּאֵשׁ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וּכְפַטִּישׁ, יְפֹצֵץ סָלַע.  {ס}	29 Is not My word like as fire? saith the LORD; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces? {S}
23.30 ל  לָכֵן הִנְנִי עַל-הַנְּבִאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, מְגַנְּבֵי דְבָרַי, אִישׁ מֵאֵת רֵעֵהוּ.	30 Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that steal My words every one from his neighbour.
23.31 לא  הִנְנִי עַל-הַנְּבִיאִם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, הַלֹּקְחִים לְשׁוֹנָם, וַיִּנְאֲמוּ נְאֻם.	31 Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that use their tongues and say: 'He saith.'
23.32 לב  הִנְנִי עַל-נִבְּאֵי חֲלֹמוֹת שֶׁקֶר, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַיְסַפְּרוּם וַיַּתְעוּ אֶת-עַמִּי, בְּשִׁקְרֵיהֶם וּבְפַחֲזוּתָם; וְאָנֹכִי לֹא-שְׁלַחְתִּים וְלֹא צִוִּיתִים, וְהוֹעֵיל לֹא-יוֹעִילוּ לָעָם-הַזֶּה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	32 Behold, I am against them that prophesy lying dreams, saith the LORD, and do tell them, and cause My people to err by their lies, and by their wantonness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; neither can they profit this people at all, saith the LORD.
23.33 לג  וְכִי-יִשְׁאָלְךָ הָעָם הַזֶּה אוֹ-הַנָּבִיא אוֹ-כֹהֵן, לֵאמֹר, מַה-מַּשָּׂא, יְהוָה--וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-מַה-מַּשָּׂא, וְנָטַשְׁתִּי אֶתְכֶם נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	33 And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying: 'What is the burden of the LORD?' then shalt thou say unto them: 'What burden! I will cast you off, saith the LORD.'
23.34 לד  וְהַנָּבִיא וְהַכֹּהֵן וְהָעָם, אֲשֶׁר יֹאמַר מַשָּׂא יְהוָה--וּפָקַדְתִּי עַל-הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, וְעַל-בֵּיתוֹ.	34 And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that shall say: 'The burden of the LORD', I will even punish that man and his house.
23.35 לה  כֹּה תֹאמְרוּ אִישׁ עַל-רֵעֵהוּ, וְאִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו:  מֶה-עָנָה יְהוָה, וּמַה-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.	35 Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother: 'What hath the LORD answered?' and: 'What hath the LORD spoken?'
23.36 לו  וּמַשָּׂא יְהוָה, לֹא תִזְכְּרוּ-עוֹד:  כִּי הַמַּשָּׂא, יִהְיֶה לְאִישׁ דְּבָרוֹ, וַהֲפַכְתֶּם אֶת-דִּבְרֵי אֱלֹהִים חַיִּים, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	36 And the burden of the LORD shall ye mention no more; for every man's own word shall be his burden; and would ye pervert the words of the living God, of the LORD of hosts our God?
23.37 לז  כֹּה תֹאמַר, אֶל-הַנָּבִיא:  מֶה-עָנָךְ יְהוָה, וּמַה-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.	37 Thus shalt thou say to the prophet: 'What hath the LORD answered thee?' and: 'What hath the LORD spoken?'
23.38 לח  וְאִם-מַשָּׂא יְהוָה, תֹּאמֵרוּ, לָכֵן כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, יַעַן אֲמָרְכֶם אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה מַשָּׂא יְהוָה--וָאֶשְׁלַח אֲלֵיכֶם לֵאמֹר, לֹא תֹאמְרוּ מַשָּׂא יְהוָה.	38 But if ye say: 'The burden of the LORD'; therefore thus saith the LORD: Because ye say this word: 'The burden of the LORD', and I have sent unto you, saying: 'Ye shall not say: The burden of the LORD';
23.39 לט  לָכֵן הִנְנִי, וְנָשִׁיתִי אֶתְכֶם נָשֹׁא; וְנָטַשְׁתִּי אֶתְכֶם, וְאֶת-הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָכֶם וְלַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם--מֵעַל פָּנָי.	39 therefore, behold, I will utterly tear you out, and I will cast you off, and the city that I gave unto you and to your fathers, away from My presence;
23.40 מ  וְנָתַתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם, חֶרְפַּת עוֹלָם, וּכְלִמּוּת עוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא תִשָּׁכֵחַ.  {פ}	40 and I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten. {P}
24.1 א  הִרְאַנִי, יְהוָה, וְהִנֵּה שְׁנֵי דּוּדָאֵי תְאֵנִים, מוּעָדִים לִפְנֵי הֵיכַל יְהוָה:  אַחֲרֵי הַגְלוֹת נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶת-יְכָנְיָהוּ בֶן-יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-הֶחָרָשׁ וְאֶת-הַמַּסְגֵּר, מִירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיְבִאֵם, בָּבֶל.	1 The LORD showed me, and behold two baskets of figs set before the temple of the LORD; after that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the craftsmen and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.
24.2 ב  הַדּוּד אֶחָד, תְּאֵנִים טֹבוֹת מְאֹד, כִּתְאֵנֵי, הַבַּכֻּרוֹת; וְהַדּוּד אֶחָד, תְּאֵנִים רָעוֹת מְאֹד, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵאָכַלְנָה, מֵרֹעַ.  {פ}	2 One basket had very good figs, like the figs that are first-ripe; and the other basket had very bad figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad. {P}
24.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלַי, מָה-אַתָּה רֹאֶה יִרְמְיָהוּ, וָאֹמַר, תְּאֵנִים; הַתְּאֵנִים הַטֹּבוֹת, טֹבוֹת מְאֹד, וְהָרָעוֹת רָעוֹת מְאֹד, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵאָכַלְנָה מֵרֹעַ.  {פ}	3 Then said the LORD unto me: 'What seest thou, Jeremiah?' And I said: 'Figs; the good figs, very good; and the bad, very bad, that cannot be eaten, they are so bad.' {P}
24.4 ד  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.	4 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
24.5 ה  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּתְּאֵנִים הַטֹּבוֹת הָאֵלֶּה:  כֵּן-אַכִּיר אֶת-גָּלוּת יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר שִׁלַּחְתִּי מִן-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה אֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים--לְטוֹבָה.	5 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Like these good figs, so will I regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans, for good.
24.6 ו  וְשַׂמְתִּי עֵינִי עֲלֵיהֶם לְטוֹבָה, וַהֲשִׁבֹתִים עַל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת; וּבְנִיתִים וְלֹא אֶהֱרֹס, וּנְטַעְתִּים וְלֹא אֶתּוֹשׁ.	6 And I will set Mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them back to this land; and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.
24.7 ז  וְנָתַתִּי לָהֶם לֵב לָדַעַת אֹתִי, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, וְהָיוּ-לִי לְעָם, וְאָנֹכִי אֶהְיֶה לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים:  כִּי-יָשֻׁבוּ אֵלַי, בְּכָל-לִבָּם.  {ס}	7 And I will give them a heart to know Me, that I am the LORD; and they shall be My people, and I will be their God; for they shall return unto Me with their whole heart. {S}
24.8 ח  וְכַתְּאֵנִים, הָרָעוֹת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵאָכַלְנָה, מֵרֹעַ:  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, כֵּן אֶתֵּן אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-שָׂרָיו וְאֵת שְׁאֵרִית יְרוּשָׁלִַם הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, וְהַיֹּשְׁבִים, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	8 And as the bad figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so bad; surely thus saith the LORD: So will I make Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt;
24.9 ט  וּנְתַתִּים לזועה (לְזַעֲוָה) לְרָעָה, לְכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, לְחֶרְפָּה וּלְמָשָׁל לִשְׁנִינָה וְלִקְלָלָה, בְּכָל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר-אַדִּיחֵם שָׁם.	9 I will even make them a horror among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil; a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.
24.10 י  וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי בָם, אֶת-הַחֶרֶב אֶת-הָרָעָב וְאֶת-הַדָּבֶר, עַד-תֻּמָּם מֵעַל הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לָהֶם וְלַאֲבוֹתֵיהֶם.  {פ}	10 And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers.' {P}
25.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה עַל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, עַל-כָּל-עַם יְהוּדָה, בַּשָּׁנָה הָרְבִעִית, לִיהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  הִיא, הַשָּׁנָה הָרִאשֹׁנִית, לִנְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר, מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon;
25.2 ב  אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, עַל-כָּל-עַם יְהוּדָה, וְאֶל כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לֵאמֹר.	2 which Jeremiah the prophet spoke unto all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying:
25.3 ג  מִן-שְׁלֹשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה לְיֹאשִׁיָּהוּ בֶן-אָמוֹן מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה וְעַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, זֶה שָׁלֹשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלָי; וָאֲדַבֵּר אֲלֵיכֶם אַשְׁכֵּים וְדַבֵּר, וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם.	3 From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, even unto this day, these three and twenty years, the word of the LORD hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, speaking betimes and often; but ye have not hearkened.
25.4 ד  וְשָׁלַח יְהוָה אֲלֵיכֶם אֶת-כָּל-עֲבָדָיו הַנְּבִאִים, הַשְׁכֵּם וְשָׁלֹחַ--וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם; וְלֹא-הִטִּיתֶם אֶת-אָזְנְכֶם, לִשְׁמֹעַ.	4 And the LORD hath sent unto you all His servants the prophets, sending them betimes and often--but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear--
25.5 ה  לֵאמֹר, שׁוּבוּ-נָא אִישׁ מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה וּמֵרֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיכֶם, וּשְׁבוּ עַל-הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן יְהוָה לָכֶם וְלַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם--לְמִן-עוֹלָם, וְעַד-עוֹלָם.	5 saying: 'Return ye now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the LORD hath given unto you and to your fathers, for ever and ever;
25.6 ו  וְאַל-תֵּלְכוּ, אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, לְעָבְדָם, וּלְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת לָהֶם; וְלֹא-תַכְעִיסוּ אוֹתִי בְּמַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיכֶם, וְלֹא אָרַע לָכֶם.	6 and go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke Me not with the work of your hands, and I will do you no hurt.'
25.7 ז  וְלֹא-שְׁמַעְתֶּם אֵלַי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לְמַעַן הכעסוני (הַכְעִיסֵנִי) בְּמַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיכֶם, לְרַע לָכֶם.  {פ}	7 Yet ye have not hearkened unto Me, saith the LORD; that ye might provoke Me with the work of your hands to your own hurt. {P}
25.8 ח  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת:  יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שְׁמַעְתֶּם אֶת-דְּבָרָי.	8 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts: Because ye have not heard My words,
25.9 ט  הִנְנִי שֹׁלֵחַ וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶת-כָּל-מִשְׁפְּחוֹת צָפוֹן נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְאֶל-נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל עַבְדִּי, וַהֲבִאֹתִים עַל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת וְעַל-יֹשְׁבֶיהָ, וְעַל כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה סָבִיב; וְהַחֲרַמְתִּים--וְשַׂמְתִּים לְשַׁמָּה וְלִשְׁרֵקָה, וּלְחָרְבוֹת עוֹלָם.	9 behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the LORD, and I will send unto Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, My servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about; and I will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations.
25.10 י  וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי מֵהֶם, קוֹל שָׂשׂוֹן וְקוֹל שִׂמְחָה, קוֹל חָתָן, וְקוֹל כַּלָּה--קוֹל רֵחַיִם, וְאוֹר נֵר.	10 Moreover I will cause to cease from among them the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the lamp.
25.11 יא  וְהָיְתָה כָּל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לְחָרְבָּה לְשַׁמָּה; וְעָבְדוּ הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה.	11 And this whole land shall be a desolation, and a waste; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.
25.12 יב  וְהָיָה כִמְלֹאות שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה אֶפְקֹד עַל-מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל וְעַל-הַגּוֹי הַהוּא נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֶת-עֲוֺנָם--וְעַל-אֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים; וְשַׂמְתִּי אֹתוֹ, לְשִׁמְמוֹת עוֹלָם.	12 And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the LORD, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans; and I will make it perpetual desolations.
25.13 יג  והבאותי (וְהֵבֵאתִי) עַל-הָאָרֶץ הַהִיא, אֶת-כָּל-דְּבָרַי אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי עָלֶיהָ--אֵת כָּל-הַכָּתוּב בַּסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-נִבָּא יִרְמְיָהוּ עַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם.	13 And I will bring upon that land all My words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.
25.14 יד  כִּי עָבְדוּ-בָם גַּם-הֵמָּה גּוֹיִם רַבִּים, וּמְלָכִים גְּדוֹלִים; וְשִׁלַּמְתִּי לָהֶם כְּפָעֳלָם, וּכְמַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיהֶם.  {פ}	14 For many nations and great kings shall make bondmen of them also; and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the work of their own hands. {P}
25.15 טו  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵלַי, קַח אֶת-כּוֹס הַיַּיִן הַחֵמָה הַזֹּאת, מִיָּדִי; וְהִשְׁקִיתָה אֹתוֹ אֶת-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁלֵחַ אוֹתְךָ אֲלֵיהֶם.	15 For thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto me: Take this cup of the wine of fury at My hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it.
25.16 טז  וְשָׁתוּ, וְהִתְגֹּעֲשׁוּ וְהִתְהֹלָלוּ, מִפְּנֵי הַחֶרֶב, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁלֵחַ בֵּינֹתָם.	16 And they shall drink, and reel to and fro, and be like madmen, because of the sword that I will send among them.--
25.17 יז  וָאֶקַּח אֶת-הַכּוֹס, מִיַּד יְהוָה; וָאַשְׁקֶה, אֶת-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-שְׁלָחַנִי יְהוָה, אֲלֵיהֶם.	17 Then took I the cup of the LORD'S hand, and made all the nations to drink, unto whom the LORD had sent me:
25.18 יח  אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְאֶת-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וְאֶת-מְלָכֶיהָ אֶת-שָׂרֶיהָ:  לָתֵת אֹתָם לְחָרְבָּה לְשַׁמָּה, לִשְׁרֵקָה וְלִקְלָלָה--כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	18 Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them an appalment, an astonishment, a hissing, and a curse; as it is this day;
25.19 יט  אֶת-פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם וְאֶת-עֲבָדָיו וְאֶת-שָׂרָיו, וְאֶת-כָּל-עַמּוֹ.	19 Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all his people;
25.20 כ  וְאֵת, כָּל-הָעֶרֶב, וְאֵת, כָּל-מַלְכֵי אֶרֶץ הָעוּץ; וְאֵת, כָּל-מַלְכֵי אֶרֶץ פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְאֶת-אַשְׁקְלוֹן וְאֶת-עַזָּה וְאֶת-עֶקְרוֹן, וְאֵת שְׁאֵרִית אַשְׁדּוֹד.	20 and all the mingled people; and all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Gaza, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod;
25.21 כא  אֶת-אֱדוֹם וְאֶת-מוֹאָב, וְאֶת-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	21 Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon;
25.22 כב  וְאֵת, כָּל-מַלְכֵי-צֹר, וְאֵת, כָּל-מַלְכֵי צִידוֹן; וְאֵת מַלְכֵי הָאִי, אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵבֶר הַיָּם.	22 and all the kings of Tyre, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isle which is beyond the sea;
25.23 כג  וְאֶת-דְּדָן וְאֶת-תֵּימָא וְאֶת-בּוּז, וְאֵת כָּל-קְצוּצֵי פֵאָה.	23 Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that have the corners of their hair polled;
25.24 כד  וְאֵת, כָּל-מַלְכֵי עֲרָב; וְאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵי הָעֶרֶב, הַשֹּׁכְנִים בַּמִּדְבָּר.	24 and all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the wilderness;
25.25 כה  וְאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵי זִמְרִי, וְאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵי עֵילָם, וְאֵת, כָּל-מַלְכֵי מָדָי.	25 and all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes;
25.26 כו  וְאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵי הַצָּפוֹן, הַקְּרֹבִים וְהָרְחֹקִים אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו, וְאֵת כָּל-הַמַּמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה; וּמֶלֶךְ שֵׁשַׁךְ, יִשְׁתֶּה אַחֲרֵיהֶם.	26 and all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another; and all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth.--And the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.
25.27 כז  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם  {פ} כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁתוּ וְשִׁכְרוּ וּקְיוּ, וְנִפְלוּ, וְלֹא תָקוּמוּ--מִפְּנֵי הַחֶרֶב, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי שֹׁלֵחַ בֵּינֵיכֶם.	27 And thou shalt say unto them: {P} Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink ye, and be drunken, and spew, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.
25.28 כח  וְהָיָה, כִּי יְמָאֲנוּ לָקַחַת-הַכּוֹס מִיָּדְךָ--לִשְׁתּוֹת; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--שָׁתוֹ תִשְׁתּוּ.	28 And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thy hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Ye shall surely drink.
25.29 כט  כִּי הִנֵּה בָעִיר אֲשֶׁר נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עָלֶיהָ, אָנֹכִי מֵחֵל לְהָרַע, וְאַתֶּם, הִנָּקֵה תִנָּקוּ:  לֹא תִנָּקוּ--כִּי חֶרֶב אֲנִי קֹרֵא עַל-כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	29 For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city whereupon My name is called, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the LORD of hosts.
25.30 ל  וְאַתָּה תִּנָּבֵא אֲלֵיהֶם, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, יְהוָה מִמָּרוֹם יִשְׁאָג וּמִמְּעוֹן קָדְשׁוֹ יִתֵּן קוֹלוֹ--שָׁאֹג יִשְׁאַג עַל-נָוֵהוּ, הֵידָד כְּדֹרְכִים יַעֲנֶה אֶל כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ.	30 Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them: The LORD doth roar from on high, and utter His voice from His holy habitation; He doth mightily roar because of His fold; He giveth a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.
25.31 לא  בָּא שָׁאוֹן, עַד-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ--כִּי רִיב לַיהוָה בַּגּוֹיִם, נִשְׁפָּט הוּא לְכָל-בָּשָׂר:  הָרְשָׁעִים נְתָנָם לַחֶרֶב, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	31 A noise is come even to the end of the earth; for the LORD hath a controversy with the nations, He doth plead with all flesh; as for the wicked, He hath given them to the sword, saith the LORD. {S}
25.32 לב  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הִנֵּה רָעָה יֹצֵאת מִגּוֹי אֶל-גּוֹי; וְסַעַר גָּדוֹל, יֵעוֹר מִיַּרְכְּתֵי-אָרֶץ.	32 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great storm shall be raised up from the uttermost parts of the earth.
25.33 לג  וְהָיוּ חַלְלֵי יְהוָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, מִקְצֵה הָאָרֶץ, וְעַד-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ:  לֹא יִסָּפְדוּ, וְלֹא יֵאָסְפוּ וְלֹא יִקָּבֵרוּ--לְדֹמֶן עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה, יִהְיוּ.	33 And the slain of the LORD shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the face of the ground.
25.34 לד  הֵילִילוּ הָרֹעִים וְזַעֲקוּ, וְהִתְפַּלְּשׁוּ אַדִּירֵי הַצֹּאן--כִּי-מָלְאוּ יְמֵיכֶם, לִטְבוֹחַ; וּתְפוֹצוֹתִיכֶם, וּנְפַלְתֶּם כִּכְלִי חֶמְדָּה.	34 Wail, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the dust, ye leaders of the flock; for the days of your slaughter are fully come, and I will break you in pieces, and ye shall fall like a precious vessel.
25.35 לה  וְאָבַד מָנוֹס, מִן-הָרֹעִים, וּפְלֵיטָה, מֵאַדִּירֵי הַצֹּאן.	35 And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the leaders of the flock to escape.
25.36 לו  קוֹל צַעֲקַת הָרֹעִים, וִילְלַת אַדִּירֵי הַצֹּאן--כִּי-שֹׁדֵד יְהוָה, אֶת-מַרְעִיתָם.	36 Hark! the cry of the shepherds, and the wailing of the leaders of the flock! For the LORD despoileth their pasture.
25.37 לז  וְנָדַמּוּ, נְאוֹת הַשָּׁלוֹם, מִפְּנֵי, חֲרוֹן אַף-יְהוָה.	37 And the peaceable folds are brought to silence because of the fierce anger of the LORD.
25.38 לח  עָזַב כַּכְּפִיר, סֻכּוֹ--כִּי-הָיְתָה אַרְצָם, לְשַׁמָּה, מִפְּנֵי חֲרוֹן הַיּוֹנָה, וּמִפְּנֵי חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ.  {פ}	38 He hath forsaken His covert, as the lion; for their land is become a waste because of the fierceness of the oppressing sword, and because of His fierce anger. {P}
26.1 א  בְּרֵאשִׁית, מַמְלְכוּת יְהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ--מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  הָיָה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, מֵאֵת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, came this word from the LORD, saying:
26.2 ב  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, עֲמֹד בַּחֲצַר בֵּית-יְהוָה, וְדִבַּרְתָּ עַל-כָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה הַבָּאִים לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת בֵּית-יְהוָה, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִיךָ לְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם:  אַל-תִּגְרַע, דָּבָר.	2 'Thus saith the LORD: Stand in the court of the LORD'S house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the LORD'S house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word.
26.3 ג  אוּלַי יִשְׁמְעוּ--וְיָשֻׁבוּ, אִישׁ מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה; וְנִחַמְתִּי אֶל-הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי חֹשֵׁב לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהֶם, מִפְּנֵי, רֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיהֶם.	3 It may be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way; that I may repent Me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings.
26.4 ד  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  אִם-לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ, אֵלַי, לָלֶכֶת בְּתוֹרָתִי, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לִפְנֵיכֶם.	4 And thou shalt say unto them: Thus saith the LORD: If ye will not hearken to Me, to walk in My law, which I have set before you,
26.5 ה  לִשְׁמֹעַ, עַל-דִּבְרֵי עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִאִים, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי, שֹׁלֵחַ אֲלֵיכֶם; וְהַשְׁכֵּם וְשָׁלֹחַ, וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם.	5 to hearken to the words of My servants the prophets, whom I send unto you, even sending them betimes and often, but ye have not hearkened;
26.6 ו  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה, כְּשִׁלֹה; וְאֶת-הָעִיר הזאתה (הַזֹּאת) אֶתֵּן לִקְלָלָה, לְכֹל גּוֹיֵ הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	6 then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.' {P}
26.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַנְּבִאִים, וְכָל-הָעָם, אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מְדַבֵּר אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה בְּבֵית יְהוָה.	7 So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the LORD.
26.8 ח  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת יִרְמְיָהוּ, לְדַבֵּר אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, לְדַבֵּר, אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם; וַיִּתְפְּשׂוּ אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַנְּבִיאִים, וְכָל-הָעָם לֵאמֹר--מוֹת תָּמוּת.	8 Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold on him, saying: 'Thou shalt surely die.
26.9 ט  מַדּוּעַ נִבֵּיתָ בְשֵׁם-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר, כְּשִׁלוֹ יִהְיֶה הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה, וְהָעִיר הַזֹּאת תֶּחֱרַב, מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב; וַיִּקָּהֵל כָּל-הָעָם אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, בְּבֵית יְהוָה.	9 Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the LORD, saying: This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate, without an inhabitant?' And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.
26.10 י  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, אֵת הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וַיַּעֲלוּ מִבֵּית-הַמֶּלֶךְ, בֵּית יְהוָה; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בְּפֶתַח שַׁעַר-יְהוָה, הֶחָדָשׁ.  {ס}	10 When the princes of Judah heard these things, they came up from the king's house unto the house of the LORD; and they sat in the entry of the new gate of the LORD'S house. {S}
26.11 יא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַנְּבִאִים, אֶל-הַשָּׂרִים, וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, לֵאמֹר:  מִשְׁפַּט-מָוֶת, לָאִישׁ הַזֶּה, כִּי נִבָּא אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, כַּאֲשֶׁר שְׁמַעְתֶּם בְּאָזְנֵיכֶם.	11 Then spoke the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to all the people, saying: 'This man is worthy of death; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.'
26.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ אֶל-כָּל-הַשָּׂרִים, וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעָם לֵאמֹר:  יְהוָה שְׁלָחַנִי, לְהִנָּבֵא אֶל-הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה וְאֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר שְׁמַעְתֶּם.	12 Then spoke Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people, saying: 'The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.
26.13 יג  וְעַתָּה, הֵיטִיבוּ דַרְכֵיכֶם וּמַעַלְלֵיכֶם, וְשִׁמְעוּ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם:  וְיִנָּחֵם יְהוָה--אֶל-הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר עֲלֵיכֶם.	13 Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and hearken to the voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD will repent Him of the evil that He hath pronounced against you.
26.14 יד  וַאֲנִי, הִנְנִי בְיֶדְכֶם:  עֲשׂוּ-לִי כַּטּוֹב וְכַיָּשָׁר, בְּעֵינֵיכֶם.	14 But as for me, behold, I am in your hand; do with me as is good and right in your eyes.
26.15 טו  אַךְ יָדֹעַ תֵּדְעוּ, כִּי אִם-מְמִתִים אַתֶּם אֹתִי--כִּי-דָם נָקִי אַתֶּם נֹתְנִים עֲלֵיכֶם, וְאֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת וְאֶל-יֹשְׁבֶיהָ:  כִּי בֶאֱמֶת, שְׁלָחַנִי יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם, לְדַבֵּר בְּאָזְנֵיכֶם, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.  {ס}	15 Only know ye for certain that, if ye put me to death, ye will bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof; for of a truth the LORD hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.' {S}
26.16 טז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הַשָּׂרִים וְכָל-הָעָם, אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְאֶל-הַנְּבִיאִים:  אֵין-לָאִישׁ הַזֶּה, מִשְׁפַּט-מָוֶת, כִּי בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, דִּבֶּר אֵלֵינוּ.	16 Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the prophets: 'This man is not worthy of death; for he hath spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God.'
26.17 יז  וַיָּקֻמוּ אֲנָשִׁים, מִזִּקְנֵי הָאָרֶץ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-כָּל-קְהַל הָעָם לֵאמֹר.	17 Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying:
26.18 יח  מיכיה (מִיכָה), הַמּוֹרַשְׁתִּי, הָיָה נִבָּא, בִּימֵי חִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-כָּל-עַם יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, צִיּוֹן שָׂדֶה תֵחָרֵשׁ וִירוּשָׁלַיִם עִיִּים תִּהְיֶה, וְהַר הַבַּיִת, לְבָמוֹת יָעַר.	18 'Micah the Morashtite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah; and he spoke to all the people of Judah, saying: Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Zion shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.
26.19 יט  הֶהָמֵת הֱמִתֻהוּ חִזְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְכָל-יְהוּדָה, הֲלֹא יָרֵא אֶת-יְהוָה--וַיְחַל אֶת-פְּנֵי יְהוָה, וַיִּנָּחֶם יְהוָה אֶל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר עֲלֵיהֶם; וַאֲנַחְנוּ, עֹשִׂים רָעָה גְדוֹלָה--עַל-נַפְשׁוֹתֵינוּ.	19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the LORD, and entreat the favour of the LORD, and the LORD repented Him of the evil which He had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our own souls.'
26.20 כ  וְגַם-אִישׁ, הָיָה מִתְנַבֵּא בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה, אוּרִיָּהוּ בֶּן-שְׁמַעְיָהוּ, מִקִּרְיַת הַיְּעָרִים; וַיִּנָּבֵא עַל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְעַל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, כְּכֹל, דִּבְרֵי יִרְמְיָהוּ.	20 And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the LORD, Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath-jearim; and he prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah;
26.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁמַע הַמֶּלֶךְ-יְהוֹיָקִים וְכָל-גִּבּוֹרָיו וְכָל-הַשָּׂרִים, אֶת-דְּבָרָיו, וַיְבַקֵּשׁ הַמֶּלֶךְ, הֲמִיתוֹ; וַיִּשְׁמַע אוּרִיָּהוּ וַיִּרָא, וַיִּבְרַח וַיָּבֹא מִצְרָיִם.	21 and when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death; but when Uriah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt;
26.22 כב  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹיָקִים, אֲנָשִׁים--מִצְרָיִם:  אֵת אֶלְנָתָן בֶּן-עַכְבּוֹר וַאֲנָשִׁים אִתּוֹ, אֶל-מִצְרָיִם.	22 and Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him, into Egypt;
26.23 כג  וַיּוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-אוּרִיָּהוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, וַיְבִאֻהוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוֹיָקִים, וַיַּכֵּהוּ, בֶּחָרֶב; וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ, אֶת-נִבְלָתוֹ, אֶל-קִבְרֵי, בְּנֵי הָעָם.	23 and they fetched forth Uriah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the children of the people.
26.24 כד  אַךְ, יַד אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן, הָיְתָה, אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ--לְבִלְתִּי תֵּת-אֹתוֹ בְיַד-הָעָם, לַהֲמִיתוֹ.  {פ}	24 Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death. {P}
27.1 א  בְּרֵאשִׁית, מַמְלֶכֶת יְהוֹיָקִם בֶּן-יֹאושִׁיָּהוּ--מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה:  הָיָה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָה, מֵאֵת יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר.	1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, came this word unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
27.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֵלַי, עֲשֵׂה לְךָ, מוֹסֵרוֹת וּמֹטוֹת; וּנְתַתָּם, עַל-צַוָּארֶךָ.	2 'Thus saith the LORD to me: Make thee bands and bars, and put them upon thy neck;
27.3 ג  וְשִׁלַּחְתָּם אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב, וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ צֹר, וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ צִידוֹן--בְּיַד מַלְאָכִים הַבָּאִים יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	3 and send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers that come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah;
27.4 ד  וְצִוִּיתָ אֹתָם, אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיהֶם לֵאמֹר:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה תֹאמְרוּ, אֶל-אֲדֹנֵיכֶם.	4 and give them a charge unto their masters, saying: Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Thus shall ye say unto your masters:
27.5 ה  אָנֹכִי עָשִׂיתִי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-הָאָדָם וְאֶת-הַבְּהֵמָה אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי הָאָרֶץ, בְּכֹחִי הַגָּדוֹל, וּבִזְרוֹעִי הַנְּטוּיָה; וּנְתַתִּיהָ, לַאֲשֶׁר יָשַׁר בְּעֵינָי.	5 I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the face of the earth, by My great power and by My outstretched arm; and I give it unto whom it seemeth right unto Me.
27.6 ו  וְעַתָּה, אָנֹכִי נָתַתִּי אֶת-כָּל-הָאֲרָצוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, בְּיַד נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, עַבְדִּי; וְגַם אֶת-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, נָתַתִּי לוֹ לְעָבְדוֹ.	6 And now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, My servant; and the beasts of the field also have I given him to serve him.
27.7 ז  וְעָבְדוּ אֹתוֹ כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, וְאֶת-בְּנוֹ וְאֶת-בֶּן-בְּנוֹ--עַד בֹּא-עֵת אַרְצוֹ, גַּם-הוּא, וְעָבְדוּ בוֹ גּוֹיִם רַבִּים, וּמְלָכִים גְּדֹלִים.	7 And all the nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son, until the time of his own land come; and then many nations and great kings shall make him their bondman.
27.8 ח  וְהָיָה הַגּוֹי וְהַמַּמְלָכָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יַעַבְדוּ אֹתוֹ אֶת-נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִתֵּן אֶת-צַוָּארוֹ, בְּעֹל מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב וּבַדֶּבֶר אֶפְקֹד עַל-הַגּוֹי הַהוּא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, עַד-תֻּמִּי אֹתָם, בְּיָדוֹ.	8 And it shall come to pass, that the nation and the kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation will I visit, saith the LORD, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.
27.9 ט  וְאַתֶּם אַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶל-נְבִיאֵיכֶם וְאֶל-קֹסְמֵיכֶם, וְאֶל חֲלֹמֹתֵיכֶם, וְאֶל-עֹנְנֵיכֶם, וְאֶל-כַּשָּׁפֵיכֶם--אֲשֶׁר-הֵם אֹמְרִים אֲלֵיכֶם, לֵאמֹר, לֹא תַעַבְדוּ, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	9 But as for you, hearken ye not to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreams, nor to your soothsayers, nor to your sorcerers, that speak unto you, saying: Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon;
27.10 י  כִּי שֶׁקֶר, הֵם נִבְּאִים לָכֶם, לְמַעַן הַרְחִיק אֶתְכֶם מֵעַל אַדְמַתְכֶם, וְהִדַּחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם וַאֲבַדְתֶּם.	10 for they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out and ye should perish.
27.11 יא  וְהַגּוֹי, אֲשֶׁר יָבִיא אֶת-צַוָּארוֹ בְּעֹל מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--וַעֲבָדוֹ:  וְהִנַּחְתִּיו עַל-אַדְמָתוֹ נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַעֲבָדָהּ וְיָשַׁב בָּהּ.	11 But the nation that shall bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, that nation will I let remain in their own land, saith the LORD; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.'
27.12 יב  וְאֶל-צִדְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה דִּבַּרְתִּי, כְּכָל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה לֵאמֹר:  הָבִיאוּ אֶת-צַוְּארֵיכֶם בְּעֹל מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וְעִבְדוּ אֹתוֹ וְעַמּוֹ--וִחְיוּ.	12 And I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying: 'Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.
27.13 יג  לָמָּה תָמוּתוּ אַתָּה וְעַמֶּךָ, בַּחֶרֶב בָּרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר--כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, אֶל-הַגּוֹי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יַעֲבֹד אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	13 Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the LORD hath spoken concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
27.14 יד  וְאַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶל-דִּבְרֵי הַנְּבִאִים, הָאֹמְרִים אֲלֵיכֶם לֵאמֹר, לֹא תַעַבְדוּ, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל:  כִּי שֶׁקֶר, הֵם נִבְּאִים לָכֶם.	14 And hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you, saying: Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon, for they prophesy a lie unto you.
27.15 טו  כִּי לֹא שְׁלַחְתִּים נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְהֵם נִבְּאִים בִּשְׁמִי לַשָּׁקֶר:  לְמַעַן הַדִּיחִי אֶתְכֶם, וַאֲבַדְתֶּם--אַתֶּם, וְהַנְּבִאִים הַנִּבְּאִים לָכֶם.	15 For I have not sent them, saith the LORD, and they prophesy falsely in My name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.'
27.16 טז  וְאֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעָם הַזֶּה דִּבַּרְתִּי לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶל-דִּבְרֵי נְבִיאֵיכֶם הַנִּבְּאִים לָכֶם לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה כְלֵי בֵית-יְהוָה מוּשָׁבִים מִבָּבֶלָה עַתָּה מְהֵרָה:  כִּי שֶׁקֶר, הֵמָּה נִבְּאִים לָכֶם.	16 Also I spoke to the priests and to all this people, saying: 'Thus saith the LORD: Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying: Behold, the vessels of the LORD'S house shall now shortly be brought back from Babylon; for they prophesy a lie unto you.
27.17 יז  אַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ אֲלֵיהֶם, עִבְדוּ אֶת-מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל וִחְיוּ:  לָמָּה תִהְיֶה הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, חָרְבָּה.	17 Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live; wherefore should this city become desolate?
27.18 יח  וְאִם-נְבִאִים הֵם, וְאִם-יֵשׁ דְּבַר-יְהוָה אִתָּם--יִפְגְּעוּ-נָא, בַּיהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לְבִלְתִּי-בֹאוּ הַכֵּלִים הַנּוֹתָרִים בְּבֵית-יְהוָה וּבֵית מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם, בָּבֶלָה.	18 But if they be prophets, and if the word of the LORD be with them, let them now make intercession to the LORD of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon.
27.19 יט  כִּי כֹה אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֶל-הָעַמֻּדִים, וְעַל-הַיָּם וְעַל-הַמְּכֹנוֹת--וְעַל יֶתֶר הַכֵּלִים, הַנּוֹתָרִים בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת.	19 For thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this city,
27.20 כ  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-לְקָחָם, נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, בַּגְלוֹתוֹ אֶת-יכוניה (יְכָנְיָה) בֶן-יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה מִירוּשָׁלִַם, בָּבֶלָה; וְאֵת כָּל-חֹרֵי יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִָם.	20 which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;
27.21 כא  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--עַל-הַכֵּלִים, הַנּוֹתָרִים בֵּית יְהוָה, וּבֵית מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִָם.	21 yea, thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem:
27.22 כב  בָּבֶלָה יוּבָאוּ, וְשָׁמָּה יִהְיוּ--עַד יוֹם פָּקְדִי אֹתָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְהַעֲלִיתִים וַהֲשִׁיבֹתִים, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	22 They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be, until the day that I remember them, saith the LORD, and bring them up, and restore them to this place.' {P}
28.1 א  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַהִיא, בְּרֵאשִׁית מַמְלֶכֶת צִדְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בשנת (בַּשָּׁנָה) הָרְבִעִית, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי; אָמַר אֵלַי חֲנַנְיָה בֶן-עַזּוּר הַנָּבִיא אֲשֶׁר מִגִּבְעוֹן, בְּבֵית יְהוָה, לְעֵינֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים וְכָל-הָעָם, לֵאמֹר.	1 And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azzur the prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke unto me in the house of the LORD, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying:
28.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לֵאמֹר:  שָׁבַרְתִּי, אֶת-עֹל מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	2 'Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying: I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.
28.3 ג  בְּעוֹד שְׁנָתַיִם יָמִים, אֲנִי מֵשִׁיב אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, אֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי, בֵּית יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר לָקַח נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, מִן-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וַיְבִיאֵם, בָּבֶל.	3 Within two full years will I bring back into this place all the vessels of the LORD'S house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon;
28.4 ד  וְאֶת-יְכָנְיָה בֶן-יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-כָּל-גָּלוּת יְהוּדָה הַבָּאִים בָּבֶלָה, אֲנִי מֵשִׁיב אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה--נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  כִּי אֶשְׁבֹּר, אֶת-עֹל מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	4 and I will bring back to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, that went to Babylon, saith the LORD; for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.'
28.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-חֲנַנְיָה הַנָּבִיא, לְעֵינֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים וּלְעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם, הָעֹמְדִים בְּבֵית יְהוָה.	5 Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood in the house of the LORD,
28.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא, אָמֵן, כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה; יָקֵם יְהוָה, אֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר נִבֵּאתָ לְהָשִׁיב כְּלֵי בֵית-יְהוָה וְכָל-הַגּוֹלָה, מִבָּבֶל אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	6 even the prophet Jeremiah said: 'Amen! the LORD do so! the LORD perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to bring back the vessels of the LORD'S house, and all them that are carried away captive, from Babylon unto this place!
28.7 ז  אַךְ-שְׁמַע-נָא הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי דֹּבֵר בְּאָזְנֶיךָ, וּבְאָזְנֵי, כָּל-הָעָם.	7 Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people:
28.8 ח  הַנְּבִיאִים, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ לְפָנַי וּלְפָנֶיךָ--מִן-הָעוֹלָם:  וַיִּנָּבְאוּ אֶל-אֲרָצוֹת רַבּוֹת, וְעַל-מַמְלָכוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת, לְמִלְחָמָה, וּלְרָעָה וּלְדָבֶר.	8 The prophets that have been before me and before thee of old prophesied against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.
28.9 ט  הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר יִנָּבֵא לְשָׁלוֹם--בְּבֹא, דְּבַר הַנָּבִיא, יִוָּדַע הַנָּבִיא, אֲשֶׁר-שְׁלָחוֹ יְהוָה בֶּאֱמֶת.	9 The prophet that prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the LORD hath truly sent him.'
28.10 י  וַיִּקַּח חֲנַנְיָה הַנָּבִיא, אֶת-הַמּוֹטָה, מֵעַל, צַוַּאר יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא; וַיִּשְׁבְּרֵהוּ.	10 Then Hananiah the prophet took the bar from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it.
28.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר חֲנַנְיָה לְעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, כָּכָה אֶשְׁבֹּר אֶת-עֹל נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל בְּעוֹד שְׁנָתַיִם יָמִים, מֵעַל צַוַּאר כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם; וַיֵּלֶךְ יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא, לְדַרְכּוֹ.  {פ}	11 And Hananiah spoke in the presence of all the people, saying: 'Thus saith the LORD: Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from off the neck of all the nations within two full years.' And the prophet Jeremiah went his way. {P}
28.12 יב  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָה:  אַחֲרֵי שְׁבוֹר חֲנַנְיָה הַנָּבִיא, אֶת-הַמּוֹטָה, מֵעַל צַוַּאר יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא, לֵאמֹר.	12 Then the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the bar from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying:
28.13 יג  הָלוֹךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ אֶל-חֲנַנְיָה לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, מוֹטֹת עֵץ, שָׁבָרְתָּ; וְעָשִׂיתָ תַחְתֵּיהֶן, מֹטוֹת בַּרְזֶל.	13 'Go, and tell Hananiah, saying: Thus saith the LORD: Thou hast broken the bars of wood; but thou shalt make in their stead bars of iron.
28.14 יד  כִּי כֹה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֹל בַּרְזֶל נָתַתִּי עַל-צַוַּאר כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה לַעֲבֹד אֶת-נְבֻכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--וַעֲבָדֻהוּ; וְגַם אֶת-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, נָתַתִּי לוֹ.	14 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him; and I have given him the beasts of the field also.'
28.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא אֶל-חֲנַנְיָה הַנָּבִיא, שְׁמַע-נָא חֲנַנְיָה:  לֹא-שְׁלָחֲךָ יְהוָה--וְאַתָּה הִבְטַחְתָּ אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, עַל-שָׁקֶר.	15 Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet: 'Hear now, Hananiah; the LORD hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.
28.16 טז  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מְשַׁלֵּחֲךָ, מֵעַל פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה; הַשָּׁנָה אַתָּה מֵת, כִּי-סָרָה דִבַּרְתָּ אֶל-יְהוָה.	16 'Therefore thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will send thee away from off the face of the earth; this year thou shalt die, because thou hast spoken perversion against the LORD.'
28.17 יז  וַיָּמָת חֲנַנְיָה הַנָּבִיא, בַּשָּׁנָה הַהִיא, בַּחֹדֶשׁ, הַשְּׁבִיעִי.  {פ}	17 So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month. {P}
29.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה דִּבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר, אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַח יִרְמְיָה הַנָּבִיא מִירוּשָׁלִָם--אֶל-יֶתֶר זִקְנֵי הַגּוֹלָה, וְאֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְאֶל-הַנְּבִיאִים וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר הֶגְלָה נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מִירוּשָׁלִַם, בָּבֶלָה.	1 Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders of the captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon,
29.2 ב  אַחֲרֵי צֵאת יְכָנְיָה-הַמֶּלֶךְ וְהַגְּבִירָה וְהַסָּרִיסִים שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה וִירוּשָׁלִַם, וְהֶחָרָשׁ וְהַמַּסְגֵּר--מִירוּשָׁלִָם.	2 after that Jeconiah the king, and the queen-mother, and the officers, and the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen, and the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;
29.3 ג  בְּיַד אֶלְעָשָׂה בֶן-שָׁפָן, וּגְמַרְיָה בֶּן-חִלְקִיָּה:  אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַח צִדְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, אֶל-נְבוּכַדְנֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--בָּבֶלָה לֵאמֹר.	3 by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, saying:
29.4 ד  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  לְכָל-הַגּוֹלָה--אֲשֶׁר-הִגְלֵיתִי מִירוּשָׁלִַם, בָּבֶלָה.	4 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all the captivity, whom I have caused to be carried away captive from Jerusalem unto Babylon:
29.5 ה  בְּנוּ בָתִּים, וְשֵׁבוּ; וְנִטְעוּ גַנּוֹת, וְאִכְלוּ אֶת-פִּרְיָן.	5 Build ye houses, and dwell in them, and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them;
29.6 ו  קְחוּ נָשִׁים, וְהוֹלִידוּ בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת, וּקְחוּ לִבְנֵיכֶם נָשִׁים וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיכֶם תְּנוּ לַאֲנָשִׁים, וְתֵלַדְנָה בָּנִים וּבָנוֹת; וּרְבוּ-שָׁם, וְאַל-תִּמְעָטוּ.	6 take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; and multiply ye there, and be not diminished.
29.7 ז  וְדִרְשׁוּ אֶת-שְׁלוֹם הָעִיר, אֲשֶׁר הִגְלֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם שָׁמָּה, וְהִתְפַּלְלוּ בַעֲדָהּ, אֶל-יְהוָה:  כִּי בִשְׁלוֹמָהּ, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם שָׁלוֹם.	7 And seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray unto the LORD for it; for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.
29.8 ח  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַל-יַשִּׁיאוּ לָכֶם נְבִיאֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר-בְּקִרְבְּכֶם, וְקֹסְמֵיכֶם; וְאַל-תִּשְׁמְעוּ, אֶל-חֲלֹמֹתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם, מַחְלְמִים.	8 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Let not your prophets that are in the midst of you, and your diviners, beguile you, neither hearken ye to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.
29.9 ט  כִּי בְשֶׁקֶר, הֵם נִבְּאִים לָכֶם בִּשְׁמִי:  לֹא שְׁלַחְתִּים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	9 For they prophesy falsely unto you in My name; I have not sent them, saith the LORD. {S}
29.10 י  כִּי-כֹה, אָמַר יְהוָה, כִּי לְפִי מְלֹאת לְבָבֶל שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה, אֶפְקֹד אֶתְכֶם; וַהֲקִמֹתִי עֲלֵיכֶם, אֶת-דְּבָרִי הַטּוֹב, לְהָשִׁיב אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	10 For thus saith the LORD: After seventy years are accomplished for Babylon, I will remember you, and perform My good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place.
29.11 יא  כִּי אָנֹכִי יָדַעְתִּי אֶת-הַמַּחֲשָׁבֹת, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי חֹשֵׁב עֲלֵיכֶם--נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  מַחְשְׁבוֹת שָׁלוֹם וְלֹא לְרָעָה, לָתֵת לָכֶם אַחֲרִית וְתִקְוָה.	11 For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you a future and a hope.
29.12 יב  וּקְרָאתֶם אֹתִי וַהֲלַכְתֶּם, וְהִתְפַּלַּלְתֶּם אֵלָי; וְשָׁמַעְתִּי, אֲלֵיכֶם.	12 And ye shall call upon Me, and go, and pray unto Me, and I will hearken unto you.
29.13 יג  וּבִקַּשְׁתֶּם אֹתִי, וּמְצָאתֶם:  כִּי תִדְרְשֻׁנִי, בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם.	13 And ye shall seek Me, and find Me, when ye shall search for Me with all your heart.
29.14 יד  וְנִמְצֵאתִי לָכֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְשַׁבְתִּי אֶת-שביתכם (שְׁבוּתְכֶם) וְקִבַּצְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִכָּל-הַגּוֹיִם וּמִכָּל-הַמְּקוֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר הִדַּחְתִּי אֶתְכֶם שָׁם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי אֶתְכֶם--אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר-הִגְלֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם מִשָּׁם.	14 And I will be found of you, saith the LORD, and I will turn your captivity, and gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith the LORD; and I will bring you back unto the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive.
29.15 טו  כִּי, אֲמַרְתֶּם:  הֵקִים לָנוּ יְהוָה נְבִאִים, בָּבֶלָה.  {ס}	15 For ye have said: 'The LORD hath raised us up prophets in Babylon.' {S}
29.16 טז  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ הַיּוֹשֵׁב אֶל-כִּסֵּא דָוִד, וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, הַיּוֹשֵׁב בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת:  אֲחֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָצְאוּ אִתְּכֶם בַּגּוֹלָה.	16 For thus saith the LORD concerning the king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and concerning all the people that dwell in this city, your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity;
29.17 יז  כֹּה אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הִנְנִי מְשַׁלֵּחַ בָּם, אֶת-הַחֶרֶב אֶת-הָרָעָב וְאֶת-הַדָּבֶר; וְנָתַתִּי אוֹתָם, כַּתְּאֵנִים הַשֹּׁעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵאָכַלְנָה, מֵרֹעַ.	17 thus saith the LORD of hosts: Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so bad.
29.18 יח  וְרָדַפְתִּי, אַחֲרֵיהֶם, בַּחֶרֶב, בָּרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר; וּנְתַתִּים לזועה (לְזַעֲוָה) לְכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, לְאָלָה וּלְשַׁמָּה וְלִשְׁרֵקָה וּלְחֶרְפָּה, בְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-הִדַּחְתִּים שָׁם.	18 And I will pursue after them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will make them a horror unto all the kingdoms of the earth, a curse, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them;
29.19 יט  תַּחַת אֲשֶׁר-לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ אֶל-דְּבָרַי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַחְתִּי אֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִאִים, הַשְׁכֵּם וְשָׁלֹחַ, וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	19 because they have not hearkened to My words, saith the LORD, wherewith I sent unto them My servants the prophets, sending them betimes and often; but ye would not hear, saith the LORD.
29.20 כ  וְאַתֶּם, שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה:  כָּל-הַגּוֹלָה--אֲשֶׁר-שִׁלַּחְתִּי מִירוּשָׁלִַם, בָּבֶלָה.  {ס}	20 Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD, all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon: {S}
29.21 כא  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-אַחְאָב בֶּן-קוֹלָיָה וְאֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ בֶן-מַעֲשֵׂיָה, הַנִּבְּאִים לָכֶם בִּשְׁמִי, שָׁקֶר:  הִנְנִי נֹתֵן אֹתָם, בְּיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וְהִכָּם, לְעֵינֵיכֶם.	21 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie unto you in My name: Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes;
29.22 כב  וְלֻקַּח מֵהֶם, קְלָלָה, לְכֹל גָּלוּת יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּבָבֶל לֵאמֹר:  יְשִׂמְךָ יְהוָה כְּצִדְקִיָּהוּ וּכְאֶחָב, אֲשֶׁר-קָלָם מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל בָּאֵשׁ.	22 and of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of Judah that are in Babylon, saying: 'The LORD make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire';
29.23 כג  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ נְבָלָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְנַאֲפוּ אֶת-נְשֵׁי רֵעֵיהֶם, וַיְדַבְּרוּ דָבָר בִּשְׁמִי שֶׁקֶר, אֲשֶׁר לוֹא צִוִּיתִם; וְאָנֹכִי הוידע (הַיּוֹדֵעַ) וָעֵד, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	23 because they have wrought vile deeds in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbours' wives, and have spoken words in My name falsely, which I commanded them not; but I am He that knoweth, and am witness, saith the LORD. {S}
29.24 כד  וְאֶל-שְׁמַעְיָהוּ הַנֶּחֱלָמִי, תֹּאמַר לֵאמֹר.	24 And concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite thou shalt speak, saying:
29.25 כה  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לֵאמֹר:  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה שָׁלַחְתָּ בְשִׁמְכָה סְפָרִים, אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וְאֶל-צְפַנְיָה בֶן-מַעֲשֵׂיָה הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶל כָּל-הַכֹּהֲנִים לֵאמֹר.	25 Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying: Because thou hast sent letters in thine own name unto all the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, and to all the priests, saying:
29.26 כו  יְהוָה נְתָנְךָ כֹהֵן, תַּחַת יְהוֹיָדָע הַכֹּהֵן, לִהְיוֹת פְּקִדִים בֵּית יְהוָה, לְכָל-אִישׁ מְשֻׁגָּע וּמִתְנַבֵּא; וְנָתַתָּה אֹתוֹ אֶל-הַמַּהְפֶּכֶת, וְאֶל-הַצִּינֹק.	26 'The LORD hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that there should be officers in the house of the LORD for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put him in the stocks and in the collar.
29.27 כז  וְעַתָּה, לָמָּה לֹא גָעַרְתָּ, בְּיִרְמְיָהוּ, הָעַנְּתֹתִי--הַמִּתְנַבֵּא, לָכֶם.	27 Now therefore, why hast thou not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth, who maketh himself a prophet to you,
29.28 כח  כִּי עַל-כֵּן שָׁלַח אֵלֵינוּ, בָּבֶל לֵאמֹר--אֲרֻכָּה הִיא; בְּנוּ בָתִּים, וְשֵׁבוּ, וְנִטְעוּ גַנּוֹת, וְאִכְלוּ אֶת-פְּרִיהֶן.	28 forasmuch as he hath sent unto us in Babylon, saying: The captivity is long; build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them?'
29.29 כט  וַיִּקְרָא צְפַנְיָה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה, בְּאָזְנֵי, יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא.  {פ}	29 And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet. {P}
29.30 ל  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	30 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying:
29.31 לא  שְׁלַח עַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹלָה, לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אֶל-שְׁמַעְיָה הַנֶּחֱלָמִי:  יַעַן אֲשֶׁר נִבָּא לָכֶם שְׁמַעְיָה, וַאֲנִי לֹא שְׁלַחְתִּיו, וַיַּבְטַח אֶתְכֶם, עַל-שָׁקֶר.	31 Send to all them of the captivity, saying: Thus saith the LORD concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: Because that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he hath caused you to trust in a lie;
29.32 לב  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי פֹקֵד עַל-שְׁמַעְיָה הַנֶּחֱלָמִי וְעַל-זַרְעוֹ--לֹא-יִהְיֶה לוֹ אִישׁ יוֹשֵׁב בְּתוֹךְ-הָעָם הַזֶּה וְלֹא-יִרְאֶה בַטּוֹב אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה-לְעַמִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  כִּי-סָרָה דִבֶּר, עַל-יְהוָה.  {ס}	32 therefore thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed; he shall not have a man to dwell among this people, neither shall he behold the good that I will do unto My people, saith the LORD; because he hath spoken perversion against the LORD. {S}
30.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
30.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  כְּתָב-לְךָ, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ--אֶל-סֵפֶר.	2 'Thus speaketh the LORD, the God of Israel, saying: Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.
30.3 ג  כִּי הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְשַׁבְתִּי אֶת-שְׁבוּת עַמִּי יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה, אָמַר יְהוָה; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִים, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לַאֲבוֹתָם--וִירֵשׁוּהָ.  {פ}	3 For, lo, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will turn the captivity of My people Israel and Judah, saith the LORD; and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.' {P}
30.4 ד  וְאֵלֶּה הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--וְאֶל-יְהוּדָה.	4 And these are the words that the LORD spoke concerning Israel and concerning Judah.
30.5 ה  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, קוֹל חֲרָדָה שָׁמָעְנוּ--פַּחַד, וְאֵין שָׁלוֹם.	5 For thus saith the LORD: We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.
30.6 ו  שַׁאֲלוּ-נָא וּרְאוּ, אִם-יֹלֵד זָכָר:  מַדּוּעַ רָאִיתִי כָל-גֶּבֶר יָדָיו עַל-חֲלָצָיו, כַּיּוֹלֵדָה, וְנֶהֶפְכוּ כָל-פָּנִים, לְיֵרָקוֹן.	6 Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child; wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?
30.7 ז  הוֹי, כִּי גָדוֹל הַיּוֹם הַהוּא--מֵאַיִן כָּמֹהוּ; וְעֵת-צָרָה הִיא לְיַעֲקֹב, וּמִמֶּנָּה יִוָּשֵׁעַ.	7 Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it; and it is a time of trouble unto Jacob, but out of it shall he be saved.
30.8 ח  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם הַהוּא נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֶשְׁבֹּר עֻלּוֹ מֵעַל צַוָּארֶךָ, וּמוֹסְרוֹתֶיךָ, אֲנַתֵּק; וְלֹא-יַעַבְדוּ-בוֹ עוֹד, זָרִים.	8 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bands; and strangers shall no more make him their bondman;
30.9 ט  וְעָבְדוּ, אֵת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וְאֵת דָּוִד מַלְכָּם, אֲשֶׁר אָקִים לָהֶם.  {ס}	9 But they shall serve the LORD their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them. {S}
30.10 י  וְאַתָּה אַל-תִּירָא עַבְדִּי יַעֲקֹב נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְאַל-תֵּחַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי הִנְנִי מוֹשִׁיעֲךָ מֵרָחוֹק, וְאֶת-זַרְעֲךָ מֵאֶרֶץ שִׁבְיָם; וְשָׁב יַעֲקֹב וְשָׁקַט וְשַׁאֲנַן, וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד.	10 Therefore fear thou not, O Jacob My servant, saith the LORD; neither be dismayed, O Israel; for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall again be quiet and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.
30.11 יא  כִּי-אִתְּךָ אֲנִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, לְהוֹשִׁיעֶךָ:  כִּי אֶעֱשֶׂה כָלָה בְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר הֲפִצוֹתִיךָ שָּׁם, אַךְ אֹתְךָ לֹא-אֶעֱשֶׂה כָלָה, וְיִסַּרְתִּיךָ לַמִּשְׁפָּט, וְנַקֵּה לֹא אֲנַקֶּךָּ.  {פ}	11 For I am with thee, saith the LORD, to save thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have scattered thee, but I will not make a full end of thee; for I will correct thee in measure, and will not utterly destroy thee. {P}
30.12 יב  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, אָנוּשׁ לְשִׁבְרֵךְ--נַחְלָה, מַכָּתֵךְ.	12 For thus saith the LORD: Thy hurt is incurable, and thy wound is grievous.
30.13 יג  אֵין-דָּן דִּינֵךְ, לְמָזוֹר; רְפֻאוֹת תְּעָלָה, אֵין לָךְ.	13 None deemeth of thy wound that it may be bound up; thou hast no healing medicines.
30.14 יד  כָּל-מְאַהֲבַיִךְ שְׁכֵחוּךְ, אוֹתָךְ לֹא יִדְרֹשׁוּ:  כִּי מַכַּת אוֹיֵב הִכִּיתִיךְ, מוּסַר אַכְזָרִי--עַל רֹב עֲוֺנֵךְ, עָצְמוּ חַטֹּאתָיִךְ.	14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee, they seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one; for the greatness of thine iniquity, because thy sins were increased.
30.15 טו  מַה-תִּזְעַק עַל-שִׁבְרֵךְ, אָנוּשׁ מַכְאֹבֵךְ:  עַל רֹב עֲוֺנֵךְ, עָצְמוּ חַטֹּאתַיִךְ--עָשִׂיתִי אֵלֶּה, לָךְ.	15 Why criest thou for thy hurt, that thy pain is incurable? For the greatness of thine iniquity, because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee.
30.16 טז  לָכֵן כָּל-אֹכְלַיִךְ, יֵאָכֵלוּ, וְכָל-צָרַיִךְ כֻּלָּם, בַּשְּׁבִי יֵלֵכוּ; וְהָיוּ שֹׁאסַיִךְ לִמְשִׁסָּה, וְכָל-בֹּזְזַיִךְ אֶתֵּן לָבַז.	16 Therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured, and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.
30.17 יז  כִּי אַעֲלֶה אֲרֻכָה לָךְ וּמִמַּכּוֹתַיִךְ אֶרְפָּאֵךְ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  כִּי נִדָּחָה, קָרְאוּ לָךְ--צִיּוֹן הִיא, דֹּרֵשׁ אֵין לָהּ.  {ס}	17 For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the LORD; because they have called thee an outcast: 'She is Zion, there is none that careth for her.' {S}
30.18 יח  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי-שָׁב שְׁבוּת אָהֳלֵי יַעֲקוֹב, וּמִשְׁכְּנֹתָיו, אֲרַחֵם; וְנִבְנְתָה עִיר עַל-תִּלָּהּ, וְאַרְמוֹן עַל-מִשְׁפָּטוֹ יֵשֵׁב.	18 Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will turn the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have compassion on his dwelling-places; and the city shall be builded upon her own mound, and the palace shall be inhabited upon its wonted place.
30.19 יט  וְיָצָא מֵהֶם תּוֹדָה, וְקוֹל מְשַׂחֲקִים; וְהִרְבִּתִים וְלֹא יִמְעָטוּ, וְהִכְבַּדְתִּים וְלֹא יִצְעָרוּ.	19 And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry; and I will multiply them, and they shall not be diminished, I will also increase them, and they shall not dwindle away.
30.20 כ  וְהָיוּ בָנָיו כְּקֶדֶם, וַעֲדָתוֹ לְפָנַי תִּכּוֹן; וּפָקַדְתִּי, עַל כָּל-לֹחֲצָיו.	20 Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before Me, and I will punish all that oppress them.
30.21 כא  וְהָיָה אַדִּירוֹ מִמֶּנּוּ, וּמֹשְׁלוֹ מִקִּרְבּוֹ יֵצֵא, וְהִקְרַבְתִּיו, וְנִגַּשׁ אֵלָי:  כִּי מִי הוּא-זֶה עָרַב אֶת-לִבּוֹ, לָגֶשֶׁת אֵלַי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	21 And their prince shall be of themselves, and their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto Me; for who is he that hath pledged his heart to approach unto Me? saith the LORD.
30.22 כב  וִהְיִיתֶם לִי, לְעָם; וְאָנֹכִי, אֶהְיֶה לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים.  {ס}	22 And ye shall be My people, and I will be your God. {S}
30.23 כג  הִנֵּה סַעֲרַת יְהוָה, חֵמָה יָצְאָה--סַעַר, מִתְגּוֹרֵר:  עַל רֹאשׁ רְשָׁעִים, יָחוּל.	23 Behold, a storm of the LORD is gone forth in fury, a sweeping storm; it shall whirl upon the head of the wicked.
30.24 כד  לֹא יָשׁוּב, חֲרוֹן אַף-יְהוָה, עַד-עֲשֹׂתוֹ וְעַד-הֲקִימוֹ, מְזִמּוֹת לִבּוֹ; בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים, תִּתְבּוֹנְנוּ בָהּ.	24 The fierce anger of the LORD shall not return, until He have executed, and till He have performed the purposes of His heart; in the end of days ye shall consider it.
31.1 א  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֶהְיֶה לֵאלֹהִים, לְכֹל מִשְׁפְּחוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהֵמָּה, יִהְיוּ-לִי לְעָם.  {ס}	1 At that time, saith the LORD, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be My people. {S}
31.2 ב  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, מָצָא חֵן בַּמִּדְבָּר, עַם שְׂרִידֵי חָרֶב; הָלוֹךְ לְהַרְגִּיעוֹ, יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 Thus saith the LORD: the people that were left of the sword have found grace in the wilderness, even Israel, when I go to cause him to rest.
31.3 ג  מֵרָחוֹק, יְהוָה נִרְאָה לִי; וְאַהֲבַת עוֹלָם אֲהַבְתִּיךְ, עַל-כֵּן מְשַׁכְתִּיךְ חָסֶד.	3 'From afar the LORD appeared unto me.' 'Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love; therefore with affection have I drawn thee.
31.4 ד  עוֹד אֶבְנֵךְ וְנִבְנֵית, בְּתוּלַת יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עוֹד תַּעְדִּי תֻפַּיִךְ, וְיָצָאת בִּמְחוֹל מְשַׂחֲקִים.	4 Again will I build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel; again shalt thou be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.
31.5 ה  עוֹד תִּטְּעִי כְרָמִים, בְּהָרֵי שֹׁמְרוֹן; נָטְעוּ נֹטְעִים, וְחִלֵּלוּ.	5 Again shalt thou plant vineyards upon the mountains of Samaria; the planters shall plant, and shall have the use thereof.
31.6 ו  כִּי יֶשׁ-יוֹם, קָרְאוּ נֹצְרִים בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; קוּמוּ וְנַעֲלֶה צִיּוֹן, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {פ}	6 For there shall be a day, that the watchmen shall call upon the mount Ephraim: arise ye, and let us go up to Zion, unto the LORD our God.' {P}
31.7 ז  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, רָנּוּ לְיַעֲקֹב שִׂמְחָה, וְצַהֲלוּ, בְּרֹאשׁ הַגּוֹיִם; הַשְׁמִיעוּ הַלְלוּ, וְאִמְרוּ, הוֹשַׁע יְהוָה אֶת-עַמְּךָ, אֵת שְׁאֵרִית יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 For thus saith the LORD: sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout at the head of the nations; announce ye, praise ye, and say: 'O LORD, save Thy people, The remnant of Israel.'
31.8 ח  הִנְנִי מֵבִיא אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן, וְקִבַּצְתִּים מִיַּרְכְּתֵי-אָרֶץ--בָּם עִוֵּר וּפִסֵּחַ, הָרָה וְיֹלֶדֶת יַחְדָּו:  קָהָל גָּדוֹל, יָשׁוּבוּ הֵנָּה.	8 Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the uttermost parts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together; a great company shall they return hither.
31.9 ט  בִּבְכִי יָבֹאוּ, וּבְתַחֲנוּנִים אוֹבִילֵם--אוֹלִיכֵם אֶל-נַחֲלֵי מַיִם, בְּדֶרֶךְ יָשָׁר לֹא יִכָּשְׁלוּ בָּהּ:  כִּי-הָיִיתִי לְיִשְׂרָאֵל לְאָב, וְאֶפְרַיִם בְּכֹרִי הוּא.  {ס}	9 They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them; I will cause them to walk by rivers of waters, in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble; for I am become a father to Israel, and Ephraim is My first-born. {S}
31.10 י  שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה גּוֹיִם, וְהַגִּידוּ בָאִיִּים מִמֶּרְחָק; וְאִמְרוּ, מְזָרֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל יְקַבְּצֶנּוּ, וּשְׁמָרוֹ, כְּרֹעֶה עֶדְרוֹ.	10 Hear the word of the LORD, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say: 'He that scattered Israel doth gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.'
31.11 יא  כִּי-פָדָה יְהוָה, אֶת-יַעֲקֹב; וּגְאָלוֹ, מִיַּד חָזָק מִמֶּנּוּ.	11 For the LORD hath ransomed Jacob, and He redeemeth him from the hand of him that is stronger than he.
31.12 יב  וּבָאוּ, וְרִנְּנוּ בִמְרוֹם-צִיּוֹן, וְנָהֲרוּ אֶל-טוּב יְהוָה עַל-דָּגָן וְעַל-תִּירֹשׁ וְעַל-יִצְהָר, וְעַל-בְּנֵי-צֹאן וּבָקָר; וְהָיְתָה נַפְשָׁם כְּגַן רָוֶה, וְלֹא-יוֹסִיפוּ לְדַאֲבָה עוֹד.	12 And they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow unto the goodness of the LORD, to the corn, and to the wine, and to the oil, and to the young of the flock and of the herd; and their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not pine any more at all.
31.13 יג  אָז תִּשְׂמַח בְּתוּלָה בְּמָחוֹל, וּבַחֻרִים וּזְקֵנִים יַחְדָּו; וְהָפַכְתִּי אֶבְלָם לְשָׂשׂוֹן וְנִחַמְתִּים, וְשִׂמַּחְתִּים מִיגוֹנָם.	13 Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, and the young men and the old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.
31.14 יד  וְרִוֵּיתִי נֶפֶשׁ הַכֹּהֲנִים, דָּשֶׁן; וְעַמִּי אֶת-טוּבִי יִשְׂבָּעוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	14 And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and My people shall be satisfied with My goodness, saith the LORD. {S}
31.15 טו  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, קוֹל בְּרָמָה נִשְׁמָע נְהִי בְּכִי תַמְרוּרִים--רָחֵל, מְבַכָּה עַל-בָּנֶיהָ; מֵאֲנָה לְהִנָּחֵם עַל-בָּנֶיהָ, כִּי אֵינֶנּוּ.  {ס}	15 Thus saith the LORD: A voice is heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children; she refuseth to be comforted for her children, because they are not. {S}
31.16 טז  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, מִנְעִי קוֹלֵךְ מִבֶּכִי, וְעֵינַיִךְ, מִדִּמְעָה:  כִּי יֵשׁ שָׂכָר לִפְעֻלָּתֵךְ נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְשָׁבוּ מֵאֶרֶץ אוֹיֵב.	16 Thus saith the LORD: Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears; for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the LORD; and they shall come back from the land of the enemy.
31.17 יז  וְיֵשׁ-תִּקְוָה לְאַחֲרִיתֵךְ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְשָׁבוּ בָנִים, לִגְבוּלָם.  {ס}	17 And there is hope for thy future, saith the LORD; and thy children shall return to their own border. {S}
31.18 יח  שָׁמוֹעַ שָׁמַעְתִּי, אֶפְרַיִם מִתְנוֹדֵד, יִסַּרְתַּנִי וָאִוָּסֵר, כְּעֵגֶל לֹא לֻמָּד; הֲשִׁבֵנִי וְאָשׁוּבָה, כִּי אַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי.	18 I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself: 'Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a calf untrained; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for Thou art the LORD my God.
31.19 יט  כִּי-אַחֲרֵי שׁוּבִי, נִחַמְתִּי, וְאַחֲרֵי הִוָּדְעִי, סָפַקְתִּי עַל-יָרֵךְ; בֹּשְׁתִּי וְגַם-נִכְלַמְתִּי, כִּי נָשָׂאתִי חֶרְפַּת נְעוּרָי.	19 Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.'
31.20 כ   הֲבֵן יַקִּיר לִי אֶפְרַיִם, אִם יֶלֶד שַׁעֲשֻׁעִים--כִּי-מִדֵּי דַבְּרִי בּוֹ, זָכֹר אֶזְכְּרֶנּוּ עוֹד; עַל-כֵּן, הָמוּ מֵעַי לוֹ--רַחֵם אֲרַחֲמֶנּוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	20 Is Ephraim a darling son unto Me? Is he a child that is dandled? For as often as I speak of him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore My heart yearneth for him, I will surely have compassion upon him, saith the LORD. {S}
31.21 כא הַצִּיבִי לָךְ צִיֻּנִים, שִׂמִי לָךְ תַּמְרוּרִים--שִׁתִי לִבֵּךְ, לַמְסִלָּה דֶּרֶךְ הלכתי (הָלָכְתְּ); שׁוּבִי בְּתוּלַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, שֻׁבִי אֶל-עָרַיִךְ אֵלֶּה.	21 Set thee up waymarks, make thee guide-posts; set thy heart toward the high-way, even the way by which thou wentest; return, O virgin of Israel, return to these thy cities.
31.22 כב  עַד-מָתַי תִּתְחַמָּקִין, הַבַּת הַשּׁוֹבֵבָה:  כִּי-בָרָא יְהוָה חֲדָשָׁה בָּאָרֶץ, נְקֵבָה תְּסוֹבֵב גָּבֶר.  {ס}	22 How long wilt thou turn away coyly, O thou backsliding daughter? For the LORD hath created a new thing in the earth: a woman shall court a man. {S}
31.23 כג  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עוֹד יֹאמְרוּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה וּבְעָרָיו, בְּשׁוּבִי אֶת-שְׁבוּתָם:  יְבָרֶכְךָ יְהוָה נְוֵה-צֶדֶק, הַר הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	23 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: yet again shall they use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I shall turn their captivity: 'The LORD bless thee, O habitation of righteousness, O mountain of holiness.'
31.24 כד  וְיָשְׁבוּ בָהּ יְהוּדָה וְכָל-עָרָיו, יַחְדָּו:  אִכָּרִים, וְנָסְעוּ בַּעֵדֶר.	24 And Judah and all the cities thereof shall dwell therein together: the husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.
31.25 כה  כִּי הִרְוֵיתִי, נֶפֶשׁ עֲיֵפָה; וְכָל-נֶפֶשׁ דָּאֲבָה, מִלֵּאתִי.	25 For I have satiated the weary soul, and every pining soul have I replenished.
31.26 כו  עַל-זֹאת, הֱקִיצֹתִי וָאֶרְאֶה; וּשְׁנָתִי, עָרְבָה לִּי.  {ס}	26 Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me. {S}
31.27 כז  הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְזָרַעְתִּי, אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאֶת-בֵּית יְהוּדָה, זֶרַע אָדָם, וְזֶרַע בְּהֵמָה.	27 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast.
31.28 כח  וְהָיָה כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁקַדְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם, לִנְתוֹשׁ וְלִנְתוֹץ וְלַהֲרֹס--וּלְהַאֲבִיד וּלְהָרֵעַ:  כֵּן אֶשְׁקֹד עֲלֵיהֶם לִבְנוֹת וְלִנְטֹעַ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	28 And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them to pluck up and to break down, and to overthrow and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them to build and to plant, saith the LORD.
31.29 כט  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם--לֹא-יֹאמְרוּ עוֹד, אָבוֹת אָכְלוּ בֹסֶר; וְשִׁנֵּי בָנִים, תִּקְהֶינָה.	29 In those days they shall say no more: 'The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge.'
31.30 ל   כִּי אִם-אִישׁ בַּעֲוֺנוֹ, יָמוּת:  כָּל-הָאָדָם הָאֹכֵל הַבֹּסֶר, תִּקְהֶינָה שִׁנָּיו.  {ס}	30 But every one shall die for his own iniquity; every man that eateth the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge. {S}
31.31 לא הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְכָרַתִּי, אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאֶת-בֵּית יְהוּדָה--בְּרִית חֲדָשָׁה.	31 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah;
31.32 לב  לֹא כַבְּרִית, אֲשֶׁר כָּרַתִּי אֶת-אֲבוֹתָם, בְּיוֹם הֶחֱזִיקִי בְיָדָם, לְהוֹצִיאָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה הֵפֵרוּ אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, וְאָנֹכִי בָּעַלְתִּי בָם--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	32 not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; forasmuch as they broke My covenant, although I was a lord over them, saith the LORD.
31.33 לג  כִּי זֹאת הַבְּרִית אֲשֶׁר אֶכְרֹת אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל אַחֲרֵי הַיָּמִים הָהֵם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, נָתַתִּי אֶת-תּוֹרָתִי בְּקִרְבָּם, וְעַל-לִבָּם אֶכְתְּבֶנָּה; וְהָיִיתִי לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים, וְהֵמָּה יִהְיוּ-לִי לְעָם.	33 But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the LORD, I will put My law in their inward parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people;
31.34 לד  וְלֹא יְלַמְּדוּ עוֹד, אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ וְאִישׁ אֶת-אָחִיו לֵאמֹר, דְּעוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה:  כִּי-כוּלָּם יֵדְעוּ אוֹתִי לְמִקְּטַנָּם וְעַד-גְּדוֹלָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--כִּי אֶסְלַח לַעֲוֺנָם, וּלְחַטָּאתָם לֹא אֶזְכָּר-עוֹד.  {ס}	34 and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying: 'Know the LORD'; for they shall all know Me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD; for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more. {S}
31.35 לה  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, נֹתֵן שֶׁמֶשׁ לְאוֹר יוֹמָם, חֻקֹּת יָרֵחַ וְכוֹכָבִים, לְאוֹר לָיְלָה; רֹגַע הַיָּם וַיֶּהֱמוּ גַלָּיו, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת שְׁמוֹ.	35 Thus saith the LORD, Who giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, who stirreth up the sea, that the waves thereof roar, the LORD of hosts is His name:
31.36 לו  אִם-יָמֻשׁוּ הַחֻקִּים הָאֵלֶּה, מִלְּפָנַי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; גַּם זֶרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל יִשְׁבְּתוּ, מִהְיוֹת גּוֹי לְפָנַי--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {ס}	36 If these ordinances depart from before Me, saith the LORD, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before Me for ever. {S}
31.37 לז  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-יִמַּדּוּ שָׁמַיִם מִלְמַעְלָה, וְיֵחָקְרוּ מוֹסְדֵי-אֶרֶץ, לְמָטָּה:  גַּם-אֲנִי אֶמְאַס בְּכָל-זֶרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	37 Thus saith the LORD: If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, then will I also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the LORD. {S}
31.38 לח  הִנֵּה יָמִים      (בָּאִים), נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְנִבְנְתָה הָעִיר לַיהוָה, מִמִּגְדַּל חֲנַנְאֵל שַׁעַר הַפִּנָּה.	38 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the city shall be built to the LORD from the tower of Hananel unto the gate of the corner.
31.39 לט  וְיָצָא עוֹד קוה (קָו) הַמִּדָּה, נֶגְדּוֹ, עַל, גִּבְעַת גָּרֵב; וְנָסַב, גֹּעָתָה.	39 And the measuring line shall yet go out straight forward unto the hill Gareb, and shall turn about unto Goah.
31.40 מ  וְכָל-הָעֵמֶק הַפְּגָרִים וְהַדֶּשֶׁן וְכָל-השרמות (הַשְּׁדֵמוֹת) עַד-נַחַל קִדְרוֹן עַד-פִּנַּת שַׁעַר הַסּוּסִים, מִזְרָחָה--קֹדֶשׁ, לַיהוָה:  לֹא-יִנָּתֵשׁ וְלֹא-יֵהָרֵס עוֹד, לְעוֹלָם.  {פ}	40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the brook Kidron, unto the corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy unto the LORD; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever. {P}
32.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה, בשנת (בַּשָּׁנָה) הָעֲשִׂרִית, לְצִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה--הִיא הַשָּׁנָה שְׁמֹנֶה-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לִנְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר.	1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.
32.2 ב  וְאָז, חֵיל מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, צָרִים, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְיִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, הָיָה כָלוּא בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה, אֲשֶׁר, בֵּית-מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	2 Now at that time the king of Babylon's army was besieging Jerusalem; and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the guard, which was in the king of Judah's house.
32.3 ג  אֲשֶׁר כְּלָאוֹ, צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר:  מַדּוּעַ אַתָּה נִבָּא לֵאמֹר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי נֹתֵן אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וּלְכָדָהּ.	3 For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying: 'Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;
32.4 ד  וְצִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, לֹא יִמָּלֵט מִיַּד הַכַּשְׂדִּים:  כִּי הִנָּתֹן יִנָּתֵן, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וְדִבֶּר-פִּיו עִם-פִּיו, וְעֵינָיו אֶת-עֵינָו תִּרְאֶינָה.	4 and Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;
32.5 ה  וּבָבֶל יוֹלִךְ אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ, וְשָׁם יִהְיֶה, עַד-פָּקְדִי אֹתוֹ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  כִּי תִלָּחֲמוּ אֶת-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, לֹא תַצְלִיחוּ.  {פ}	5 and he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall he be until I remember him, saith the LORD; though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper?' {P}
32.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, יִרְמְיָהוּ:  הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֵלַי לֵאמֹר.	6 And Jeremiah said: 'The word of the LORD came unto me, saying:
32.7 ז  הִנֵּה חֲנַמְאֵל, בֶּן-שַׁלֻּם דֹּדְךָ, בָּא אֵלֶיךָ, לֵאמֹר:  קְנֵה לְךָ, אֶת-שָׂדִי אֲשֶׁר בַּעֲנָתוֹת--כִּי לְךָ מִשְׁפַּט הַגְּאֻלָּה, לִקְנוֹת.	7 Behold, Hanamel, the son of Shallum thine uncle, shall come unto thee, saying: Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth; for the right of redemption is thine to buy it.'
32.8 ח  וַיָּבֹא אֵלַי חֲנַמְאֵל בֶּן-דֹּדִי כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֶל-חֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלַי קְנֵה נָא אֶת-שָׂדִי אֲשֶׁר-בַּעֲנָתוֹת אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִין כִּי-לְךָ מִשְׁפַּט הַיְרֻשָּׁה וּלְךָ הַגְּאֻלָּה, קְנֵה-לָךְ; וָאֵדַע, כִּי דְבַר-יְהוָה הוּא.	8 So Hanamel mine uncle's son came to me in the court of the guard according to the word of the LORD, and said unto me: 'Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the land of Benjamin; for the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine; buy it for thyself.' Then I knew that this was the word of the LORD.
32.9 ט  וָאֶקְנֶה, אֶת-הַשָּׂדֶה, מֵאֵת חֲנַמְאֵל בֶּן-דֹּדִי, אֲשֶׁר בַּעֲנָתוֹת; וָאֶשְׁקְלָה-לּוֹ, אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעָה שְׁקָלִים, וַעֲשָׂרָה הַכָּסֶף.	9 And I bought the field that was in Anathoth of Hanamel mine uncle's son, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.
32.10 י  וָאֶכְתֹּב בַּסֵּפֶר וָאֶחְתֹּם, וָאָעֵד עֵדִים; וָאֶשְׁקֹל הַכֶּסֶף, בְּמֹאזְנָיִם.	10 And I subscribed the deed, and sealed it, and called witnesses, and weighed him the money in the balances.
32.11 יא  וָאֶקַּח, אֶת-סֵפֶר הַמִּקְנָה, אֶת-הֶחָתוּם הַמִּצְוָה וְהַחֻקִּים, וְאֶת-הַגָּלוּי.	11 So I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was sealed, containing the terms and conditions, and that which was open;
32.12 יב  וָאֶתֵּן אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר הַמִּקְנָה, אֶל-בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּה בֶּן-מַחְסֵיָה, לְעֵינֵי חֲנַמְאֵל דֹּדִי, וּלְעֵינֵי הָעֵדִים הַכֹּתְבִים בְּסֵפֶר הַמִּקְנָה--לְעֵינֵי, כָּל-הַיְּהוּדִים, הַיֹּשְׁבִים, בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה.	12 and I delivered the deed of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the presence of Hanamel mine uncle['s son], and in the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the deed of the purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the court of the guard.
32.13 יג  וָאֲצַוֶּה, אֶת-בָּרוּךְ, לְעֵינֵיהֶם, לֵאמֹר.	13 And I charged Baruch before them, saying:
32.14 יד  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לָקוֹחַ אֶת-הַסְּפָרִים הָאֵלֶּה אֵת סֵפֶר הַמִּקְנָה הַזֶּה וְאֵת הֶחָתוּם וְאֵת סֵפֶר הַגָּלוּי הַזֶּה, וּנְתַתָּם, בִּכְלִי-חָרֶשׂ--לְמַעַן יַעַמְדוּ, יָמִים רַבִּים.  {ס}	14 'Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Take these deeds, this deed of the purchase, both that which is sealed, and this deed which is open, and put them in an earthen vessel; that they may continue many days. {S}
32.15 טו  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עוֹד יִקָּנוּ בָתִּים וְשָׂדוֹת וּכְרָמִים, בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת.  {פ}	15 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Houses and fields and vineyards shall yet again be bought in this land.' {P}
32.16 טז  וָאֶתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-יְהוָה, אַחֲרֵי תִתִּי אֶת-סֵפֶר הַמִּקְנָה, אֶל-בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּה לֵאמֹר.	16 Now after I had delivered the deed of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the LORD, saying:
32.17 יז  אֲהָהּ, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, הִנֵּה אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת-הָאָרֶץ, בְּכֹחֲךָ הַגָּדוֹל וּבִזְרֹעֲךָ הַנְּטוּיָה:  לֹא-יִפָּלֵא מִמְּךָ, כָּל-דָּבָר.	17 'Ah Lord GOD! behold, Thou hast made the heaven and the earth by Thy great power and by Thy outstretched arm; there is nothing too hard for Thee;
32.18 יח  עֹשֶׂה חֶסֶד, לַאֲלָפִים, וּמְשַׁלֵּם עֲוֺן אָבוֹת, אֶל-חֵיק בְּנֵיהֶם אַחֲרֵיהֶם:  הָאֵל הַגָּדוֹל הַגִּבּוֹר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת שְׁמוֹ.	18 who showest mercy unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them; the great, the mighty God, the LORD of hosts is His name;
32.19 יט  גְּדֹל, הָעֵצָה, וְרַב, הָעֲלִילִיָּה--אֲשֶׁר-עֵינֶיךָ פְקֻחוֹת, עַל-כָּל-דַּרְכֵי בְּנֵי אָדָם, לָתֵת לְאִישׁ כִּדְרָכָיו, וְכִפְרִי מַעֲלָלָיו.	19 great in counsel, and mighty in work; whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings;
32.20 כ  אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתָּ אֹתוֹת וּמֹפְתִים בְּאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם, עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וּבְיִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבָאָדָם; וַתַּעֲשֶׂה-לְּךָ שֵׁם, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	20 who didst set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel and among other men; and madest Thee a name, as at this day;
32.21 כא  וַתֹּצֵא אֶת-עַמְּךָ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--בְּאֹתוֹת וּבְמוֹפְתִים, וּבְיָד חֲזָקָה וּבְאֶזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה, וּבְמוֹרָא, גָּדוֹל.	21 and didst bring forth Thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terror;
32.22 כב  וַתִּתֵּן לָהֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּעְתָּ לַאֲבוֹתָם לָתֵת לָהֶם--אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב, וּדְבָשׁ.	22 and gavest them this land, which Thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;
32.23 כג  וַיָּבֹאוּ וַיִּרְשׁוּ אֹתָהּ, וְלֹא-שָׁמְעוּ בְקוֹלֶךָ ובתרותך (וּבְתוֹרָתְךָ) לֹא-הָלָכוּ--אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתָה לָהֶם לַעֲשׂוֹת, לֹא עָשׂוּ; וַתַּקְרֵא אֹתָם, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת.	23 and they came in, and possessed it; but they hearkened not to Thy voice, neither walked in Thy law; they have done nothing of all that Thou commandedst them to do; therefore Thou hast caused all this evil to befall them;
32.24 כד  הִנֵּה הַסֹּלְלוֹת, בָּאוּ הָעִיר לְלָכְדָהּ, וְהָעִיר נִתְּנָה בְּיַד הַכַּשְׂדִּים הַנִּלְחָמִים עָלֶיהָ, מִפְּנֵי הַחֶרֶב וְהָרָעָב וְהַדָּבֶר; וַאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ הָיָה, וְהִנְּךָ רֹאֶה.	24 behold the mounds, they are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence; and what Thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, behold, Thou seest it.
32.25 כה  וְאַתָּה אָמַרְתָּ אֵלַי, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, קְנֵה-לְךָ הַשָּׂדֶה בַּכֶּסֶף, וְהָעֵד עֵדִים; וְהָעִיר נִתְּנָה, בְּיַד הַכַּשְׂדִּים.  {ס}	25 Yet Thou hast said unto me, O Lord GOD: Buy thee the field for money, and call witnesses; whereas the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.' {S}
32.26 כו  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	26 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying:
32.27 כז  הִנֵּה אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי כָּל-בָּשָׂר--הֲמִמֶּנִּי, יִפָּלֵא כָּל-דָּבָר.	27 'Behold, I am the LORD, the God of all flesh; is there any thing too hard for Me?
32.28 כח  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  הִנְנִי נֹתֵן אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת בְּיַד הַכַּשְׂדִּים, וּבְיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--וּלְכָדָהּ.	28 Therefore thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it;
32.29 כט  וּבָאוּ הַכַּשְׂדִּים, הַנִּלְחָמִים עַל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְהִצִּיתוּ אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת בָּאֵשׁ, וּשְׂרָפוּהָ; וְאֵת הַבָּתִּים אֲשֶׁר קִטְּרוּ עַל-גַּגּוֹתֵיהֶם לַבַּעַל, וְהִסִּכוּ נְסָכִים לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--לְמַעַן, הַכְעִסֵנִי.	29 and the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come and set this city on fire, and burn it, with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered unto Baal, and poured out drink-offerings unto other gods, to provoke Me.
32.30 ל  כִּי-הָיוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבְנֵי יְהוּדָה, אַךְ עֹשִׂים הָרַע בְּעֵינַי--מִנְּעֻרֹתֵיהֶם:  כִּי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַךְ מַכְעִסִים אֹתִי בְּמַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיהֶם--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	30 For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done that which was evil in My sight from their youth; for the children of Israel have only provoked Me with the work of their hands, saith the LORD.
32.31 לא  כִּי עַל-אַפִּי וְעַל-חֲמָתִי, הָיְתָה לִּי הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, לְמִן-הַיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר בָּנוּ אוֹתָהּ, וְעַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--לַהֲסִירָהּ, מֵעַל פָּנָי.	31 For this city hath been to Me a provocation of Mine anger and of My fury from the day that they built it even unto this day, that I should remove it from before My face;
32.32 לב  עַל כָּל-רָעַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבְנֵי יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לְהַכְעִסֵנִי, הֵמָּה מַלְכֵיהֶם שָׂרֵיהֶם, כֹּהֲנֵיהֶם וּנְבִיאֵיהֶם; וְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וְיֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	32 because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke Me, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
32.33 לג  וַיִּפְנוּ אֵלַי עֹרֶף, וְלֹא פָנִים; וְלַמֵּד אֹתָם הַשְׁכֵּם וְלַמֵּד, וְאֵינָם שֹׁמְעִים לָקַחַת מוּסָר.	33 And they have turned unto Me the back, and not the face; and though I taught them, teaching them betimes and often, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.
32.34 לד  וַיָּשִׂימוּ שִׁקּוּצֵיהֶם, בַּבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-נִקְרָא-שְׁמִי עָלָיו--לְטַמְּאוֹ.	34 But they set their abominations in the house whereupon My name is called, to defile it.
32.35 לה  וַיִּבְנוּ אֶת-בָּמוֹת הַבַּעַל אֲשֶׁר בְּגֵיא בֶן-הִנֹּם, לְהַעֲבִיר אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיהֶם לַמֹּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-צִוִּיתִים וְלֹא עָלְתָה עַל-לִבִּי, לַעֲשׂוֹת הַתּוֹעֵבָה הַזֹּאת--לְמַעַן, הַחֲטִי אֶת-יְהוּדָה.  {ס}	35 And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to set apart their sons and their daughters unto Molech; which I commanded them not, neither came it into My mind, that they should do this abomination; to cause Judah to sin. {S}
32.36 לו  וְעַתָּה, לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת--אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים נִתְּנָה בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר.	36 And now therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say: It is given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence:
32.37 לז  הִנְנִי מְקַבְּצָם מִכָּל-הָאֲרָצוֹת, אֲשֶׁר הִדַּחְתִּים שָׁם בְּאַפִּי וּבַחֲמָתִי וּבְקֶצֶף גָּדוֹל; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִים אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה, וְהֹשַׁבְתִּים לָבֶטַח.	37 Behold, I will gather them out of all the countries, whither I have driven them in Mine anger, and in My fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them back unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely;
32.38 לח  וְהָיוּ לִי, לְעָם; וַאֲנִי, אֶהְיֶה לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים.	38 and they shall be My people, and I will be their God;
32.39 לט  וְנָתַתִּי לָהֶם לֵב אֶחָד, וְדֶרֶךְ אֶחָד, לְיִרְאָה אוֹתִי, כָּל-הַיָּמִים--לְטוֹב לָהֶם, וְלִבְנֵיהֶם אַחֲרֵיהֶם.	39 and I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear Me for ever; for the good of them, and of their children after them;
32.40 מ  וְכָרַתִּי לָהֶם, בְּרִית עוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-אָשׁוּב מֵאַחֲרֵיהֶם, לְהֵיטִיבִי אוֹתָם; וְאֶת-יִרְאָתִי אֶתֵּן בִּלְבָבָם, לְבִלְתִּי סוּר מֵעָלָי.	40 and I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; and I will put My fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from Me.
32.41 מא  וְשַׂשְׂתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם, לְהֵטִיב אוֹתָם; וּנְטַעְתִּים בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, בֶּאֱמֶת--בְּכָל-לִבִּי, וּבְכָל-נַפְשִׁי.  {ס}	41 Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land in truth with My whole heart and with My whole soul. {S}
32.42 מב  כִּי-כֹה, אָמַר יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר הֵבֵאתִי אֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת--כֵּן אָנֹכִי מֵבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת-כָּל-הַטּוֹבָה, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי, דֹּבֵר עֲלֵיהֶם.	42 For thus saith the LORD: Like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.
32.43 מג  וְנִקְנָה הַשָּׂדֶה, בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת--אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, שְׁמָמָה הִיא מֵאֵין אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה, נִתְּנָה, בְּיַד הַכַּשְׂדִּים.	43 And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say: It is desolate, without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.
32.44 מד  שָׂדוֹת בַּכֶּסֶף יִקְנוּ, וְכָתוֹב בַּסֵּפֶר וְחָתוֹם וְהָעֵד עֵדִים, בְּאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן וּבִסְבִיבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם וּבְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה וּבְעָרֵי הָהָר, וּבְעָרֵי הַשְּׁפֵלָה וּבְעָרֵי הַנֶּגֶב:  כִּי-אָשִׁיב אֶת-שְׁבוּתָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	44 Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe the deeds, and seal them, and call witnesses, in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the hill-country, and in the cities of the Lowland, and in the cities of the South; for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the LORD.' {P}
33.1 א  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, שֵׁנִית; וְהוּא עוֹדֶנּוּ עָצוּר, בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה לֵאמֹר.	1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the guard, saying:
33.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, עֹשָׂהּ:  יְהוָה, יוֹצֵר אוֹתָהּ לַהֲכִינָהּ--יְהוָה שְׁמוֹ.	2 Thus saith the LORD the Maker thereof, the LORD that formed it to establish it, the LORD is His name:
33.3 ג  קְרָא אֵלַי, וְאֶעֱנֶךָּ; וְאַגִּידָה לְּךָ גְּדֹלוֹת וּבְצֻרוֹת, לֹא יְדַעְתָּם.  {פ}	3 Call unto Me, and I will answer thee, and will tell thee great things, and hidden, which thou knowest not. {P}
33.4 ד  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-בָּתֵּי הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, וְעַל-בָּתֵּי מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה--הַנְּתֻצִים, אֶל-הַסֹּלְלוֹת וְאֶל-הֶחָרֶב.	4 For thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are broken down for mounds, and for ramparts;
33.5 ה  בָּאִים, לְהִלָּחֵם אֶת-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, וּלְמַלְאָם אֶת-פִּגְרֵי הָאָדָם, אֲשֶׁר-הִכֵּיתִי בְאַפִּי וּבַחֲמָתִי; וַאֲשֶׁר הִסְתַּרְתִּי פָנַי מֵהָעִיר הַזֹּאת, עַל כָּל-רָעָתָם.	5 whereon they come to fight with the Chaldeans, even to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in Mine anger and in My fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid My face from this city:
33.6 ו  הִנְנִי מַעֲלֶה-לָּהּ אֲרֻכָה וּמַרְפֵּא, וּרְפָאתִים; וְגִלֵּיתִי לָהֶם, עֲתֶרֶת שָׁלוֹם וֶאֱמֶת.	6 Behold, I will bring it healing and cure, and I will cure them; and I will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.
33.7 ז  וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי אֶת-שְׁבוּת יְהוּדָה, וְאֵת שְׁבוּת יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבְנִתִים, כְּבָרִאשֹׁנָה.	7 And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.
33.8 ח  וְטִהַרְתִּים, מִכָּל-עֲוֺנָם אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ-לִי; וְסָלַחְתִּי, לכול- (לְכָל-) עֲוֺנוֹתֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ-לִי, וַאֲשֶׁר, פָּשְׁעוּ בִי.	8 And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against Me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against Me, and whereby they have transgressed against Me.
33.9 ט  וְהָיְתָה לִּי, לְשֵׁם שָׂשׂוֹן לִתְהִלָּה וּלְתִפְאֶרֶת, לְכֹל, גּוֹיֵי הָאָרֶץ--אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁמְעוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַטּוֹבָה, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי עֹשֶׂה אוֹתָם, וּפָחֲדוּ וְרָגְזוּ עַל כָּל-הַטּוֹבָה וְעַל כָּל-הַשָּׁלוֹם, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי עֹשֶׂה לָּהּ.  {ס}	9 And this city shall be to Me for a name of joy, for a praise and for a glory, before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them, and shall fear and tremble for all the good and for all the peace that I procure unto it. {S}
33.10 י  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, עוֹד יִשָּׁמַע בַּמָּקוֹם-הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם אֹמְרִים, חָרֵב הוּא מֵאֵין אָדָם וּמֵאֵין בְּהֵמָה--בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וּבְחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, הַנְשַׁמּוֹת מֵאֵין אָדָם וּמֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב, וּמֵאֵין בְּהֵמָה.	10 Thus saith the LORD: Yet again there shall be heard in this place, whereof ye say: It is waste, without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man and without inhabitant and without beast,
33.11 יא  קוֹל שָׂשׂוֹן וְקוֹל שִׂמְחָה, קוֹל חָתָן וְקוֹל כַּלָּה, קוֹל אֹמְרִים הוֹדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת כִּי-טוֹב יְהוָה כִּי-לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ, מְבִאִים תּוֹדָה בֵּית יְהוָה:  כִּי-אָשִׁיב אֶת-שְׁבוּת-הָאָרֶץ כְּבָרִאשֹׁנָה, אָמַר יְהוָה.  {ס}	11 the voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that say: 'Give thanks to the LORD of hosts, for the LORD is good, for His mercy endureth for ever', even of them that bring offerings of thanksgiving into the house of the LORD. For I will cause the captivity of the land to return as at the first, saith the LORD. {S}
33.12 יב  כֹּה-אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עוֹד יִהְיֶה בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה הֶחָרֵב מֵאֵין-אָדָם וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה, וּבְכָל-עָרָיו--נְוֵה רֹעִים, מַרְבִּצִים צֹאן.	12 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Yet again shall there be in this place, which is waste, without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof, a habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.
33.13 יג  בְּעָרֵי הָהָר בְּעָרֵי הַשְּׁפֵלָה, וּבְעָרֵי הַנֶּגֶב, וּבְאֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן וּבִסְבִיבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּבְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה--עֹד תַּעֲבֹרְנָה הַצֹּאן עַל-יְדֵי מוֹנֶה, אָמַר יְהוָה.  {ס}	13 In the cities of the hill-country, in the cities of the Lowland, and in the cities of the South, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shall the flocks again pass under the hands of him that counteth them, saith the LORD. {S}
33.14 יד  הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וַהֲקִמֹתִי אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַטּוֹב, אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וְעַל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה.	14 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will perform that good word which I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and concerning the house of Judah.
33.15 טו  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם וּבָעֵת הַהִיא, אַצְמִיחַ לְדָוִד צֶמַח צְדָקָה; וְעָשָׂה מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה, בָּאָרֶץ.	15 In those days, and at that time, will I cause a shoot of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
33.16 טז  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם תִּוָּשַׁע יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִַם תִּשְׁכּוֹן לָבֶטַח; וְזֶה אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרָא-לָהּ, יְהוָה צִדְקֵנוּ.  {ס}	16 In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely; and this is the name whereby she shall be called, the LORD is our righteousness. {S}
33.17 יז  כִּי-כֹה, אָמַר יְהוָה:  לֹא-יִכָּרֵת לְדָוִד--אִישׁ, יֹשֵׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא בֵית-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	17 For thus saith the LORD: There shall not be cut off unto David a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;
33.18 יח  וְלַכֹּהֲנִים, הַלְוִיִּם, לֹא-יִכָּרֵת אִישׁ, מִלְּפָנָי:  מַעֲלֶה עוֹלָה וּמַקְטִיר מִנְחָה, וְעֹשֶׂה זֶּבַח--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {פ}	18 neither shall there be cut off unto the priests the Levites a man before Me to offer burnt-offerings, and to burn meal-offerings, and to do sacrifice continually. {P}
33.19 יט  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֵאמוֹר.	19 And the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, saying:
33.20 כ  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-תָּפֵרוּ אֶת-בְּרִיתִי הַיּוֹם, וְאֶת-בְּרִיתִי הַלָּיְלָה; וּלְבִלְתִּי הֱיוֹת יוֹמָם-וָלַיְלָה, בְּעִתָּם.	20 Thus saith the LORD: If ye can break My covenant with the day, and My covenant with the night, so that there should not be day and night in their season;
33.21 כא  גַּם-בְּרִיתִי תֻפַר אֶת-דָּוִד עַבְדִּי, מִהְיוֹת-לוֹ בֵן מֹלֵךְ עַל-כִּסְאוֹ; וְאֶת-הַלְוִיִּם הַכֹּהֲנִים, מְשָׁרְתָי.	21 Then may also My covenant be broken with David My servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, My ministers.
33.22 כב  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִסָּפֵר צְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְלֹא יִמַּד חוֹל הַיָּם--כֵּן אַרְבֶּה, אֶת-זֶרַע דָּוִד עַבְדִּי, וְאֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, מְשָׁרְתֵי אֹתִי.  {ס}	22 As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured; so will I multiply the seed of David My servant, and the Levites that minister unto Me. {S}
33.23 כג  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	23 And the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, saying:
33.24 כד  הֲלוֹא רָאִיתָ, מָה-הָעָם הַזֶּה דִּבְּרוּ לֵאמֹר, שְׁתֵּי הַמִּשְׁפָּחוֹת אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר יְהוָה בָּהֶם, וַיִּמְאָסֵם; וְאֶת-עַמִּי, יִנְאָצוּן, מִהְיוֹת עוֹד, גּוֹי לִפְנֵיהֶם.  {ס}	24 'Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying: The two families which the LORD did choose, He hath cast them off? and they contemn My people, that they should be no more a nation before them. {S}
33.25 כה  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-לֹא בְרִיתִי יוֹמָם וָלָיְלָה--חֻקּוֹת שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ, לֹא-שָׂמְתִּי.	25 Thus saith the LORD: If My covenant be not with day and night, if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth;
33.26 כו  גַּם-זֶרַע יַעֲקוֹב וְדָוִד עַבְדִּי אֶמְאַס, מִקַּחַת מִזַּרְעוֹ מֹשְׁלִים, אֶל-זֶרַע אַבְרָהָם, יִשְׂחָק וְיַעֲקֹב:  כִּי-אשוב (אָשִׁיב) אֶת-שְׁבוּתָם, וְרִחַמְתִּים.  {פ}	26 then will I also cast away the seed of Jacob, and of David My servant, so that I will not take of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for I will cause their captivity to return, and will have compassion on them.' {P}
34.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה; וּנְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל וְכָל-חֵילוֹ וְכָל-מַמְלְכוֹת אֶרֶץ מֶמְשֶׁלֶת יָדוֹ וְכָל-הָעַמִּים, נִלְחָמִים עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְעַל-כָּל-עָרֶיהָ--לֵאמֹר.	1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the land of his dominion, and all the peoples, fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying:
34.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָלֹךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי נֹתֵן אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וּשְׂרָפָהּ בָּאֵשׁ.	2 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Go, and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire;
34.3 ג  וְאַתָּה, לֹא תִמָּלֵט מִיָּדוֹ--כִּי תָּפֹשׂ תִּתָּפֵשׂ, וּבְיָדוֹ תִּנָּתֵן; וְעֵינֶיךָ אֶת-עֵינֵי מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל תִּרְאֶינָה, וּפִיהוּ אֶת-פִּיךָ יְדַבֵּר--וּבָבֶל תָּבוֹא.	3 and thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.
34.4 ד  אַךְ שְׁמַע דְּבַר-יְהוָה, צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה עָלֶיךָ, לֹא תָמוּת בֶּחָרֶב.	4 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah: Thus saith the LORD concerning thee: Thou shalt not die by the sword;
34.5 ה  בְּשָׁלוֹם תָּמוּת, וּכְמִשְׂרְפוֹת אֲבוֹתֶיךָ הַמְּלָכִים הָרִאשֹׁנִים אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ לְפָנֶיךָ כֵּן יִשְׂרְפוּ-לָךְ, וְהוֹי אָדוֹן, יִסְפְּדוּ-לָךְ:  כִּי-דָבָר אֲנִי-דִבַּרְתִּי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	5 thou shalt die in peace; and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings that were before thee, so shall they make a burning for thee; and they shall lament thee: 'Ah lord!' for I have spoken the word, saith the LORD. {S}
34.6 ו  וַיְדַבֵּר יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	6 Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,
34.7 ז  וְחֵיל מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, נִלְחָמִים עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְעַל כָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, הַנּוֹתָרוֹת:  אֶל-לָכִישׁ, וְאֶל-עֲזֵקָה, כִּי הֵנָּה נִשְׁאֲרוּ בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, עָרֵי מִבְצָר.  {פ}	7 when the king of Babylon's army fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish and against Azekah; for these alone remained of the cities of Judah as fortified cities. {P}
34.8 ח  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה--אַחֲרֵי כְּרֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ בְּרִית, אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, לִקְרֹא לָהֶם, דְּרוֹר.	8 The word that came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, after that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people that were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them;
34.9 ט  לְשַׁלַּח אִישׁ אֶת-עַבְדּוֹ וְאִישׁ אֶת-שִׁפְחָתוֹ, הָעִבְרִי וְהָעִבְרִיָּה--חָפְשִׁים:  לְבִלְתִּי עֲבָד-בָּם בִּיהוּדִי אָחִיהוּ, אִישׁ.	9 that every man should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, being a Hebrew man or a Hebrew woman, go free; that none should make bondmen of them, even of a Jew his brother;
34.10 י  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ כָל-הַשָּׂרִים וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ בַבְּרִית, לְשַׁלַּח אִישׁ אֶת-עַבְדּוֹ וְאִישׁ אֶת-שִׁפְחָתוֹ חָפְשִׁים, לְבִלְתִּי עֲבָד-בָּם, עוֹד; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, וַיְשַׁלֵּחוּ.	10 and all the princes and all the people hearkened, that had entered into the covenant to let every one his man-servant, and every one his maid-servant, go free, and not to make bondmen of them any more; they hearkened, and let them go;
34.11 יא  וַיָּשׁוּבוּ, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיָּשִׁבוּ אֶת-הָעֲבָדִים וְאֶת-הַשְּׁפָחוֹת, אֲשֶׁר שִׁלְּחוּ חָפְשִׁים; ויכבישום (וַיִּכְבְּשׁוּם), לַעֲבָדִים וְלִשְׁפָחוֹת.  {פ}	11 but afterwards they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids; {P}
34.12 יב  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	12 therefore the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
34.13 יג  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אָנֹכִי, כָּרַתִּי בְרִית אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּיוֹם הוֹצִאִי אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים לֵאמֹר.	13 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying:
34.14 יד  מִקֵּץ שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים תְּשַׁלְּחוּ אִישׁ אֶת-אָחִיו הָעִבְרִי אֲשֶׁר-יִמָּכֵר לְךָ, וַעֲבָדְךָ שֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים, וְשִׁלַּחְתּוֹ חָפְשִׁי, מֵעִמָּךְ; וְלֹא-שָׁמְעוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם אֵלַי, וְלֹא הִטּוּ אֶת-אָזְנָם.	14 'At the end of seven years ye shall let go every man his brother that is a Hebrew, that hath been sold unto thee, and hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee'; but your fathers hearkened not unto Me, neither inclined their ear.
34.15 טו  וַתָּשֻׁבוּ אַתֶּם הַיּוֹם, וַתַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינַי, לִקְרֹא דְרוֹר, אִישׁ לְרֵעֵהוּ; וַתִּכְרְתוּ בְרִית, לְפָנַי, בַּבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר-נִקְרָא שְׁמִי עָלָיו.	15 And ye were now turned, and had done that which is right in Mine eyes, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before Me in the house whereon My name is called;
34.16 טז  וַתָּשֻׁבוּ, וַתְּחַלְּלוּ אֶת-שְׁמִי, וַתָּשִׁבוּ אִישׁ אֶת-עַבְדּוֹ וְאִישׁ אֶת-שִׁפְחָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר-שִׁלַּחְתֶּם חָפְשִׁים לְנַפְשָׁם; וַתִּכְבְּשׁוּ אֹתָם--לִהְיוֹת לָכֶם, לַעֲבָדִים וְלִשְׁפָחוֹת.  {ס}	16 but ye turned and profaned My name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had let go free at their pleasure, to return; and ye brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids. {S}
34.17 יז  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אַתֶּם לֹא-שְׁמַעְתֶּם אֵלַי, לִקְרֹא דְרוֹר אִישׁ לְאָחִיו וְאִישׁ לְרֵעֵהוּ; הִנְנִי קֹרֵא לָכֶם דְּרוֹר נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אֶל-הַחֶרֶב אֶל-הַדֶּבֶר וְאֶל-הָרָעָב, וְנָתַתִּי אֶתְכֶם לזועה (לְזַעֲוָה), לְכֹל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ.	17 Therefore thus saith the LORD: Ye have not hearkened unto Me, to proclaim liberty, every man to his brother, and every man to his neighbour; behold, I proclaim for you a liberty, saith the LORD, unto the sword, unto the pestilence, and unto the famine; and I will make you a horror unto all the kingdoms of the earth.
34.18 יח  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים, הָעֹבְרִים אֶת-בְּרִתִי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הֵקִימוּ אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַבְּרִית, אֲשֶׁר כָּרְתוּ לְפָנָי--הָעֵגֶל אֲשֶׁר כָּרְתוּ לִשְׁנַיִם, וַיַּעַבְרוּ בֵּין בְּתָרָיו.	18 And I will give the men that have transgressed My covenant, that have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before Me, when they cut the calf in twain and passed between the parts thereof;
34.19 יט  שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה וְשָׂרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, הַסָּרִסִים וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, וְכֹל, עַם הָאָרֶץ--הָעֹבְרִים, בֵּין בִּתְרֵי הָעֵגֶל.	19 the princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the officers, and the priests, and all the people of the land, that passed between the parts of the calf;
34.20 כ  וְנָתַתִּי אוֹתָם בְּיַד אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וּבְיַד מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם; וְהָיְתָה נִבְלָתָם לְמַאֲכָל, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם וּלְבֶהֱמַת הָאָרֶץ.	20 I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life; and their dead bodies shall be for food unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.
34.21 כא  וְאֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְאֶת-שָׂרָיו, אֶתֵּן בְּיַד אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וּבְיַד, מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם; וּבְיַד, חֵיל מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, הָעֹלִים, מֵעֲלֵיכֶם.	21 And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, that are gone up from you.
34.22 כב  הִנְנִי מְצַוֶּה נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַהֲשִׁבֹתִים אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת וְנִלְחֲמוּ עָלֶיהָ, וּלְכָדוּהָ, וּשְׂרָפֻהָ בָאֵשׁ; וְאֶת-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה אֶתֵּן שְׁמָמָה, מֵאֵין יֹשֵׁב.  {פ}	22 Behold, I will command, saith the LORD, and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant. {P}
35.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה, בִּימֵי יְהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, לֵאמֹר.	1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying:
35.2 ב  הָלוֹךְ, אֶל-בֵּית הָרֵכָבִים, וְדִבַּרְתָּ אוֹתָם, וַהֲבִאוֹתָם בֵּית יְהוָה אֶל-אַחַת הַלְּשָׁכוֹת; וְהִשְׁקִיתָ אוֹתָם, יָיִן.	2 'Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the house of the LORD, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink.'
35.3 ג  וָאֶקַּח אֶת-יַאֲזַנְיָה בֶן-יִרְמְיָהוּ, בֶּן-חֲבַצִּנְיָה, וְאֶת-אֶחָיו, וְאֶת-כָּל-בָּנָיו--וְאֵת, כָּל-בֵּית הָרֵכָבִים.	3 Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites;
35.4 ד  וָאָבִא אֹתָם, בֵּית יְהוָה, אֶל-לִשְׁכַּת בְּנֵי חָנָן בֶּן-יִגְדַּלְיָהוּ, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים--אֲשֶׁר-אֵצֶל, לִשְׁכַּת הַשָּׂרִים, אֲשֶׁר מִמַּעַל לְלִשְׁכַּת מַעֲשֵׂיָהוּ בֶן-שַׁלֻּם, שֹׁמֵר הַסַּף.	4 and I brought them into the house of the LORD, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door;
35.5 ה  וָאֶתֵּן לִפְנֵי בְּנֵי בֵית-הָרֵכָבִים, גְּבִעִים מְלֵאִים יַיִן--וְכֹסוֹת; וָאֹמַר אֲלֵיהֶם, שְׁתוּ-יָיִן.	5 and I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites goblets full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them: 'Drink ye wine.'
35.6 ו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֹא נִשְׁתֶּה-יָּיִן:  כִּי יוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב אָבִינוּ, צִוָּה עָלֵינוּ לֵאמֹר, לֹא תִשְׁתּוּ-יַיִן אַתֶּם וּבְנֵיכֶם, עַד-עוֹלָם.	6 But they said: 'We will drink no wine; for Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying: Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons, for ever;
35.7 ז  וּבַיִת לֹא-תִבְנוּ, וְזֶרַע לֹא-תִזְרָעוּ וְכֶרֶם לֹא-תִטָּעוּ, וְלֹא יִהְיֶה, לָכֶם:  כִּי בָּאֳהָלִים תֵּשְׁבוּ, כָּל-יְמֵיכֶם, לְמַעַן תִּחְיוּ יָמִים רַבִּים עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם גָּרִים שָׁם.	7 neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any; but all your days ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live many days in the land wherein ye sojourn.
35.8 ח  וַנִּשְׁמַע, בְּקוֹל יְהוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב אָבִינוּ, לְכֹל, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּנוּ:  לְבִלְתִּי שְׁתוֹת-יַיִן, כָּל-יָמֵינוּ--אֲנַחְנוּ נָשֵׁינוּ, בָּנֵינוּ וּבְנֹתֵינוּ.	8 And we have hearkened to the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our father in all that he charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters;
35.9 ט  וּלְבִלְתִּי בְּנוֹת בָּתִּים, לְשִׁבְתֵּנוּ; וְכֶרֶם וְשָׂדֶה וָזֶרַע, לֹא יִהְיֶה-לָּנוּ.	9 nor to build houses for us to dwell in, neither to have vineyard, or field, or seed;
35.10 י  וַנֵּשֶׁב, בָּאֳהָלִים; וַנִּשְׁמַע וַנַּעַשׂ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּנוּ יוֹנָדָב אָבִינוּ.	10 but we have dwelt in tents, and have hearkened, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.
35.11 יא  וַיְהִי, בַּעֲלוֹת נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, וַנֹּאמֶר בֹּאוּ וְנָבוֹא יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מִפְּנֵי חֵיל הַכַּשְׂדִּים וּמִפְּנֵי חֵיל אֲרָם; וַנֵּשֶׁב, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	11 But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up against the land, that we said: Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Arameans; so we dwell at Jerusalem.' {P}
35.12 יב  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	12 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying:
35.13 יג  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָלֹךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ לְאִישׁ יְהוּדָה, וּלְיוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  הֲלוֹא תִקְחוּ מוּסָר לִשְׁמֹעַ אֶל-דְּבָרַי, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	13 'Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Go, and say to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to My words? saith the LORD.
35.14 יד  הוּקַם אֶת-דִּבְרֵי יְהוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה אֶת-בָּנָיו לְבִלְתִּי שְׁתוֹת-יַיִן, וְלֹא שָׁתוּ עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--כִּי שָׁמְעוּ, אֵת מִצְוַת אֲבִיהֶם; וְאָנֹכִי דִּבַּרְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם, הַשְׁכֵּם וְדַבֵּר--וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם, אֵלָי.	14 The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed, and unto this day they drink none, for they hearken to their father's commandment; but I have spoken unto you, speaking betimes and often, and ye have not hearkened unto Me.
35.15 טו  וָאֶשְׁלַח אֲלֵיכֶם אֶת-כָּל-עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִאִים הַשְׁכֵּם וְשָׁלֹחַ לֵאמֹר שֻׁבוּ-נָא אִישׁ מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה וְהֵיטִיבוּ מַעַלְלֵיכֶם, וְאַל-תֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים לְעָבְדָם, וּשְׁבוּ אֶל-הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לָכֶם וְלַאֲבֹתֵיכֶם; וְלֹא הִטִּיתֶם אֶת-אָזְנְכֶם, וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם אֵלָי.	15 I have sent also unto you all My servants the prophets, sending them betimes and often, saying: Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers; but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto Me.
35.16 טז  כִּי הֵקִימוּ, בְּנֵי יְהוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב, אֶת-מִצְוַת אֲבִיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּם; וְהָעָם הַזֶּה, לֹא שָׁמְעוּ אֵלָי.	16 Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them, but this people hath not hearkened unto Me;
35.17 יז  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מֵבִיא אֶל-יְהוּדָה וְאֶל כָּל-יוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם:  יַעַן דִּבַּרְתִּי אֲלֵיהֶם וְלֹא שָׁמֵעוּ, וָאֶקְרָא לָהֶם וְלֹא עָנוּ.	17 therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them; because I have spoken unto them, but they have not heard, and I have called unto them, but they have not answered.'
35.18 יח  וּלְבֵית הָרֵכָבִים אָמַר יִרְמְיָהוּ, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר שְׁמַעְתֶּם, עַל-מִצְוַת יְהוֹנָדָב אֲבִיכֶם; וַתִּשְׁמְרוּ, אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺתָיו, וַתַּעֲשׂוּ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה אֶתְכֶם.	18 And unto the house of the Rechabites Jeremiah said: Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Because ye have hearkened to the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according unto all that he commanded you;
35.19 יט  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  לֹא-יִכָּרֵת אִישׁ לְיוֹנָדָב בֶּן-רֵכָב, עֹמֵד לְפָנַי--כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {פ}	19 therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: There shall not be cut off unto Jonadab the son of Rechab a man to stand before Me for ever.' {P}
36.1 א  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הָרְבִעִית, לִיהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה; הָיָה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר.	1 And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying:
36.2 ב  קַח-לְךָ, מְגִלַּת-סֵפֶר, וְכָתַבְתָּ אֵלֶיהָ אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וְעַל-יְהוּדָה, וְעַל-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם--מִיּוֹם דִּבַּרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ, מִימֵי יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ, וְעַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	2 'Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spoke unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day.
36.3 ג  אוּלַי יִשְׁמְעוּ, בֵּית יְהוּדָה, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי חֹשֵׁב לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהֶם--לְמַעַן יָשׁוּבוּ, אִישׁ מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה, וְסָלַחְתִּי לַעֲוֺנָם, וּלְחַטָּאתָם.  {ס}	3 It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way, and I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.' {S}
36.4 ד  וַיִּקְרָא יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶת-בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּה; וַיִּכְתֹּב בָּרוּךְ מִפִּי יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֵלָיו--עַל-מְגִלַּת-סֵפֶר.	4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah; and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the LORD, which He had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.
36.5 ה  וַיְצַוֶּה יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶת-בָּרוּךְ לֵאמֹר:  אֲנִי עָצוּר--לֹא אוּכַל, לָבוֹא בֵּית יְהוָה.	5 And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying: 'I am detained, I cannot go into the house of the LORD;
36.6 ו  וּבָאתָ אַתָּה וְקָרָאתָ בַמְּגִלָּה אֲשֶׁר-כָּתַבְתָּ-מִפִּי אֶת-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם, בֵּית יְהוָה--בְּיוֹם צוֹם; וְגַם בְּאָזְנֵי כָל-יְהוּדָה הַבָּאִים מֵעָרֵיהֶם, תִּקְרָאֵם.	6 therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the words of the LORD in the ears of the people in the LORD'S house upon a fast-day; and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities.
36.7 ז  אוּלַי תִּפֹּל תְּחִנָּתָם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְיָשֻׁבוּ, אִישׁ מִדַּרְכּוֹ הָרָעָה:  כִּי-גָדוֹל הָאַף וְהַחֵמָה, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-הָעָם הַזֶּה.	7 It may be they will present their supplication before the LORD, and will return every one from his evil way; for great is the anger and the fury that the LORD hath pronounced against this people.'
36.8 ח  וַיַּעַשׂ, בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּהוּ, יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא--לִקְרֹא בַסֵּפֶר דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה, בֵּית יְהוָה.  {פ}	8 And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the LORD in the LORD'S house. {P}
36.9 ט  וַיְהִי בַשָּׁנָה הַחֲמִשִׁית לִיהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַתְּשִׁעִי, קָרְאוּ צוֹם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה כָּל-הָעָם, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְכָל-הָעָם, הַבָּאִים מֵעָרֵי יְהוּדָה--בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	9 Now it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before the LORD, all the people in Jerusalem, and all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.
36.10 י  וַיִּקְרָא בָרוּךְ בַּסֵּפֶר אֶת-דִּבְרֵי יִרְמְיָהוּ, בֵּית יְהוָה--בְּלִשְׁכַּת גְּמַרְיָהוּ בֶן-שָׁפָן הַסֹּפֵר בֶּחָצֵר הָעֶלְיוֹן, פֶּתַח שַׁעַר בֵּית-יְהוָה הֶחָדָשׁ, בְּאָזְנֵי, כָּל-הָעָם.	10 Then did Baruch read in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of the LORD, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the upper court, at the entry of the new gate of the LORD'S house, in the ears of all the people.
36.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמַע מִכָיְהוּ בֶן-גְּמַרְיָהוּ בֶן-שָׁפָן, אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה--מֵעַל הַסֵּפֶר.	11 And when Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of the LORD,
36.12 יב  וַיֵּרֶד בֵּית-הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-לִשְׁכַּת הַסֹּפֵר, וְהִנֵּה-שָׁם, כָּל-הַשָּׂרִים יוֹשְׁבִים:  אֱלִישָׁמָע הַסֹּפֵר וּדְלָיָהוּ בֶן-שְׁמַעְיָהוּ וְאֶלְנָתָן בֶּן-עַכְבּוֹר וּגְמַרְיָהוּ בֶן-שָׁפָן, וְצִדְקִיָּהוּ בֶן-חֲנַנְיָהוּ--וְכָל-הַשָּׂרִים.	12 he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's chamber; and, lo, all the princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.
36.13 יג  וַיַּגֵּד לָהֶם מִכָיְהוּ, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁמֵעַ, בִּקְרֹא בָרוּךְ בַּסֵּפֶר, בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם.	13 Then Micaiah declared unto them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.
36.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ כָל-הַשָּׂרִים אֶל-בָּרוּךְ, אֶת-יְהוּדִי בֶּן-נְתַנְיָהוּ בֶּן-שֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ בֶן-כּוּשִׁי לֵאמֹר, הַמְּגִלָּה אֲשֶׁר קָרָאתָ בָּהּ בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם, קָחֶנָּה בְיָדְךָ וָלֵךְ; וַיִּקַּח בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּהוּ אֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה, בְּיָדוֹ, וַיָּבֹא, אֲלֵיהֶם.	14 Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying: 'Take in thy hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come.' So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto them.
36.15 טו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו--שֵׁב נָא, וּקְרָאֶנָּה בְּאָזְנֵינוּ; וַיִּקְרָא בָרוּךְ, בְּאָזְנֵיהֶם.	15 And they said unto him: 'Sit down now, and read it in our ears.' So Baruch read it in their ears.
36.16 טז  וַיְהִי, כְּשָׁמְעָם אֶת-כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, פָּחֲדוּ, אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-בָּרוּךְ, הַגֵּיד נַגִּיד לַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	16 Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they turned in fear one toward another, and said unto Baruch: 'We will surely tell the king of all these words.'
36.17 יז  וְאֶת-בָּרוּךְ--שָׁאֲלוּ, לֵאמֹר:  הַגֶּד-נָא לָנוּ--אֵיךְ כָּתַבְתָּ אֶת-כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, מִפִּיו.	17 And they asked Baruch, saying: 'Tell us now: How didst thou write all these words at his mouth?'
36.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, בָּרוּךְ, מִפִּיו יִקְרָא אֵלַי, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַאֲנִי כֹּתֵב עַל-הַסֵּפֶר, בַּדְּיוֹ.  {ס}	18 Then Baruch answered them: 'He pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.' {S}
36.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הַשָּׂרִים אֶל-בָּרוּךְ, לֵךְ הִסָּתֵר אַתָּה וְיִרְמְיָהוּ; וְאִישׁ אַל-יֵדַע, אֵיפֹה אַתֶּם.	19 Then said the princes unto Baruch: 'Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah, and let no man know where ye are.'
36.20 כ  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, חָצֵרָה, וְאֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה הִפְקִדוּ, בְּלִשְׁכַּת אֱלִישָׁמָע הַסֹּפֵר; וַיַּגִּידוּ בְּאָזְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים.	20 And they went in to the king into the court; but they had deposited the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe; and they told all the words in the ears of the king.
36.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-יְהוּדִי, לָקַחַת אֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה, וַיִּקָּחֶהָ, מִלִּשְׁכַּת אֱלִישָׁמָע הַסֹּפֵר; וַיִּקְרָאֶהָ יְהוּדִי, בְּאָזְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּבְאָזְנֵי כָּל-הַשָּׂרִים, הָעֹמְדִים מֵעַל הַמֶּלֶךְ.	21 So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll; and he took it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes that stood beside the king.
36.22 כב  וְהַמֶּלֶךְ, יוֹשֵׁב בֵּית הַחֹרֶף, בַּחֹדֶשׁ, הַתְּשִׁיעִי; וְאֶת-הָאָח, לְפָנָיו מְבֹעָרֶת.	22 Now the king was sitting in the winter-house in the ninth month; and the brazier was burning before him.
36.23 כג  וַיְהִי כִּקְרוֹא יְהוּדִי, שָׁלֹשׁ דְּלָתוֹת וְאַרְבָּעָה, יִקְרָעֶהָ בְּתַעַר הַסֹּפֵר, וְהַשְׁלֵךְ אֶל-הָאֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר אֶל-הָאָח:  עַד-תֹּם, כָּל-הַמְּגִלָּה, עַל-הָאֵשׁ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאָח.	23 And it came to pass, when Jehudi had read three or four columns, that he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was in the brazier, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was in the brazier.
36.24 כד  וְלֹא פָחֲדוּ, וְלֹא קָרְעוּ אֶת-בִּגְדֵיהֶם--הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכָל-עֲבָדָיו, הַשֹּׁמְעִים, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	24 Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words.
36.25 כה  וְגַם אֶלְנָתָן וּדְלָיָהוּ וּגְמַרְיָהוּ הִפְגִּעוּ בַמֶּלֶךְ, לְבִלְתִּי שְׂרֹף אֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה; וְלֹא שָׁמַע, אֲלֵיהֶם.	25 Moreover Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had entreated the king not to burn the roll; but he would not hear them.
36.26 כו  וַיְצַוֶּה הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶת-יְרַחְמְאֵל בֶּן-הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-שְׂרָיָהוּ בֶן-עַזְרִיאֵל, וְאֶת-שֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ בֶּן-עַבְדְּאֵל, לָקַחַת אֶת-בָּרוּךְ הַסֹּפֵר, וְאֵת יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא; וַיַּסְתִּרֵם, יְהוָה.  {ס}	26 And the king commanded Jerahmeel the king's son, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet; but the LORD hid them. {S}
36.27 כז  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ--אַחֲרֵי שְׂרֹף הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה וְאֶת-הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר כָּתַב בָּרוּךְ מִפִּי יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֵאמֹר.	27 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying:
36.28 כח  שׁוּב קַח-לְךָ, מְגִלָּה אַחֶרֶת; וּכְתֹב עָלֶיהָ, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָרִאשֹׁנִים, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ עַל-הַמְּגִלָּה הָרִאשֹׁנָה, אֲשֶׁר שָׂרַף יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה.	28 'Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burned.
36.29 כט  וְעַל-יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה תֹאמַר, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה:  אַתָּה שָׂרַפְתָּ אֶת-הַמְּגִלָּה הַזֹּאת, לֵאמֹר, מַדּוּעַ כָּתַבְתָּ עָלֶיהָ לֵאמֹר בֹּא-יָבוֹא מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל וְהִשְׁחִית אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, וְהִשְׁבִּית מִמֶּנָּה אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה.  {ס}	29 And concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah thou shalt say: Thus saith the LORD: Thou hast burned this roll, saying: Why hast thou written therein, saying: The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast? {S}
36.30 ל  לָכֵן כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, עַל-יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, לֹא-יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ יוֹשֵׁב, עַל-כִּסֵּא דָוִד; וְנִבְלָתוֹ תִּהְיֶה מֻשְׁלֶכֶת, לַחֹרֶב בַּיּוֹם וְלַקֶּרַח בַּלָּיְלָה.	30 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David; and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.
36.31 לא  וּפָקַדְתִּי עָלָיו וְעַל-זַרְעוֹ וְעַל-עֲבָדָיו, אֶת-עֲוֺנָם; וְהֵבֵאתִי עֲלֵיהֶם וְעַל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְאֶל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי אֲלֵיהֶם--וְלֹא שָׁמֵעוּ.	31 And I will visit upon him and his seed and his servants their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them, but they hearkened not.'
36.32 לב  וְיִרְמְיָהוּ לָקַח מְגִלָּה אַחֶרֶת, וַיִּתְּנָהּ אֶל-בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּהוּ הַסֹּפֵר, וַיִּכְתֹּב עָלֶיהָ מִפִּי יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֵת כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הַסֵּפֶר אֲשֶׁר שָׂרַף יְהוֹיָקִים מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה בָּאֵשׁ; וְעוֹד נוֹסַף עֲלֵיהֶם דְּבָרִים רַבִּים, כָּהֵמָּה.  {פ}	32 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire; and there were added besides unto them many like words. {P}
37.1 א  וַיִּמְלָךְ-מֶלֶךְ--צִדְקִיָּהוּ, בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ:  תַּחַת, כָּנְיָהוּ בֶּן-יְהוֹיָקִים, אֲשֶׁר הִמְלִיךְ נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה.	1 And Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king, instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.
37.2 ב  וְלֹא שָׁמַע הוּא וַעֲבָדָיו, וְעַם הָאָרֶץ:  אֶל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה--אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, בְּיַד יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא.	2 But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did hearken unto the words of the LORD, which He spoke by the prophet Jeremiah.
37.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ אֶת-יְהוּכַל בֶּן-שֶׁלֶמְיָה, וְאֶת-צְפַנְיָהוּ בֶן-מַעֲשֵׂיָה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, לֵאמֹר:  הִתְפַּלֶּל-נָא בַעֲדֵנוּ, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	3 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, to the prophet Jeremiah, saying: 'Pray now unto the LORD our God for us.'
37.4 ד  וְיִרְמְיָהוּ, בָּא וְיֹצֵא בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם; וְלֹא-נָתְנוּ אֹתוֹ, בֵּית הכליא (הַכְּלוּא).	4 Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people; for they had not put him into prison.
37.5 ה  וְחֵיל פַּרְעֹה, יָצָא מִמִּצְרָיִם; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ הַכַּשְׂדִּים הַצָּרִים עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶת-שִׁמְעָם, וַיֵּעָלוּ, מֵעַל יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}	5 And Pharaoh's army was come forth out of Egypt; and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they broke up from Jerusalem. {P}
37.6 ו  וַיְהִי, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, לֵאמֹר.	6 Then came the word of the LORD unto the prophet Jeremiah, saying:
37.7 ז  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כֹּה תֹאמְרוּ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, הַשֹּׁלֵחַ אֶתְכֶם אֵלַי לְדָרְשֵׁנִי:  הִנֵּה חֵיל פַּרְעֹה, הַיֹּצֵא לָכֶם לְעֶזְרָה, שָׁב לְאַרְצוֹ, מִצְרָיִם.	7 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you unto Me to inquire of Me: Behold, Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land.
37.8 ח  וְשָׁבוּ, הַכַּשְׂדִּים, וְנִלְחֲמוּ, עַל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת; וּלְכָדֻהָ, וּשְׂרָפֻהָ בָאֵשׁ.  {פ}	8 And the Chaldeans shall return, and fight against this city; and they shall take it, and burn it with fire. {P}
37.9 ט  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אַל-תַּשִּׁאוּ נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם לֵאמֹר, הָלֹךְ יֵלְכוּ מֵעָלֵינוּ, הַכַּשְׂדִּים:  כִּי-לֹא, יֵלֵכוּ.	9 Thus saith the LORD: Deceive not yourselves, saying: The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us; for they shall not depart.
37.10 י  כִּי אִם-הִכִּיתֶם כָּל-חֵיל כַּשְׂדִּים, הַנִּלְחָמִים אִתְּכֶם, וְנִשְׁאֲרוּ-בָם, אֲנָשִׁים מְדֻקָּרִים--אִישׁ בְּאָהֳלוֹ יָקוּמוּ, וְשָׂרְפוּ אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת בָּאֵשׁ.	10 For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet would they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.'
37.11 יא  וְהָיָה, בְּהֵעָלוֹת חֵיל הַכַּשְׂדִּים, מֵעַל, יְרוּשָׁלִָם--מִפְּנֵי, חֵיל פַּרְעֹה.  {ס}	11 And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army, {S}
37.12 יב  וַיֵּצֵא יִרְמְיָהוּ מִירוּשָׁלִַם, לָלֶכֶת אֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן, לַחֲלִק מִשָּׁם, בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם.	12 then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to receive his portion there, in the midst of the people.
37.13 יג  וַיְהִי-הוּא בְּשַׁעַר בִּנְיָמִן, וְשָׁם בַּעַל פְּקִדֻת, וּשְׁמוֹ יִרְאִיָּיה, בֶּן-שֶׁלֶמְיָה בֶּן-חֲנַנְיָה; וַיִּתְפֹּשׂ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, לֵאמֹר, אֶל-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, אַתָּה נֹפֵל.	13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he laid hold on Jeremiah the prophet, saying: 'Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.'
37.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ שֶׁקֶר, אֵינֶנִּי נֹפֵל עַל-הַכַּשְׂדִּים--וְלֹא שָׁמַע, אֵלָיו; וַיִּתְפֹּשׂ יִרְאִיָּיה בְּיִרְמְיָהוּ, וַיְבִאֵהוּ אֶל-הַשָּׂרִים.	14 Then said Jeremiah: 'It is false; I fall not away to the Chaldeans'; but he hearkened not to him; so Irijah laid hold on Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.
37.15 טו  וַיִּקְצְפוּ הַשָּׂרִים עַל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, וְהִכּוּ אֹתוֹ; וְנָתְנוּ אוֹתוֹ בֵּית הָאֵסוּר, בֵּית יְהוֹנָתָן הַסֹּפֵר--כִּי-אֹתוֹ עָשׂוּ, לְבֵית הַכֶּלֶא.	15 And the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe; for they had made that the prison.
37.16 טז  כִּי בָא יִרְמְיָהוּ אֶל-בֵּית הַבּוֹר, וְאֶל-הַחֲנֻיוֹת; וַיֵּשֶׁב-שָׁם יִרְמְיָהוּ, יָמִים רַבִּים.	16 When Jeremiah was come into the dungeon-house, and into the cells, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;
37.17 יז  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ, וַיִּשְׁאָלֵהוּ הַמֶּלֶךְ בְּבֵיתוֹ בַּסֵּתֶר, וַיֹּאמֶר, הֲיֵשׁ דָּבָר מֵאֵת יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, יֵשׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר, בְּיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל תִּנָּתֵן.	17 then Zedekiah the king sent, and fetched him; and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said: 'Is there any word from the LORD?' And Jeremiah said: 'There is.' He said also: 'Thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.'
37.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ:  מֶה חָטָאתִי לְךָ וְלַעֲבָדֶיךָ וְלָעָם הַזֶּה, כִּי-נְתַתֶּם אוֹתִי אֶל-בֵּית הַכֶּלֶא.	18 Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah: 'Wherein have I sinned against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
37.19 יט  ואיו (וְאַיֵּה), נְבִיאֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-נִבְּאוּ לָכֶם, לֵאמֹר:  לֹא-יָבֹא מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל עֲלֵיכֶם, וְעַל הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת.	19 Where now are your prophets that prophesied unto you, saying: The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?
37.20 כ  וְעַתָּה, שְׁמַע-נָא אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ:  תִּפָּל-נָא תְחִנָּתִי, לְפָנֶיךָ, וְאַל-תְּשִׁבֵנִי בֵּית יְהוֹנָתָן הַסֹּפֵר, וְלֹא אָמוּת שָׁם.	20 And now hear, I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be presented before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.'
37.21 כא  וַיְצַוֶּה הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ, וַיַּפְקִדוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה, וְנָתֹן לוֹ כִכַּר-לֶחֶם לַיּוֹם מִחוּץ הָאֹפִים, עַד-תֹּם כָּל-הַלֶּחֶם מִן-הָעִיר; וַיֵּשֶׁב יִרְמְיָהוּ, בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה.	21 Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and they committed Jeremiah into the court of the guard, and they gave him daily a loaf of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in the city was spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.
38.1 א  וַיִּשְׁמַע שְׁפַטְיָה בֶן-מַתָּן, וּגְדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-פַּשְׁחוּר, וְיוּכַל בֶּן-שֶׁלֶמְיָהוּ, וּפַשְׁחוּר בֶּן-מַלְכִּיָּה:  אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים--אֲשֶׁר יִרְמְיָהוּ מְדַבֵּר אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, לֵאמֹר.	1 And Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashhur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah spoke unto all the people, saying:
38.2 ב  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, הַיֹּשֵׁב בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת, יָמוּת בַּחֶרֶב בָּרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר; וְהַיֹּצֵא אֶל-הַכַּשְׂדִּים יחיה (וְחָיָה), וְהָיְתָה-לּוֹ נַפְשׁוֹ לְשָׁלָל וָחָי.  {ס}	2 'Thus saith the LORD: He that remaineth in this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey, and he shall live. {S}
38.3 ג  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה:  הִנָּתֹן תִּנָּתֵן הָעִיר הַזֹּאת, בְּיַד חֵיל מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--וּלְכָדָהּ.	3 Thus saith the LORD: This city shall surely be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.'
38.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הַשָּׂרִים אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, יוּמַת נָא אֶת-הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה--כִּי-עַל-כֵּן הוּא-מְרַפֵּא אֶת-יְדֵי אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּעִיר הַזֹּאת וְאֵת יְדֵי כָל-הָעָם, לְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם כַּדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה:  כִּי הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה, אֵינֶנּוּ דֹרֵשׁ לְשָׁלוֹם לָעָם הַזֶּה--כִּי אִם-לְרָעָה.	4 Then the princes said unto the king: 'Let this man, we pray thee, be put to death; forasmuch as he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them; for this man seeketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.'
38.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ, הִנֵּה-הוּא בְּיֶדְכֶם:  כִּי-אֵין הַמֶּלֶךְ, יוּכַל אֶתְכֶם דָּבָר.	5 Then Zedekiah the king said: 'Behold, he is in your hand; for the king is not he that can do any thing against you.'
38.6 ו  וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, וַיַּשְׁלִכוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-הַבּוֹר מַלְכִּיָּהוּ בֶן-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה, וַיְשַׁלְּחוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, בַּחֲבָלִים; וּבַבּוֹר אֵין-מַיִם כִּי אִם-טִיט, וַיִּטְבַּע יִרְמְיָהוּ בַּטִּיט.  {ס}	6 Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the pit of Malchiah the king's son, that was in the court of the guard; and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the pit there was no water, but mire; and Jeremiah sank in the mire. {S}
38.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁמַע עֶבֶד-מֶלֶךְ הַכּוּשִׁי אִישׁ סָרִיס, וְהוּא בְּבֵית הַמֶּלֶךְ, כִּי-נָתְנוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶל-הַבּוֹר; וְהַמֶּלֶךְ יוֹשֵׁב, בְּשַׁעַר בִּנְיָמִן.	7 Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, an officer, who was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the pit; the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin;
38.8 ח  וַיֵּצֵא עֶבֶד-מֶלֶךְ, מִבֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיְדַבֵּר אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, לֵאמֹר.	8 Ebed-melech went forth out of the king's house, and spoke to the king, saying:
38.9 ט  אֲדֹנִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, הֵרֵעוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לְיִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הִשְׁלִיכוּ, אֶל-הַבּוֹר; וַיָּמָת תַּחְתָּיו מִפְּנֵי הָרָעָב, כִּי אֵין הַלֶּחֶם עוֹד בָּעִיר.	9 'My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the pit; and he is like to die in the place where he is because of the famine; for there is no more bread in the city.'
38.10 י  וַיְצַוֶּה הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֵת עֶבֶד-מֶלֶךְ הַכּוּשִׁי לֵאמֹר:  קַח בְּיָדְךָ מִזֶּה, שְׁלֹשִׁים אֲנָשִׁים, וְהַעֲלִיתָ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא מִן-הַבּוֹר, בְּטֶרֶם יָמוּת.	10 Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying: 'Take from hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the pit, before he die.'
38.11 יא  וַיִּקַּח עֶבֶד-מֶלֶךְ אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים בְּיָדוֹ, וַיָּבֹא בֵית-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-תַּחַת הָאוֹצָר, וַיִּקַּח מִשָּׁם בְּלוֹיֵ הסחבות (סְחָבוֹת), וּבְלוֹיֵ מְלָחִים; וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ אֶל-הַבּוֹר, בַּחֲבָלִים.	11 So Ebed-melech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took thence worn clouts and worn rags, and let them down by cords into the pit to Jeremiah.
38.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר עֶבֶד-מֶלֶךְ הַכּוּשִׁי אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, שִׂים נָא בְּלוֹאֵי הַסְּחָבוֹת וְהַמְּלָחִים תַּחַת אַצִּלוֹת יָדֶיךָ, מִתַּחַת, לַחֲבָלִים; וַיַּעַשׂ יִרְמְיָהוּ, כֵּן.	12 And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah: 'Put now these worn clouts and rags under thine armholes under the cords.' And Jeremiah did so.
38.13 יג  וַיִּמְשְׁכוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ בַּחֲבָלִים, וַיַּעֲלוּ אֹתוֹ מִן-הַבּוֹר; וַיֵּשֶׁב יִרְמְיָהוּ, בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה.  {ס}	13 So they drew up Jeremiah with the cords, and took him up out of the pit; and Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard. {S}
38.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא אֵלָיו, אֶל-מָבוֹא הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, שֹׁאֵל אֲנִי אֹתְךָ דָּבָר--אַל-תְּכַחֵד מִמֶּנִּי, דָּבָר.	14 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the third entry that was in the house of the LORD; and the king said unto Jeremiah: 'I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.'
38.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ, כִּי אַגִּיד לְךָ, הֲלוֹא הָמֵת תְּמִיתֵנִי; וְכִי, אִיעָצְךָ, לֹא תִשְׁמַע, אֵלָי.	15 Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah: 'If I declare it unto thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, thou wilt not hearken unto me.'
38.16 טז  וַיִּשָּׁבַע הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ--בַּסֵּתֶר לֵאמֹר:  חַי-יְהוָה את (  ) אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה-לָנוּ אֶת-הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַזֹּאת, אִם-אֲמִיתֶךָ, וְאִם-אֶתֶּנְךָ בְּיַד הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר מְבַקְשִׁים אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ.  {ס}	16 So Zedekiah the king swore secretly unto Jeremiah, saying: 'As the LORD liveth, that made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life.' {S}
38.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ אֶל-צִדְקִיָּהוּ  {ס}  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-יָצֹא תֵצֵא אֶל-שָׂרֵי מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל וְחָיְתָה נַפְשֶׁךָ, וְהָעִיר הַזֹּאת, לֹא תִשָּׂרֵף בָּאֵשׁ; וְחָיִתָה, אַתָּה וּבֵיתֶךָ.	17 Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah: {S} 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: If thou wilt go forth unto the king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, thou, and thy house;
38.18 יח  וְאִם לֹא-תֵצֵא, אֶל-שָׂרֵי מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--וְנִתְּנָה הָעִיר הַזֹּאת בְּיַד הַכַּשְׂדִּים, וּשְׂרָפוּהָ בָּאֵשׁ; וְאַתָּה, לֹא-תִמָּלֵט מִיָּדָם.  {ס}	18 but if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.' {S}
38.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר הַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ:  אֲנִי דֹאֵג אֶת-הַיְּהוּדִים, אֲשֶׁר נָפְלוּ אֶל-הַכַּשְׂדִּים--פֶּן-יִתְּנוּ אֹתִי בְּיָדָם, וְהִתְעַלְּלוּ-בִי.	19 And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah: 'I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen away to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.'
38.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, לֹא יִתֵּנוּ; שְׁמַע-נָא בְּקוֹל יְהוָה, לַאֲשֶׁר אֲנִי דֹּבֵר אֵלֶיךָ--וְיִיטַב לְךָ, וּתְחִי נַפְשֶׁךָ.	20 But Jeremiah said: 'They shall not deliver thee. Hearken, I beseech thee, to the voice of the LORD, in that which I speak unto thee; so it shall be well with thee, and thy soul shall live.
38.21 כא  וְאִם-מָאֵן אַתָּה, לָצֵאת--זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר הִרְאַנִי יְהוָה.	21 But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the LORD hath shown me:
38.22 כב  וְהִנֵּה כָל-הַנָּשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁאֲרוּ בְּבֵית מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, מוּצָאוֹת, אֶל-שָׂרֵי מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל; וְהֵנָּה אֹמְרֹת, הִסִּיתוּךָ וְיָכְלוּ לְךָ אַנְשֵׁי שְׁלֹמֶךָ, הָטְבְּעוּ בַבֹּץ רַגְלֶךָ, נָסֹגוּ אָחוֹר.	22 Behold, all the women that are left in the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's princes, and those women shall say: Thy familiar friends have set thee on, and have prevailed over thee; thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they are turned away back.
38.23 כג  וְאֶת-כָּל-נָשֶׁיךָ וְאֶת-בָּנֶיךָ, מוֹצִאִים אֶל-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, וְאַתָּה, לֹא-תִמָּלֵט מִיָּדָם:  כִּי בְיַד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל תִּתָּפֵשׂ, וְאֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת תִּשְׂרֹף בָּאֵשׁ.  {ס}	23 And they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the Chaldeans; and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon; and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.' {S}
38.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר צִדְקִיָּהוּ אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, אִישׁ אַל-יֵדַע בַּדְּבָרִים-הָאֵלֶּה--וְלֹא תָמוּת.	24 Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah: 'Let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die.
38.25 כה  וְכִי-יִשְׁמְעוּ הַשָּׂרִים, כִּי-דִבַּרְתִּי אִתָּךְ, וּבָאוּ אֵלֶיךָ וְאָמְרוּ אֵלֶיךָ הַגִּידָה-נָּא לָנוּ מַה-דִּבַּרְתָּ אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ אַל-תְּכַחֵד מִמֶּנּוּ, וְלֹא נְמִיתֶךָ; וּמַה-דִּבֶּר אֵלֶיךָ, הַמֶּלֶךְ.	25 But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee: Declare unto us now what thou hast said unto the king; hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the king said unto thee;
38.26 כו  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם, מַפִּיל-אֲנִי תְחִנָּתִי לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְבִלְתִּי הֲשִׁיבֵנִי בֵּית יְהוֹנָתָן, לָמוּת שָׁם.  {פ}	26 then thou shalt say unto them: I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to die there.' {P}
38.27 כז  וַיָּבֹאוּ כָל-הַשָּׂרִים אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ אֹתוֹ, וַיַּגֵּד לָהֶם כְּכָל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיַּחֲרִשׁוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, כִּי לֹא-נִשְׁמַע הַדָּבָר.	27 Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him; and he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him; for the matter was not reported.
38.28 כח  וַיֵּשֶׁב יִרְמְיָהוּ בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה, עַד-יוֹם אֲשֶׁר-נִלְכְּדָה יְרוּשָׁלִָם;  {ס}  וְהָיָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִלְכְּדָה יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	28 So Jeremiah abode in the court of the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken. {S} And it came to pass, when Jerusalem was taken--
39.1 א  בַּשָּׁנָה הַתְּשִׁעִית לְצִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָעֲשִׂרִי, בָּא נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל וְכָל-חֵילוֹ אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיָּצֻרוּ, עָלֶיהָ.	1 in the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and besieged it;
39.2 ב  בְּעַשְׁתֵּי-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה לְצִדְקִיָּהוּ, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרְבִיעִי בְּתִשְׁעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ, הָבְקְעָה, הָעִיר.	2 in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city--
39.3 ג  וַיָּבֹאוּ, כֹּל שָׂרֵי מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, בְּשַׁעַר הַתָּוֶךְ--נֵרְגַל שַׂרְאֶצֶר סַמְגַּר-נְבוּ שַׂר-סְכִים רַב-סָרִיס, נֵרְגַל שַׂרְאֶצֶר רַב-מָג, וְכָל-שְׁאֵרִית, שָׂרֵי מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	3 that all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergal-sarezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim Rab-saris, Nergal-sarezer Rab-mag, with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon.
39.4 ד  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר רָאָם צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה וְכֹל אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיִּבְרְחוּ וַיֵּצְאוּ לַיְלָה מִן-הָעִיר דֶּרֶךְ גַּן הַמֶּלֶךְ, בְּשַׁעַר, בֵּין הַחֹמֹתָיִם; וַיֵּצֵא, דֶּרֶךְ הָעֲרָבָה.	4 And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah and all the men of war saw them, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate betwixt the two walls; and he went out the way of the Arabah.
39.5 ה  וַיִּרְדְּפוּ חֵיל-כַּשְׂדִּים אַחֲרֵיהֶם, וַיַּשִּׂגוּ אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ בְּעַרְבוֹת יְרֵחוֹ, וַיִּקְחוּ אוֹתוֹ וַיַּעֲלֻהוּ אֶל-נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל רִבְלָתָה, בְּאֶרֶץ חֲמָת; וַיְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ, מִשְׁפָּטִים.	5 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, and he gave judgment upon him.
39.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁחַט מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל אֶת-בְּנֵי צִדְקִיָּהוּ, בְּרִבְלָה--לְעֵינָיו; וְאֵת כָּל-חֹרֵי יְהוּדָה, שָׁחַט מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	6 Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes; also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah.
39.7 ז  וְאֶת-עֵינֵי צִדְקִיָּהוּ, עִוֵּר; וַיַּאַסְרֵהוּ, בַּנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם, לָבִיא אֹתוֹ, בָּבֶלָה.	7 Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.
39.8 ח  וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-בֵּית הָעָם, שָׂרְפוּ הַכַּשְׂדִּים בָּאֵשׁ; וְאֶת-חֹמוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, נָתָצוּ.	8 And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the house of the people, with fire, and broke down the walls of Jerusalem.
39.9 ט  וְאֵת יֶתֶר הָעָם הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּעִיר, וְאֶת-הַנֹּפְלִים אֲשֶׁר נָפְלוּ עָלָיו, וְאֵת יֶתֶר הָעָם, הַנִּשְׁאָרִים--הֶגְלָה נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, בָּבֶל.	9 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, the deserters also, that fell away to him, with the rest of the people that remained.
39.10 י  וּמִן-הָעָם הַדַּלִּים, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לָהֶם מְאוּמָה, הִשְׁאִיר נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה; וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם כְּרָמִים וִיגֵבִים, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.	10 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, that had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields in that day.
39.11 יא  וַיְצַו נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, עַל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, בְּיַד נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, לֵאמֹר.	11 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying:
39.12 יב  קָחֶנּוּ, וְעֵינֶיךָ שִׂים עָלָיו, וְאַל-תַּעַשׂ לוֹ, מְאוּמָה רָּע:  כִּי, אם (  ) כַּאֲשֶׁר יְדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ--כֵּן, עֲשֵׂה עִמּוֹ.	12 'Take him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee.'
39.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁלַח נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, וּנְבוּשַׁזְבָּן רַב-סָרִיס, וְנֵרְגַל שַׂרְאֶצֶר, רַב-מָג--וְכֹל, רַבֵּי מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל.	13 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushazban Rab-saris, and Nergal-sarezer Rab-mag, and all the chief officers of the king of Babylon;
39.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ מֵחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה, וַיִּתְּנוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן, לְהוֹצִאֵהוּ, אֶל-הַבָּיִת; וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם.  {ס}	14 they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the guard, and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home; so he dwelt among the people. {S}
39.15 טו  וְאֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה, בִּהְיֹתוֹ עָצוּר, בַּחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה לֵאמֹר.	15 Now the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying:
39.16 טז  הָלוֹךְ וְאָמַרְתָּ לְעֶבֶד-מֶלֶךְ הַכּוּשִׁי לֵאמֹר, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי מֵבִי אֶת-דְּבָרַי אֶל-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת לְרָעָה, וְלֹא לְטוֹבָה; וְהָיוּ לְפָנֶיךָ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.	16 'Go, and speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying: Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring My words upon this city for evil, and not for good; and they shall be accomplished before thee in that day.
39.17 יז  וְהִצַּלְתִּיךָ בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְלֹא תִנָּתֵן בְּיַד הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה יָגוֹר מִפְּנֵיהֶם.	17 But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the LORD; and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.
39.18 יח  כִּי מַלֵּט אֲמַלֶּטְךָ, וּבַחֶרֶב לֹא תִפֹּל; וְהָיְתָה לְךָ נַפְשְׁךָ לְשָׁלָל, כִּי-בָטַחְתָּ בִּי נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	18 For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee; because thou hast put thy trust in Me, saith the LORD.' {P}
40.1 א  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, מֵאֵת יְהוָה, אַחַר שַׁלַּח אֹתוֹ נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, מִן-הָרָמָה--בְּקַחְתּוֹ אֹתוֹ, וְהוּא-אָסוּר בָּאזִקִּים בְּתוֹךְ כָּל-גָּלוּת יְרוּשָׁלִַם וִיהוּדָה, הַמֻּגְלִים, בָּבֶלָה.	1 The word which came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah, that were carried away captive unto Babylon.
40.2 ב  וַיִּקַּח רַב-טַבָּחִים, לְיִרְמְיָהוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו--יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ דִּבֶּר אֶת-הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him: 'The LORD thy God pronounced this evil upon this place;
40.3 ג  וַיָּבֵא וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר:  כִּי-חֲטָאתֶם לַיהוָה וְלֹא-שְׁמַעְתֶּם בְּקוֹלוֹ, וְהָיָה לָכֶם דבר (הַדָּבָר) הַזֶּה.	3 and the LORD hath brought it, and done according as He spoke; because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not hearkened to His voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.
40.4 ד  וְעַתָּה הִנֵּה פִתַּחְתִּיךָ הַיּוֹם, מִן-הָאזִקִּים אֲשֶׁר עַל-יָדֶךָ--אִם-טוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ לָבוֹא אִתִּי בָבֶל בֹּא וְאָשִׂים אֶת-עֵינִי עָלֶיךָ, וְאִם-רַע בְּעֵינֶיךָ לָבוֹא-אִתִּי בָבֶל חֲדָל:  רְאֵה כָּל-הָאָרֶץ לְפָנֶיךָ, אֶל-טוֹב וְאֶל-הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינֶיךָ לָלֶכֶת שָׁמָּה לֵךְ.	4 And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which are upon thy hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into Babylon, come, and I will look well unto thee; but if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear; behold, all the land is before thee; whither it seemeth good and right unto thee to go, thither go.--
40.5 ה  וְעוֹדֶנּוּ לֹא-יָשׁוּב, וְשֻׁבָה אֶל-גְּדַלְיָה בֶן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן אֲשֶׁר הִפְקִיד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה וְשֵׁב אִתּוֹ בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם, אוֹ אֶל-כָּל-הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינֶיךָ לָלֶכֶת, לֵךְ; וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ רַב-טַבָּחִים אֲרֻחָה וּמַשְׂאֵת, וַיְשַׁלְּחֵהוּ.	5 Yet he would not go back.--Go back then to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people; or go wheresoever it seemeth right unto thee to go.' So the captain of the guard gave him an allowance and a present, and let him go.
40.6 ו  וַיָּבֹא יִרְמְיָהוּ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָה בֶן-אֲחִיקָם, הַמִּצְפָּתָה; וַיֵּשֶׁב אִתּוֹ בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם, הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּאָרֶץ.  {פ}	6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah, and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land. {P}
40.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ כָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה, הֵמָּה וְאַנְשֵׁיהֶם, כִּי-הִפְקִיד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶן-אֲחִיקָם, בָּאָרֶץ; וְכִי הִפְקִיד אִתּוֹ, אֲנָשִׁים וְנָשִׁים וָטָף, וּמִדַּלַּת הָאָרֶץ, מֵאֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָגְלוּ בָּבֶלָה.	7 Now when all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poorest of the land, of them that were not carried away captive to Babylon;
40.8 ח  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָה, הַמִּצְפָּתָה; וְיִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָהוּ וְיוֹחָנָן וְיוֹנָתָן בְּנֵי-קָרֵחַ וּשְׂרָיָה בֶן-תַּנְחֻמֶת וּבְנֵי עופי (עֵיפַי) הַנְּטֹפָתִי, וִיזַנְיָהוּ בֶּן-הַמַּעֲכָתִי--הֵמָּה, וְאַנְשֵׁיהֶם.	8 then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.
40.9 ט  וַיִּשָּׁבַע לָהֶם גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן, וּלְאַנְשֵׁיהֶם לֵאמֹר, אַל-תִּירְאוּ, מֵעֲבוֹד הַכַּשְׂדִּים; שְׁבוּ בָאָרֶץ, וְעִבְדוּ אֶת-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל--וְיִיטַב לָכֶם.	9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan swore unto them and to their men, saying: 'Fear not to serve the Chaldeans; dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.
40.10 י  וַאֲנִי, הִנְנִי יֹשֵׁב בַּמִּצְפָּה, לַעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי הַכַּשְׂדִּים, אֲשֶׁר יָבֹאוּ אֵלֵינוּ; וְאַתֶּם אִסְפוּ יַיִן וְקַיִץ וְשֶׁמֶן, וְשִׂמוּ בִּכְלֵיכֶם, וּשְׁבוּ, בְּעָרֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר-תְּפַשְׂתֶּם.	10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans that may come unto us; but ye, gather ye wine and summer fruits and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken.'
40.11 יא  וְגַם כָּל-הַיְּהוּדִים אֲשֶׁר-בְּמוֹאָב וּבִבְנֵי-עַמּוֹן וּבֶאֱדוֹם וַאֲשֶׁר בְּכָל-הָאֲרָצוֹת, שָׁמְעוּ, כִּי-נָתַן מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל שְׁאֵרִית, לִיהוּדָה; וְכִי הִפְקִיד עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן.	11 Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the children of Ammon, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan;
40.12 יב  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ כָל-הַיְּהוּדִים, מִכָּל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר נִדְּחוּ-שָׁם, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶרֶץ-יְהוּדָה אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ, הַמִּצְפָּתָה; וַיַּאַסְפוּ יַיִן וָקַיִץ, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.  {ס}	12 then all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits in great abundance. {S}
40.13 יג  וְיוֹחָנָן, בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים, אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה--בָּאוּ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ, הַמִּצְפָּתָה.	13 Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
40.14 יד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, הֲיָדֹעַ תֵּדַע כִּי בַּעֲלִיס מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן שָׁלַח אֶת-יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה, לְהַכֹּתְךָ, נָפֶשׁ; וְלֹא-הֶאֱמִין לָהֶם, גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם.	14 and said unto him: 'Dost thou know that Baalis the king of the children of Ammon hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to take thy life?' But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.
40.15 טו  וְיוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ אָמַר אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בַסֵּתֶר בַּמִּצְפָּה לֵאמֹר, אֵלְכָה נָּא וְאַכֶּה אֶת-יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה, וְאִישׁ, לֹא יֵדָע; לָמָּה יַכֶּכָּה נֶּפֶשׁ, וְנָפֹצוּ כָּל-יְהוּדָה הַנִּקְבָּצִים אֵלֶיךָ, וְאָבְדָה, שְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה.	15 Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying: 'Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it; wherefore should he take thy life, that all the Jews that are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant of Judah perish?'
40.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶן-אֲחִיקָם אֶל-יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, אַל-תעש (תַּעֲשֵׂה) אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה:  כִּי-שֶׁקֶר אַתָּה דֹבֵר, אֶל-יִשְׁמָעֵאל.  {פ}	16 But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah: 'Thou shalt not do this thing; for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.' {P}
41.1 א  וַיְהִי בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, בָּא יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה בֶן-אֱלִישָׁמָע מִזֶּרַע הַמְּלוּכָה וְרַבֵּי הַמֶּלֶךְ וַעֲשָׂרָה אֲנָשִׁים אִתּוֹ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶן-אֲחִיקָם--הַמִּצְפָּתָה; וַיֹּאכְלוּ שָׁם לֶחֶם יַחְדָּו, בַּמִּצְפָּה.	1 Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and one of the chief officers of the king, and ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.
41.2 ב  וַיָּקָם יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה וַעֲשֶׂרֶת הָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ אִתּוֹ, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן בַּחֶרֶב--וַיָּמֶת אֹתוֹ:  אֲשֶׁר-הִפְקִיד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, בָּאָרֶץ.	2 Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.
41.3 ג  וְאֵת כָּל-הַיְּהוּדִים, אֲשֶׁר-הָיוּ אִתּוֹ אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בַּמִּצְפָּה, וְאֶת-הַכַּשְׂדִּים, אֲשֶׁר נִמְצְאוּ-שָׁם--אֵת אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, הִכָּה יִשְׁמָעֵאל.	3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, even the men of war.
41.4 ד  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי, לְהָמִית אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ; וְאִישׁ, לֹא יָדָע.	4 And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it,
41.5 ה  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֲנָשִׁים מִשְּׁכֶם מִשִּׁלוֹ וּמִשֹּׁמְרוֹן, שְׁמֹנִים אִישׁ, מְגֻלְּחֵי זָקָן וּקְרֻעֵי בְגָדִים, וּמִתְגֹּדְדִים; וּמִנְחָה וּלְבוֹנָה בְּיָדָם, לְהָבִיא בֵּית יְהוָה.	5 that there came certain men from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards shaven and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with meal-offerings and frankincense in their hand to bring them to the house of the LORD.
41.6 ו  וַיֵּצֵא יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה לִקְרָאתָם, מִן-הַמִּצְפָּה, הֹלֵךְ הָלֹךְ, וּבֹכֶה; וַיְהִי, כִּפְגֹשׁ אֹתָם, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, בֹּאוּ אֶל-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶן-אֲחִיקָם.	6 And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went; and it came to pass, as he met them, he said unto them: 'Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.'
41.7 ז  וַיְהִי, כְּבוֹאָם אֶל-תּוֹךְ הָעִיר; וַיִּשְׁחָטֵם יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה, אֶל-תּוֹךְ הַבּוֹר--הוּא, וְהָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ.	7 And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that were with him.
41.8 ח  וַעֲשָׂרָה אֲנָשִׁים נִמְצְאוּ-בָם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-יִשְׁמָעֵאל אַל-תְּמִתֵנוּ--כִּי-יֶשׁ-לָנוּ מַטְמֹנִים בַּשָּׂדֶה, חִטִּים וּשְׂעֹרִים וְשֶׁמֶן וּדְבָשׁ; וַיֶּחְדַּל, וְלֹא הֱמִיתָם בְּתוֹךְ אֲחֵיהֶם.	8 But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael: 'Slay us not; for we have stores hidden in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey.' So he forbore, and slew them not among their brethren.
41.9 ט  וְהַבּוֹר, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁלִיךְ שָׁם יִשְׁמָעֵאל אֵת כָּל-פִּגְרֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה בְּיַד-גְּדַלְיָהוּ--הוּא אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ אָסָא, מִפְּנֵי בַּעְשָׁא מֶלֶךְ-יִשְׂרָאֵל; אֹתוֹ, מִלֵּא יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָהוּ--חֲלָלִים.	9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael cast all the dead bodies of the men whom he had slain by the side of Gedaliah was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasa king of Israel; the same Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled with them that were slain.
41.10 י  וַיִּשְׁבְּ יִשְׁמָעֵאל אֶת-כָּל-שְׁאֵרִית הָעָם אֲשֶׁר בַּמִּצְפָּה, אֶת-בְּנוֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ וְאֶת-כָּל-הָעָם הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בַּמִּצְפָּה, אֲשֶׁר הִפְקִיד נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם; וַיִּשְׁבֵּם, יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה, וַיֵּלֶךְ, לַעֲבֹר אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.  {ס}	10 Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam; Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the children of Ammon. {S}
41.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמַע יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה.	11 But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,
41.12 יב  וַיִּקְחוּ, אֶת-כָּל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיֵּלְכוּ, לְהִלָּחֵם עִם-יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה; וַיִּמְצְאוּ אֹתוֹ, אֶל-מַיִם רַבִּים אֲשֶׁר בְּגִבְעוֹן.	12 then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon.
41.13 יג  וַיְהִי, כִּרְאוֹת כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אֶת-יִשְׁמָעֵאל, אֶת-יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וְאֵת כָּל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ--וַיִּשְׂמָחוּ.	13 Now it came to pass, that when all the people that were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, then they were glad.
41.14 יד  וַיָּסֹבּוּ, כָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁבָה יִשְׁמָעֵאל, מִן-הַמִּצְפָּה; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, וַיֵּלְכוּ, אֶל-יוֹחָנָן, בֶּן-קָרֵחַ.	14 So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah.
41.15 טו  וְיִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה, נִמְלַט בִּשְׁמֹנָה אֲנָשִׁים, מִפְּנֵי, יוֹחָנָן; וַיֵּלֶךְ, אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.  {ס}	15 But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon. {S}
41.16 טז  וַיִּקַּח יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ וְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, אֵת כָּל-שְׁאֵרִית הָעָם אֲשֶׁר הֵשִׁיב מֵאֵת יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה מִן-הַמִּצְפָּה, אַחַר הִכָּה, אֶת-גְּדַלְיָה בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם--גְּבָרִים אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, וְנָשִׁים וְטַף וְסָרִסִים, אֲשֶׁר הֵשִׁיב, מִגִּבְעוֹן.	16 Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the men, even the men of war, and the women, and the children, and the officers, whom he had brought back from Gibeon;
41.17 יז  וַיֵּלְכוּ, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בְּגֵרוּת כמוהם (כִּמְהָם), אֲשֶׁר-אֵצֶל, בֵּית לָחֶם--לָלֶכֶת, לָבוֹא מִצְרָיִם.	17 and they departed, and dwelt in Geruth Chimham, which is by Beth-lehem, to go to enter into Egypt,
41.18 יח  מִפְּנֵי, הַכַּשְׂדִּים, כִּי יָרְאוּ, מִפְּנֵיהֶם:  כִּי-הִכָּה יִשְׁמָעֵאל בֶּן-נְתַנְיָה, אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם, אֲשֶׁר-הִפְקִיד מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, בָּאָרֶץ.  {פ}	18 because of the Chaldeans; for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the land. {P}
42.1 א  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ, כָּל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים, וְיוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וִיזַנְיָה בֶּן-הוֹשַׁעְיָה--וְכָל-הָעָם, מִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל.	1 Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even unto the greatest, came near,
42.2 ב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, תִּפָּל-נָא תְחִנָּתֵנוּ לְפָנֶיךָ, וְהִתְפַּלֵּל בַּעֲדֵנוּ אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, בְּעַד כָּל-הַשְּׁאֵרִית הַזֹּאת:  כִּי-נִשְׁאַרְנוּ מְעַט מֵהַרְבֵּה, כַּאֲשֶׁר עֵינֶיךָ רֹאוֹת אֹתָנוּ.	2 and said unto Jeremiah the prophet: 'Let, we pray thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for us unto the LORD thy God, even for all this remnant; for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us;
42.3 ג  וְיַגֶּד-לָנוּ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר נֵלֶךְ-בָּהּ, וְאֶת-הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר נַעֲשֶׂה.	3 that the LORD thy God may tell us the way wherein we should walk, and the thing that we should do.'
42.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, שָׁמַעְתִּי--הִנְנִי מִתְפַּלֵּל אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, כְּדִבְרֵיכֶם; וְהָיָה כָּל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲנֶה יְהוָה אֶתְכֶם, אַגִּיד לָכֶם--לֹא-אֶמְנַע מִכֶּם, דָּבָר.	4 Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them: 'I have heard you; behold, I will pray unto the LORD your God according to your words; and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the LORD shall answer you, I will declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you.'
42.5 ה  וְהֵמָּה, אָמְרוּ אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, יְהִי יְהוָה בָּנוּ, לְעֵד אֱמֶת וְנֶאֱמָן:  אִם-לֹא כְּכָל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁלָחֲךָ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֵלֵינוּ--כֵּן נַעֲשֶׂה.	5 Then they said to Jeremiah: 'The LORD be a true and faithful witness against us, if we do not even according to all the word wherewith the LORD thy God shall send thee to us.
42.6 ו  אִם-טוֹב וְאִם-רָע--בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ אֲשֶׁר אנו (אֲנַחְנוּ) שֹׁלְחִים אֹתְךָ אֵלָיו, נִשְׁמָע:  לְמַעַן, אֲשֶׁר יִיטַב-לָנוּ, כִּי נִשְׁמַע, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {פ}	6 Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will hearken to the voice of the LORD our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with us, when we hearken to the voice of the LORD our God.' {P}
42.7 ז  וַיְהִי, מִקֵּץ עֲשֶׂרֶת יָמִים; וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ.	7 And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah.
42.8 ח  וַיִּקְרָא, אֶל-יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וְאֶל כָּל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים, אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ; וּלְכָל-הָעָם--לְמִקָּטֹן, וְעַד-גָּדוֹל.	8 Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, and all the people from the least even to the greatest,
42.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלַחְתֶּם אֹתִי אֵלָיו, לְהַפִּיל תְּחִנַּתְכֶם לְפָנָיו.	9 and said unto them: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before Him:
42.10 י  אִם-שׁוֹב תֵּשְׁבוּ, בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת--וּבָנִיתִי אֶתְכֶם וְלֹא אֶהֱרֹס, וְנָטַעְתִּי אֶתְכֶם וְלֹא אֶתּוֹשׁ:  כִּי נִחַמְתִּי אֶל-הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי לָכֶם.	10 If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up; for I repent Me of the evil that I have done unto you.
42.11 יא  אַל-תִּירְאוּ, מִפְּנֵי מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם יְרֵאִים, מִפָּנָיו; אַל-תִּירְאוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--כִּי-אִתְּכֶם אָנִי, לְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֶתְכֶם וּלְהַצִּיל אֶתְכֶם מִיָּדוֹ.	11 Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the LORD; for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.
42.12 יב  וְאֶתֵּן לָכֶם רַחֲמִים, וְרִחַם אֶתְכֶם; וְהֵשִׁיב אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-אַדְמַתְכֶם.	12 And I will grant you compassion, that he may have compassion upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.
42.13 יג  וְאִם-אֹמְרִים אַתֶּם, לֹא נֵשֵׁב בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לְבִלְתִּי שְׁמֹעַ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	13 But if ye say: We will not abide in this land; so that ye hearken not to the voice of the LORD your God;
42.14 יד  לֵאמֹר, לֹא כִּי אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם נָבוֹא, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נִרְאֶה מִלְחָמָה, וְקוֹל שׁוֹפָר לֹא נִשְׁמָע; וְלַלֶּחֶם לֹא-נִרְעָב, וְשָׁם נֵשֵׁב.	14 saying: No; but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the horn, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we abide;
42.15 טו  וְעַתָּה--לָכֵן שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, שְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה:  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-אַתֶּם שׂוֹם תְּשִׂמוּן פְּנֵיכֶם לָבֹא מִצְרַיִם, וּבָאתֶם, לָגוּר שָׁם.	15 now therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, O remnant of Judah: Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there;
42.16 טז  וְהָיְתָה הַחֶרֶב, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם יְרֵאִים מִמֶּנָּה, שָׁם תַּשִּׂיג אֶתְכֶם, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְהָרָעָב אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם דֹּאֲגִים מִמֶּנּוּ, שָׁם יִדְבַּק אַחֲרֵיכֶם מִצְרַיִם--וְשָׁם תָּמֻתוּ.	16 then it shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye fear, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye are afraid, shall follow hard after you there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.
42.17 יז  וְיִהְיוּ כָל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-שָׂמוּ אֶת-פְּנֵיהֶם לָבוֹא מִצְרַיִם לָגוּר שָׁם--יָמוּתוּ, בַּחֶרֶב בָּרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר:  וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה לָהֶם, שָׂרִיד וּפָלִיט, מִפְּנֵי הָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מֵבִיא עֲלֵיהֶם.	17 So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.
42.18 יח  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִתַּךְ אַפִּי וַחֲמָתִי עַל-יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, כֵּן תִּתַּךְ חֲמָתִי עֲלֵיכֶם בְּבֹאֲכֶם מִצְרָיִם; וִהְיִיתֶם לְאָלָה וּלְשַׁמָּה, וְלִקְלָלָה וּלְחֶרְפָּה, וְלֹא-תִרְאוּ עוֹד, אֶת-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה.	18 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: As Mine anger and My fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall My fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into Egypt; and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.
42.19 יט  דִּבֶּר יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם שְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה, אַל-תָּבֹאוּ מִצְרָיִם; יָדֹעַ, תֵּדְעוּ, כִּי-הַעִידֹתִי בָכֶם, הַיּוֹם.	19 The LORD hath spoken concerning you, O remnant of Judah: Go ye not into Egypt; know certainly that I have forewarned you this day.
42.20 כ  כִּי התעתים (הִתְעֵיתֶם), בְּנַפְשׁוֹתֵיכֶם--כִּי-אַתֶּם שְׁלַחְתֶּם אֹתִי אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם לֵאמֹר, הִתְפַּלֵּל בַּעֲדֵנוּ אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וּכְכֹל אֲשֶׁר יֹאמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, כֵּן הַגֶּד-לָנוּ--וְעָשִׂינוּ.	20 For ye have dealt deceitfully against your own souls; for ye sent me unto the LORD your God, saying: Pray for us unto the LORD our God; and according unto all that the LORD our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it;
42.21 כא  וָאַגִּד לָכֶם, הַיּוֹם; וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וּלְכֹל, אֲשֶׁר-שְׁלָחַנִי אֲלֵיכֶם.	21 and I have this day declared it to you; but ye have not hearkened to the voice of the LORD your God in any thing for which He hath sent me unto you.
42.22 כב  וְעַתָּה, יָדֹעַ תֵּדְעוּ, כִּי בַּחֶרֶב בָּרָעָב וּבַדֶּבֶר, תָּמוּתוּ--בַּמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר חֲפַצְתֶּם, לָבוֹא לָגוּר שָׁם.  {ס}	22 Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go to sojourn there.' {S}
43.1 א  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת יִרְמְיָהוּ לְדַבֵּר אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר שְׁלָחוֹ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, אֲלֵיהֶם--אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה.  {ס}	1 And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking unto all the people all the words of the LORD their God, wherewith the LORD their God had sent him to them, even all these words, {S}
43.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר עֲזַרְיָה בֶן-הוֹשַׁעְיָה וְיוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וְכָל-הָאֲנָשִׁים הַזֵּדִים:  אֹמְרִים אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, שֶׁקֶר אַתָּה מְדַבֵּר--לֹא שְׁלָחֲךָ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ לֵאמֹר, לֹא-תָבֹאוּ מִצְרַיִם לָגוּר שָׁם.	2 then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah: 'Thou speakest falsely; the LORD our God hath not sent thee to say: Ye shall not go into Egypt to sojourn there;
43.3 ג  כִּי, בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּה, מַסִּית אֹתְךָ, בָּנוּ--לְמַעַן תֵּת אֹתָנוּ בְיַד-הַכַּשְׂדִּים לְהָמִית אֹתָנוּ, וּלְהַגְלוֹת אֹתָנוּ בָּבֶל.	3 but Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may put us to death, and carry us away captives to Babylon.'
43.4 ד  וְלֹא-שָׁמַע יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ וְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים, וְכָל-הָעָם--בְּקוֹל יְהוָה:  לָשֶׁבֶת, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה.	4 So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, hearkened not to the voice of the LORD, to dwell in the land of Judah.
43.5 ה  וַיִּקַּח יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-קָרֵחַ, וְכָל-שָׂרֵי הַחֲיָלִים, אֵת, כָּל-שְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה--אֲשֶׁר-שָׁבוּ, מִכָּל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר נִדְּחוּ-שָׁם, לָגוּר, בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה.	5 But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all the nations whither they had been driven to sojourn in the land of Judah:
43.6 ו  אֶת-הַגְּבָרִים וְאֶת-הַנָּשִׁים וְאֶת-הַטַּף, וְאֶת-בְּנוֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְאֵת כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר הִנִּיחַ נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, אֶת-גְּדַלְיָהוּ בֶּן-אֲחִיקָם בֶּן-שָׁפָן; וְאֵת יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, וְאֶת-בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-נֵרִיָּהוּ.	6 the men, and the women, and the children, and the king's daughters, and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah;
43.7 ז  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, כִּי לֹא שָׁמְעוּ בְּקוֹל יְהוָה; וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-תַּחְפַּנְחֵס.  {ס}	7 and they came into the land of Egypt; for they hearkened not to the voice of the LORD; and they came even to Tahpanhes. {S}
43.8 ח  וַיְהִי דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, בְּתַחְפַּנְחֵס לֵאמֹר.	8 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying:
43.9 ט  קַח בְּיָדְךָ אֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת, וּטְמַנְתָּם בַּמֶּלֶט בַּמַּלְבֵּן, אֲשֶׁר בְּפֶתַח בֵּית-פַּרְעֹה, בְּתַחְפַּנְחֵס--לְעֵינֵי, אֲנָשִׁים יְהוּדִים.	9 'Take great stones in thy hand, and hide them in the mortar in the framework, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;
43.10 י  וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵיהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי שֹׁלֵחַ וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶת-נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל עַבְדִּי, וְשַׂמְתִּי כִסְאוֹ, מִמַּעַל לָאֲבָנִים הָאֵלֶּה אֲשֶׁר טָמָנְתִּי; וְנָטָה אֶת-שפרורו (שַׁפְרִירוֹ), עֲלֵיהֶם.	10 and say unto them: Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, My servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.
43.11 יא  ובאה (וּבָא), וְהִכָּה אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--אֲשֶׁר לַמָּוֶת לַמָּוֶת, וַאֲשֶׁר לַשְּׁבִי לַשֶּׁבִי, וַאֲשֶׁר לַחֶרֶב, לֶחָרֶב.	11 And he shall come, and shall smite the land of Egypt; such as are for death to death, and such as are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to the sword.
43.12 יב  וְהִצַּתִּי אֵשׁ, בְּבָתֵּי אֱלֹהֵי מִצְרַיִם, וּשְׂרָפָם, וְשָׁבָם; וְעָטָה אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם כַּאֲשֶׁר-יַעְטֶה הָרֹעֶה, אֶת-בִּגְדוֹ, וְיָצָא מִשָּׁם, בְּשָׁלוֹם.	12 And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captives; and he shall fold up the land of Egypt, as a shepherd foldeth up his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in peace.
43.13 יג  וְשִׁבַּר, אֶת-מַצְּבוֹת בֵּית שֶׁמֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְאֶת-בָּתֵּי אֱלֹהֵי-מִצְרַיִם, יִשְׂרֹף בָּאֵשׁ.  {פ}	13 He shall also break the pillars of Beth-shemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire.' {P}
44.1 א  הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר הָיָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶל כָּל-הַיְּהוּדִים, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּמִגְדֹּל וּבְתַחְפַּנְחֵס וּבְנֹף, וּבְאֶרֶץ פַּתְרוֹס לֵאמֹר.	1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews that dwelt in the land of Egypt, that dwelt at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying:
44.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַתֶּם רְאִיתֶם אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר הֵבֵאתִי עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְעַל כָּל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה; וְהִנָּם חָרְבָּה הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וְאֵין בָּהֶם יוֹשֵׁב.	2 'Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein;
44.3 ג  מִפְּנֵי רָעָתָם, אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לְהַכְעִסֵנִי, לָלֶכֶת לְקַטֵּר, לַעֲבֹד לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים--אֲשֶׁר לֹא יְדָעוּם, הֵמָּה אַתֶּם וַאֲבֹתֵיכֶם.	3 because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke Me, in that they went to offer, and to serve other gods, whom they knew not, neither they, nor ye, nor your fathers.
44.4 ד  וָאֶשְׁלַח אֲלֵיכֶם אֶת-כָּל-עֲבָדַי הַנְּבִיאִים, הַשְׁכֵּים וְשָׁלֹחַ לֵאמֹר:  אַל-נָא תַעֲשׂוּ, אֵת דְּבַר-הַתֹּעֵבָה הַזֹּאת--אֲשֶׁר שָׂנֵאתִי.	4 Howbeit I sent unto you all My servants the prophets, sending them betimes and often, saying: Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate.
44.5 ה  וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ וְלֹא-הִטּוּ אֶת-אָזְנָם, לָשׁוּב מֵרָעָתָם--לְבִלְתִּי קַטֵּר, לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.	5 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to forbear offering unto other gods.
44.6 ו  וַתִּתַּךְ חֲמָתִי, וְאַפִּי, וַתִּבְעַר בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, וּבְחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַתִּהְיֶינָה לְחָרְבָּה לִשְׁמָמָה, כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	6 Wherefore My fury and Mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day. {S}
44.7 ז  וְעַתָּה כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לָמָה אַתֶּם עֹשִׂים רָעָה גְדוֹלָה אֶל-נַפְשֹׁתֵכֶם, לְהַכְרִית לָכֶם אִישׁ-וְאִשָּׁה עוֹלֵל וְיוֹנֵק, מִתּוֹךְ יְהוּדָה--לְבִלְתִּי הוֹתִיר לָכֶם, שְׁאֵרִית.	7 Therefore now thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your own souls, to cut off from you man and woman, infant and suckling, out of the midst of Judah, to leave you none remaining;
44.8 ח  לְהַכְעִסֵנִי, בְּמַעֲשֵׂי יְדֵיכֶם, לְקַטֵּר לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם בָּאִים לָגוּר שָׁם--לְמַעַן, הַכְרִית לָכֶם, וּלְמַעַן הֱיוֹתְכֶם לִקְלָלָה וּלְחֶרְפָּה, בְּכֹל גּוֹיֵ הָאָרֶץ.	8 in that ye provoke Me with the works of your hands, offering unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye are gone to sojourn; that ye may be cut off, and that ye may be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?
44.9 ט  הַשְׁכַחְתֶּם אֶת-רָעוֹת אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם וְאֶת-רָעוֹת מַלְכֵי יְהוּדָה, וְאֵת רָעוֹת נָשָׁיו, וְאֵת רָעֹתֵכֶם, וְאֵת רָעֹת נְשֵׁיכֶם--אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה, וּבְחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִָם.	9 Have ye forgotten the wicked deeds of your fathers, and the wicked deeds of the kings of Judah, and the wicked deeds of their wives, and your own wicked deeds, and the wicked deeds of your wives, which they committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
44.10 י  לֹא דֻכְּאוּ, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וְלֹא יָרְאוּ, וְלֹא-הָלְכוּ בְתוֹרָתִי וּבְחֻקֹּתַי, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לִפְנֵיכֶם, וְלִפְנֵי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.  {ס}	10 They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in My law, nor in My statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers. {S}
44.11 יא  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי שָׂם פָּנַי בָּכֶם, לְרָעָה--וּלְהַכְרִית, אֶת-כָּל-יְהוּדָה.	11 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will set My face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah.
44.12 יב  וְלָקַחְתִּי אֶת-שְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר-שָׂמוּ פְנֵיהֶם לָבוֹא אֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם לָגוּר שָׁם, וְתַמּוּ כֹל בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם יִפֹּלוּ בַּחֶרֶב בָּרָעָב יִתַּמּוּ, מִקָּטֹן וְעַד-גָּדוֹל בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב יָמֻתוּ; וְהָיוּ לְאָלָה לְשַׁמָּה, וְלִקְלָלָה וּלְחֶרְפָּה.	12 And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed; in the land of Egypt shall they fall; they shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine; they shall die, from the least even unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine; and they shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.
44.13 יג  וּפָקַדְתִּי, עַל הַיּוֹשְׁבִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, כַּאֲשֶׁר פָּקַדְתִּי, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם--בַּחֶרֶב, בָּרָעָב וּבַדָּבֶר.	13 For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence;
44.14 יד  וְלֹא יִהְיֶה פָּלִיט וְשָׂרִיד, לִשְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה, הַבָּאִים לָגוּר-שָׁם, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; וְלָשׁוּב אֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר-הֵמָּה מְנַשְּׂאִים אֶת-נַפְשָׁם לָשׁוּב לָשֶׁבֶת שָׁם--כִּי לֹא-יָשׁוּבוּ, כִּי אִם-פְּלֵטִים.  {פ}	14 so that none of the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they should return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return to dwell there; for none shall return save such as shall escape.' {P}
44.15 טו  וַיַּעֲנוּ אֶת-יִרְמְיָהוּ, כָּל-הָאֲנָשִׁים הַיֹּדְעִים כִּי-מְקַטְּרוֹת נְשֵׁיהֶם לֵאלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וְכָל-הַנָּשִׁים הָעֹמְדוֹת, קָהָל גָּדוֹל; וְכָל-הָעָם הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם, בְּפַתְרוֹס לֵאמֹר.	15 Then all the men who knew that their wives offered unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great assembly, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying:
44.16 טז  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתָּ אֵלֵינוּ, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה--אֵינֶנּוּ שֹׁמְעִים, אֵלֶיךָ.	16 'As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the LORD, we will not hearken unto thee.
44.17 יז  כִּי עָשֹׂה נַעֲשֶׂה אֶת-כָּל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-יָצָא מִפִּינוּ, לְקַטֵּר לִמְלֶכֶת הַשָּׁמַיִם וְהַסֵּיךְ-לָהּ נְסָכִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂינוּ אֲנַחְנוּ וַאֲבֹתֵינוּ מְלָכֵינוּ וְשָׂרֵינוּ, בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה וּבְחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וַנִּשְׂבַּע-לֶחֶם וַנִּהְיֶה טוֹבִים, וְרָעָה לֹא רָאִינוּ.	17 But we will certainly perform every word that is gone forth out of our mouth, to offer unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty of food, and were well, and saw no evil.
44.18 יח  וּמִן-אָז חָדַלְנוּ לְקַטֵּר לִמְלֶכֶת הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְהַסֵּךְ-לָהּ נְסָכִים--חָסַרְנוּ כֹל; וּבַחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב, תָּמְנוּ.	18 But since we let off to offer to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.
44.19 יט  וְכִי-אֲנַחְנוּ מְקַטְּרִים לִמְלֶכֶת הַשָּׁמַיִם, וּלְהַסֵּךְ לָהּ נְסָכִים; הֲמִבַּלְעֲדֵי אֲנָשֵׁינוּ, עָשִׂינוּ לָהּ כַּוָּנִים לְהַעֲצִבָה, וְהַסֵּךְ לָהּ, נְסָכִים.  {ס}	19 And is it we that offer to the queen of heaven, and pour out drink-offerings unto her? did we make her cakes in her image, and pour out drink-offerings unto her, without our husbands?' {S}
44.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, עַל-הַגְּבָרִים וְעַל-הַנָּשִׁים וְעַל-כָּל-הָעָם, הָעֹנִים אֹתוֹ דָּבָר לֵאמֹר.	20 Then Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, even to all the people that had given him that answer, saying:
44.21 כא  הֲלוֹא אֶת-הַקִּטֵּר, אֲשֶׁר קִטַּרְתֶּם בְּעָרֵי יְהוּדָה וּבְחֻצוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אַתֶּם וַאֲבוֹתֵיכֶם מַלְכֵיכֶם וְשָׂרֵיכֶם, וְעַם הָאָרֶץ:  אֹתָם זָכַר יְהוָה, וַתַּעֲלֶה עַל-לִבּוֹ.	21 'The offering that ye offered in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers, your kings and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the LORD remember them, and came it not into His mind?
44.22 כב  וְלֹא-יוּכַל יְהוָה עוֹד לָשֵׂאת, מִפְּנֵי רֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיכֶם, מִפְּנֵי הַתּוֹעֵבֹת, אֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם; וַתְּהִי אַרְצְכֶם לְחָרְבָּה וּלְשַׁמָּה וְלִקְלָלָה, מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב--כְּהַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	22 So that the LORD could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have committed; therefore is your land become a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.
44.23 כג  מִפְּנֵי אֲשֶׁר קִטַּרְתֶּם וַאֲשֶׁר חֲטָאתֶם לַיהוָה, וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם בְּקוֹל יְהוָה, וּבְתֹרָתוֹ וּבְחֻקֹּתָיו וּבְעֵדְוֺתָיו, לֹא הֲלַכְתֶּם; עַל-כֵּן קָרָאת אֶתְכֶם, הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת--כַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	23 Because ye have offered, and because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not hearkened to the voice of the LORD, nor walked in His law, nor in His statutes, nor in His testimonies; therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day.' {S}
44.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, וְאֶל כָּל-הַנָּשִׁים:  שִׁמְעוּ, דְּבַר-יְהוָה, כָּל-יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	24 Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women: 'Hear the word of the LORD, all Judah that are in the land of Egypt:
44.25 כה  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה-צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר, אַתֶּם וּנְשֵׁיכֶם וַתְּדַבֵּרְנָה בְּפִיכֶם וּבִידֵיכֶם מִלֵּאתֶם לֵאמֹר, עָשֹׂה נַעֲשֶׂה אֶת-נְדָרֵינוּ אֲשֶׁר נָדַרְנוּ לְקַטֵּר לִמְלֶכֶת הַשָּׁמַיִם, וּלְהַסֵּךְ לָהּ נְסָכִים; הָקֵים תָּקִימְנָה אֶת-נִדְרֵיכֶם, וְעָשֹׂה תַעֲשֶׂינָה אֶת-נִדְרֵיכֶם.  {ס}	25 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying: Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and with your hands have fulfilled it, saying: We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to offer to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her; ye shall surely establish your vows, and surely perform your vows. {S}
44.26 כו  לָכֵן, שִׁמְעוּ דְבַר-יְהוָה, כָּל-יְהוּדָה, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  הִנְנִי נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי בִּשְׁמִי הַגָּדוֹל, אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-יִהְיֶה עוֹד שְׁמִי נִקְרָא בְּפִי כָּל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה אֹמֵר חַי-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	26 Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt: Behold, I have sworn by My great name, saith the LORD, that My name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt saying: As the Lord GOD liveth.
44.27 כז  הִנְנִי שֹׁקֵד עֲלֵיהֶם לְרָעָה, וְלֹא לְטוֹבָה; וְתַמּוּ כָל-אִישׁ יְהוּדָה אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם, בַּחֶרֶב וּבָרָעָב--עַד-כְּלוֹתָם.	27 Behold, I watch over them for evil, and not for good; and all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.
44.28 כח  וּפְלִיטֵי חֶרֶב יְשֻׁבוּן מִן-אֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, אֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה--מְתֵי מִסְפָּר; וְיָדְעוּ כָּל-שְׁאֵרִית יְהוּדָה, הַבָּאִים לְאֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם לָגוּר שָׁם, דְּבַר-מִי יָקוּם, מִמֶּנִּי וּמֵהֶם.	28 And they that escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, few in number; and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose word shall stand, Mine, or theirs.
44.29 כט  וְזֹאת-לָכֶם הָאוֹת נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי-פֹקֵד אֲנִי עֲלֵיכֶם בַּמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה--לְמַעַן, תֵּדְעוּ, כִּי קוֹם יָקוּמוּ דְבָרַי עֲלֵיכֶם, לְרָעָה.  {פ}	29 And this shall be the sign unto you, saith the LORD, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that My words shall surely stand against you for evil; {P}
44.30 ל  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי נֹתֵן אֶת-פַּרְעֹה חָפְרַע מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם בְּיַד אֹיְבָיו, וּבְיַד, מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשׁוֹ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בְּיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֹיְבוֹ--וּמְבַקֵּשׁ נַפְשׁוֹ.  {ס}	30 thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will give Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.' {S}
45.1 א  הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-בָּרוּךְ, בֶּן-נֵרִיָּה--בְּכָתְבוֹ אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה עַל-סֵפֶר, מִפִּי יִרְמְיָהוּ, בַּשָּׁנָה הָרְבִעִית, לִיהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה לֵאמֹר.	1 The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying:
45.2 ב  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עָלֶיךָ, בָּרוּךְ.	2 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning thee, O Baruch: Thou didst say:
45.3 ג  אָמַרְתָּ אוֹי-נָא לִי, כִּי-יָסַף יְהוָה יָגוֹן עַל-מַכְאֹבִי; יָגַעְתִּי, בְּאַנְחָתִי, וּמְנוּחָה, לֹא מָצָאתִי.	3 Woe is me now! for the LORD hath added sorrow to my pain; I am weary with my groaning, and I find no rest.
45.4 ד  כֹּה תֹּאמַר אֵלָיו, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה אֲשֶׁר-בָּנִיתִי אֲנִי הֹרֵס, וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר-נָטַעְתִּי אֲנִי נֹתֵשׁ; וְאֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, הִיא.	4 Thus shalt thou say unto him: Thus saith the LORD: Behold, that which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up; and this in the whole land.
45.5 ה  וְאַתָּה תְּבַקֶּשׁ-לְךָ גְדֹלוֹת, אַל-תְּבַקֵּשׁ:  כִּי הִנְנִי מֵבִיא רָעָה עַל-כָּל-בָּשָׂר, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְנָתַתִּי לְךָ אֶת-נַפְשְׁךָ לְשָׁלָל, עַל כָּל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר תֵּלֶךְ-שָׁם.  {פ}	5 And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not; for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the LORD; but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.' {P}
46.1 א  אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, עַל-הַגּוֹיִם.	1 The word of the LORD which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations.
46.2 ב  לְמִצְרַיִם, עַל-חֵיל פַּרְעֹה נְכוֹ מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה עַל-נְהַר-פְּרָת, בְּכַרְכְּמִשׁ--אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה, נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, בִּשְׁנַת הָרְבִיעִית, לִיהוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֹאשִׁיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ יְהוּדָה.	2 Of Egypt: concerning the army of Pharaoh-neco king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah.
46.3 ג  עִרְכוּ מָגֵן וְצִנָּה, וּגְשׁוּ לַמִּלְחָמָה.	3 Make ready buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.
46.4 ד  אִסְרוּ הַסּוּסִים, וַעֲלוּ הַפָּרָשִׁים, וְהִתְיַצְּבוּ, בְּכוֹבָעִים; מִרְקוּ, הָרְמָחִים, לִבְשׁוּ, הַסִּרְיֹנֹת.	4 Harness the horses, and mount, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, put on the coats of mail.
46.5 ה  מַדּוּעַ רָאִיתִי, הֵמָּה חַתִּים נְסֹגִים אָחוֹר, וְגִבּוֹרֵיהֶם יֻכַּתּוּ, וּמָנוֹס נָסוּ וְלֹא הִפְנוּ--מָגוֹר מִסָּבִיב, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	5 Wherefore do I see them dismayed and turned backward? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and they are fled apace, and look not back; terror is on every side, saith the LORD.
46.6 ו  אַל-יָנוּס הַקַּל, וְאַל-יִמָּלֵט הַגִּבּוֹר; צָפוֹנָה עַל-יַד נְהַר-פְּרָת, כָּשְׁלוּ וְנָפָלוּ.	6 The swift cannot flee away, nor the mighty man escape; in the north by the river Euphrates have they stumbled and fallen.
46.7 ז  מִי-זֶה, כַּיְאֹר יַעֲלֶה; כַּנְּהָרוֹת, יִתְגָּעֲשׁוּ מֵימָיו.	7 Who is this like the Nile that riseth up, like the rivers whose waters toss themselves?
46.8 ח  מִצְרַיִם כַּיְאֹר יַעֲלֶה, וְכַנְּהָרוֹת יִתְגֹּעֲשׁוּ מָיִם; וַיֹּאמֶר, אַעֲלֶה אֲכַסֶּה-אֶרֶץ, אֹבִידָה עִיר, וְיֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ.	8 Egypt is like the Nile that riseth up, and like the rivers whose waters toss themselves; and he saith: 'I will rise up, I will cover the earth, I will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.'
46.9 ט  עֲלוּ הַסּוּסִים וְהִתְהֹלְלוּ הָרֶכֶב, וְיֵצְאוּ הַגִּבּוֹרִים--כּוּשׁ וּפוּט, תֹּפְשֵׂי מָגֵן, וְלוּדִים, תֹּפְשֵׂי דֹּרְכֵי קָשֶׁת.	9 Prance, ye horses, and rush madly, ye chariots; and let the mighty men go forth: Cush and Put, that handle the shield, and the Ludim, that handle and bend the bow.
46.10 י  וְהַיּוֹם הַהוּא לַאדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת, יוֹם נְקָמָה לְהִנָּקֵם מִצָּרָיו, וְאָכְלָה חֶרֶב וְשָׂבְעָה, וְרָוְתָה מִדָּמָם:  כִּי זֶבַח לַאדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת, בְּאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן--אֶל-נְהַר-פְּרָת.	10 For the Lord GOD of hosts shall have on that day a day of vengeance, that He may avenge Him of His adversaries; and the sword shall devour and be satiate, and shall be made drunk with their blood; for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates.
46.11 יא  עֲלִי גִלְעָד וּקְחִי צֳרִי, בְּתוּלַת בַּת-מִצְרָיִם; לַשָּׁוְא הרביתי (הִרְבֵּית) רְפֻאוֹת, תְּעָלָה אֵין לָךְ.	11 Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin daughter of Egypt; in vain dost thou use many medicines; there is no cure for thee.
46.12 יב  שָׁמְעוּ גוֹיִם קְלוֹנֵךְ, וְצִוְחָתֵךְ מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי-גִבּוֹר בְּגִבּוֹר כָּשָׁלוּ, יַחְדָּיו נָפְלוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם.  {פ}	12 The nations have heard of thy shame, and the earth is full of thy cry; for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, they are fallen both of them together. {P}
46.13 יג  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא--לָבוֹא, נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, לְהַכּוֹת, אֶת-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	13 The word that the LORD spoke to Jeremiah the prophet, how that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt.
46.14 יד  הַגִּידוּ בְמִצְרַיִם וְהַשְׁמִיעוּ בְמִגְדּוֹל, וְהַשְׁמִיעוּ בְנֹף וּבְתַחְפַּנְחֵס; אִמְרוּ, הִתְיַצֵּב וְהָכֵן לָךְ--כִּי-אָכְלָה חֶרֶב, סְבִיבֶיךָ.	14 Declare ye in Egypt, and announce in Migdol, and announce in Noph and in Tahpanhes; say ye: 'Stand forth, and prepare thee, for the sword hath devoured round about thee.'
46.15 טו  מַדּוּעַ, נִסְחַף אַבִּירֶיךָ:  לֹא עָמַד, כִּי יְהוָה הֲדָפוֹ.	15 Why is thy strong one overthrown? He stood not, because the LORD did thrust him down.
46.16 טז  הִרְבָּה, כּוֹשֵׁל; גַּם-נָפַל אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ קוּמָה וְנָשֻׁבָה אֶל-עַמֵּנוּ וְאֶל-אֶרֶץ מוֹלַדְתֵּנוּ, מִפְּנֵי, חֶרֶב הַיּוֹנָה.	16 He made many to stumble; yea, they fell one upon another, and said: 'Arise, and let us return to our own people, and to the land of our birth, from the oppressing sword.'
46.17 יז  קָרְאוּ, שָׁם, פַּרְעֹה מֶלֶךְ-מִצְרַיִם שָׁאוֹן, הֶעֱבִיר הַמּוֹעֵד.	17 They cried there: 'Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he hath let the appointed time pass by.'
46.18 יח  חַי-אָנִי, נְאֻם-הַמֶּלֶךְ--יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ:  כִּי כְּתָבוֹר בֶּהָרִים, וּכְכַרְמֶל בַּיָּם יָבוֹא.	18 As I live, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts, surely like Tabor among the mountains, and like Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.
46.19 יט  כְּלֵי גוֹלָה עֲשִׂי לָךְ, יוֹשֶׁבֶת בַּת-מִצְרָיִם:  כִּי-נֹף לְשַׁמָּה תִהְיֶה, וְנִצְּתָה מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב.  {ס}	19 O thou daughter that dwellest in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into captivity; for Noph shall become a desolation, and shall be laid waste, without inhabitant. {S}
46.20 כ  עֶגְלָה יְפֵה-פִיָּה, מִצְרָיִם; קֶרֶץ מִצָּפוֹן, בָּא בָא.	20 Egypt is a very fair heifer; but the gadfly out of the north is come, it is come.
46.21 כא  גַּם-שְׂכִרֶיהָ בְקִרְבָּהּ כְּעֶגְלֵי מַרְבֵּק, כִּי-גַם-הֵמָּה הִפְנוּ נָסוּ יַחְדָּיו לֹא עָמָדוּ:  כִּי יוֹם אֵידָם בָּא עֲלֵיהֶם, עֵת פְּקֻדָּתָם.	21 Also her mercenaries in the midst of her are like calves of the stall, for they also are turned back, they are fled away together, they did not stand; for the day of their calamity is come upon them, the time of their visitation.
46.22 כב  קוֹלָהּ, כַּנָּחָשׁ יֵלֵךְ:  כִּי-בְחַיִל יֵלֵכוּ--וּבְקַרְדֻּמּוֹת בָּאוּ לָהּ, כְּחֹטְבֵי עֵצִים.	22 The sound thereof shall go like the serpent's; for they march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.
46.23 כג  כָּרְתוּ יַעְרָהּ נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי לֹא יֵחָקֵר:  כִּי רַבּוּ מֵאַרְבֶּה, וְאֵין לָהֶם מִסְפָּר.	23 They cut down her forest, saith the LORD, though it cannot be searched; because they are more than the locusts, and are innumerable.
46.24 כד  הֹבִישָׁה, בַּת-מִצְרָיִם; נִתְּנָה, בְּיַד עַם-צָפוֹן.	24 The daughter of Egypt is put to shame; she is delivered into the hand of the people of the north.
46.25 כה  אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי פוֹקֵד אֶל-אָמוֹן מִנֹּא, וְעַל-פַּרְעֹה וְעַל-מִצְרַיִם, וְעַל-אֱלֹהֶיהָ וְעַל-מְלָכֶיהָ; וְעַל-פַּרְעֹה--וְעַל הַבֹּטְחִים, בּוֹ.	25 The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saith: Behold, I will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with her gods, and her kings; even Pharaoh, and them that trust in him;
46.26 כו  וּנְתַתִּים, בְּיַד מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם, וּבְיַד נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, וּבְיַד-עֲבָדָיו; וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן תִּשְׁכֹּן כִּימֵי-קֶדֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	26 and I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants; and afterwards it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the LORD. {P}
46.27 כז  וְאַתָּה אַל-תִּירָא עַבְדִּי יַעֲקֹב, וְאַל-תֵּחַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּי הִנְנִי מוֹשִׁעֲךָ מֵרָחוֹק, וְאֶת-זַרְעֲךָ מֵאֶרֶץ שִׁבְיָם; וְשָׁב יַעֲקוֹב וְשָׁקַט וְשַׁאֲנַן, וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד.	27 But fear not thou, O Jacob My servant, neither be dismayed, O Israel; for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall again be quiet and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.
46.28 כח  אַתָּה אַל-תִּירָא עַבְדִּי יַעֲקֹב, נְאֻם-יְהוָה--כִּי אִתְּךָ, אָנִי:  כִּי אֶעֱשֶׂה כָלָה בְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר הִדַּחְתִּיךָ שָּׁמָּה, וְאֹתְךָ לֹא-אֶעֱשֶׂה כָלָה, וְיִסַּרְתִּיךָ לַמִּשְׁפָּט, וְנַקֵּה לֹא אֲנַקֶּךָּ.  {פ}	28 Fear not thou, O Jacob My servant, saith the LORD, for I am with thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee, but I will not make a full end of thee; and I will correct thee in measure, but will not utterly destroy thee. {P}
47.1 א  אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, בְּטֶרֶם יַכֶּה פַרְעֹה, אֶת-עַזָּה.	1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.
47.2 ב  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה-מַיִם עֹלִים מִצָּפוֹן וְהָיוּ לְנַחַל שׁוֹטֵף, וְיִשְׁטְפוּ אֶרֶץ וּמְלוֹאָהּ, עִיר וְיֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ; וְזָעֲקוּ, הָאָדָם, וְהֵילִל, כֹּל יוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ.	2 Thus saith the LORD: behold, waters rise up out of the north, and shall become an overflowing stream, and they shall overflow the land and all that is therein, the city and them that dwell therein; and the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall wail.
47.3 ג  מִקּוֹל, שַׁעֲטַת פַּרְסוֹת אַבִּירָיו, מֵרַעַשׁ לְרִכְבּוֹ, הֲמוֹן גַּלְגִּלָּיו--לֹא-הִפְנוּ אָבוֹת אֶל-בָּנִים, מֵרִפְיוֹן יָדָיִם.	3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong ones, at the rushing of his chariots, at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers look not back to their children for feebleness of hands;
47.4 ד  עַל-הַיּוֹם, הַבָּא לִשְׁדוֹד אֶת-כָּל-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, לְהַכְרִית לְצֹר וּלְצִידוֹן, כֹּל שָׂרִיד עֹזֵר:  כִּי-שֹׁדֵד יְהוָה אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, שְׁאֵרִית אִי כַפְתּוֹר.	4 Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Zidon every helper that remaineth; for the LORD will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the isle of Caphtor.
47.5 ה  בָּאָה קָרְחָה אֶל-עַזָּה, נִדְמְתָה אַשְׁקְלוֹן שְׁאֵרִית עִמְקָם; עַד-מָתַי, תִּתְגּוֹדָדִי.	5 Baldness is come upon Gaza, Ashkelon is brought to nought, the remnant of their valley; how long wilt thou cut thyself?
47.6 ו  הוֹי, חֶרֶב לַיהוָה, עַד-אָנָה, לֹא תִשְׁקֹטִי; הֵאָסְפִי, אֶל-תַּעְרֵךְ--הֵרָגְעִי, וָדֹמִּי.	6 O thou sword of the LORD, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.
47.7 ז  אֵיךְ תִּשְׁקֹטִי, וַיהוָה צִוָּה-לָהּ:  אֶל-אַשְׁקְלוֹן וְאֶל-חוֹף הַיָּם, שָׁם יְעָדָהּ.  {פ}	7 How canst thou be quiet? for the LORD hath given it a charge; against Ashkelon, and against the sea-shore, there hath He appointed it. {P}
48.1 א  לְמוֹאָב כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוֹי אֶל-נְבוֹ כִּי שֻׁדָּדָה, הֹבִישָׁה נִלְכְּדָה, קִרְיָתָיִם; הֹבִישָׁה הַמִּשְׂגָּב, וָחָתָּה.	1 Of Moab. Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled; Kiriathaim is put to shame, it is taken; Misgab is put to shame and dismayed.
48.2 ב  אֵין עוֹד, תְּהִלַּת מוֹאָב--בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן חָשְׁבוּ עָלֶיהָ רָעָה, לְכוּ וְנַכְרִיתֶנָּה מִגּוֹי; גַּם-מַדְמֵן תִּדֹּמִּי, אַחֲרַיִךְ תֵּלֶךְ חָרֶב.	2 The praise of Moab is no more; in Heshbon they have devised evil against her: 'Come, and let us cut her off from being a nation.' Thou also, O Madmen, shalt be brought to silence; the sword shall pursue thee.
48.3 ג  קוֹל צְעָקָה, מֵחֹרוֹנָיִם--שֹׁד, וָשֶׁבֶר גָּדוֹל.	3 Hark! a cry from Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction!
48.4 ד  נִשְׁבְּרָה, מוֹאָב; הִשְׁמִיעוּ זְּעָקָה, צעוריה (צְעִירֶיהָ).	4 Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.
48.5 ה  כִּי מַעֲלֵה הלחות (הַלֻּחִית), בִּבְכִי יַעֲלֶה-בֶּכִי:  כִּי בְּמוֹרַד חוֹרֹנַיִם, צָרֵי צַעֲקַת-שֶׁבֶר שָׁמֵעוּ.	5 For by the ascent of Luhith with continual weeping shall they go up; for in the going down of Horonaim they have heard the distressing cry of destruction.
48.6 ו  נֻסוּ, מַלְּטוּ נַפְשְׁכֶם; וְתִהְיֶינָה, כַּעֲרוֹעֵר בַּמִּדְבָּר.	6 Flee, save your lives, and be like a tamarisk in the wilderness.
48.7 ז  כִּי יַעַן בִּטְחֵךְ בְּמַעֲשַׂיִךְ, וּבְאוֹצְרוֹתַיִךְ, גַּם-אַתְּ, תִּלָּכֵדִי; וְיָצָא כמיש (כְמוֹשׁ) בַּגּוֹלָה, כֹּהֲנָיו וְשָׂרָיו יחד (יַחְדָּו).	7 For, because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou also shalt be taken; and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity, his priests and his princes together.
48.8 ח  וְיָבֹא שֹׁדֵד אֶל-כָּל-עִיר, וְעִיר לֹא תִמָּלֵט, וְאָבַד הָעֵמֶק, וְנִשְׁמַד הַמִּישֹׁר--אֲשֶׁר, אָמַר יְהוָה.	8 And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape; the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed; as the LORD hath spoken.
48.9 ט  תְּנוּ-צִיץ לְמוֹאָב, כִּי נָצֹא תֵּצֵא; וְעָרֶיהָ לְשַׁמָּה תִהְיֶינָה, מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב בָּהֵן.	9 Give wings unto Moab, for she must fly and get away; and her cities shall become a desolation, without any to dwell therein.
48.10 י  אָרוּר, עֹשֶׂה מְלֶאכֶת יְהוָה--רְמִיָּה; וְאָרוּר, מֹנֵעַ חַרְבּוֹ מִדָּם.	10 Cursed be he that doeth the work of the LORD with a slack hand, and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.
48.11 יא  שַׁאֲנַן מוֹאָב מִנְּעוּרָיו, וְשֹׁקֵט הוּא אֶל-שְׁמָרָיו, וְלֹא-הוּרַק מִכְּלִי אֶל-כֶּלִי, וּבַגּוֹלָה לֹא הָלָךְ; עַל-כֵּן, עָמַד טַעְמוֹ בּוֹ, וְרֵיחוֹ, לֹא נָמָר.  {ס}	11 Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity; therefore his taste remaineth in him, and his scent is not changed. {S}
48.12 יב  לָכֵן הִנֵּה-יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי-לוֹ צֹעִים, וְצֵעֻהוּ; וְכֵלָיו יָרִיקוּ, וְנִבְלֵיהֶם יְנַפֵּצוּ.	12 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will send unto him them that tilt up, and they shall tilt him up; and they shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles in pieces.
48.13 יג  וּבֹשׁ מוֹאָב, מִכְּמוֹשׁ, כַּאֲשֶׁר-בֹּשׁוּ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִבֵּית אֵל מִבְטֶחָם.	13 And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Beth-el their confidence.
48.14 יד  אֵיךְ, תֹּאמְרוּ, גִּבּוֹרִים, אֲנָחְנוּ; וְאַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל, לַמִּלְחָמָה.	14 How say ye: 'We are mighty men, and valiant men for the war'?
48.15 טו  שֻׁדַּד מוֹאָב וְעָרֶיהָ עָלָה, וּמִבְחַר בַּחוּרָיו יָרְדוּ לַטָּבַח:  נְאֻם-הַמֶּלֶךְ--יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ.	15 Moab is spoiled, and they are gone up into her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts.
48.16 טז  קָרוֹב אֵיד-מוֹאָב, לָבוֹא; וְרָעָתוֹ, מִהֲרָה מְאֹד.	16 The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hasteth fast.
48.17 יז  נֻדוּ לוֹ כָּל-סְבִיבָיו, וְכֹל יֹדְעֵי שְׁמוֹ; אִמְרוּ, אֵיכָה נִשְׁבַּר מַטֵּה-עֹז--מַקֵּל, תִּפְאָרָה.	17 Bemoan him, all ye that are round about him, and all ye that know his name; say: 'How is the strong staff broken, the beautiful rod!'
48.18 יח  רְדִי מִכָּבוֹד ישבי (וּשְׁבִי) בַצָּמָא, יֹשֶׁבֶת בַּת-דִּיבוֹן:  כִּי-שֹׁדֵד מוֹאָב עָלָה בָךְ, שִׁחֵת מִבְצָרָיִךְ.	18 O thou daughter that dwellest in Dibon, come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab is come up against thee, he hath destroyed thy strongholds.
48.19 יט  אֶל-דֶּרֶךְ עִמְדִי וְצַפִּי, יוֹשֶׁבֶת עֲרוֹעֵר; שַׁאֲלִי-נָס וְנִמְלָטָה, אִמְרִי מַה-נִּהְיָתָה.	19 O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and watch; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth; say: 'What hath been done?'
48.20 כ  הֹבִישׁ מוֹאָב כִּי-חַתָּה, הילילי (הֵילִילוּ) וזעקי (וּזְעָקוּ); הַגִּידוּ בְאַרְנוֹן, כִּי שֻׁדַּד מוֹאָב.	20 Moab is put to shame, for it is dismayed; wail and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled.
48.21 כא  וּמִשְׁפָּט בָּא, אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַמִּישֹׁר--אֶל-חֹלוֹן וְאֶל-יַהְצָה, וְעַל-מופעת (מֵיפָעַת).	21 And judgment is come upon the country of the Plain; upon Holon, and upon Jahzah, and upon Mephaath;
48.22 כב  וְעַל-דִּיבוֹן וְעַל-נְבוֹ, וְעַל-בֵּית דִּבְלָתָיִם.	22 and upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim;
48.23 כג  וְעַל קִרְיָתַיִם וְעַל-בֵּית גָּמוּל, וְעַל-בֵּית מְעוֹן.	23 and upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon;
48.24 כד  וְעַל-קְרִיּוֹת, וְעַל-בָּצְרָה; וְעַל, כָּל-עָרֵי אֶרֶץ מוֹאָב--הָרְחֹקוֹת, וְהַקְּרֹבוֹת.	24 and upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.
48.25 כה  נִגְדְּעָה קֶרֶן מוֹאָב, וּזְרֹעוֹ נִשְׁבָּרָה--נְאֻם, יְהוָה.	25 The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the LORD.
48.26 כו  הַשְׁכִּירֻהוּ, כִּי עַל-יְהוָה הִגְדִּיל; וְסָפַק מוֹאָב בְּקִיאוֹ, וְהָיָה לִשְׂחֹק גַּם-הוּא.	26 Make ye him drunken, for he magnified himself against the LORD; and Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.
48.27 כז  וְאִם לוֹא הַשְּׂחֹק, הָיָה לְךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-בְּגַנָּבִים, נמצאה (נִמְצָא):  כִּי-מִדֵּי דְבָרֶיךָ בּוֹ, תִּתְנוֹדָד.	27 For was not Israel a derision unto thee? Was he found among thieves? For as often as thou speakest of him, thou waggest the head.
48.28 כח  עִזְבוּ עָרִים וְשִׁכְנוּ בַּסֶּלַע, יֹשְׁבֵי מוֹאָב; וִהְיוּ כְיוֹנָה, תְּקַנֵּן בְּעֶבְרֵי פִי-פָחַת.	28 O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock; and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the pit's mouth.
48.29 כט  שָׁמַעְנוּ גְאוֹן-מוֹאָב, גֵּאֶה מְאֹד:  גָּבְהוֹ וּגְאוֹנוֹ וְגַאֲוָתוֹ, וְרֻם לִבּוֹ.	29 We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud; his loftiness, and his pride, and his haughtiness, and the assumption of his heart.
48.30 ל  אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, עֶבְרָתוֹ וְלֹא-כֵן; בַּדָּיו, לֹא-כֵן עָשׂוּ.	30 I know his arrogancy, saith the LORD, that it is ill-founded; his boastings have wrought nothing well-founded.
48.31 לא  עַל-כֵּן עַל-מוֹאָב אֲיֵלִיל, וּלְמוֹאָב כֻּלֹּה אֶזְעָק:  אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי קִיר-חֶרֶשׂ, יֶהְגֶּה.	31 Therefore will I wail for Moab; yea, I will cry out for all Moab; for the men of Kir-heres shall my heart moan.
48.32 לב  מִבְּכִי יַעְזֵר אֶבְכֶּה-לָּךְ, הַגֶּפֶן שִׂבְמָה, נְטִישֹׁתַיִךְ עָבְרוּ יָם, עַד יָם יַעְזֵר נָגָעוּ--עַל-קֵיצֵךְ וְעַל-בְּצִירֵךְ, שֹׁדֵד נָפָל.	32 With more than the weeping of Jazer will I weep for thee, O vine of Sibmah; thy branches passed over the sea, they reached even to the sea of Jazer; upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage the spoiler is fallen.
48.33 לג  וְנֶאֶסְפָה שִׂמְחָה וָגִיל מִכַּרְמֶל, וּמֵאֶרֶץ מוֹאָב; וְיַיִן, מִיקָבִים הִשְׁבַּתִּי--לֹא-יִדְרֹךְ הֵידָד, הֵידָד לֹא הֵידָד.	33 And gladness and joy is taken away from the fruitful field, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to cease from the winepresses; none shall tread with shouting; the shouting shall be no shouting.
48.34 לד  מִזַּעֲקַת חֶשְׁבּוֹן עַד-אֶלְעָלֵה, עַד-יַהַץ נָתְנוּ קוֹלָם--מִצֹּעַר עַד-חֹרֹנַיִם, עֶגְלַת שְׁלִשִׁיָּה:  כִּי גַּם-מֵי נִמְרִים, לִמְשַׁמּוֹת יִהְיוּ.	34 From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh, even unto Jahaz have they uttered their voice, from Zoar even unto Horonaim, a heifer of three years old; for the Waters of Nimrim also shall be desolate.
48.35 לה  וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי לְמוֹאָב, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, מַעֲלֶה בָמָה, וּמַקְטִיר לֵאלֹהָיו.	35 Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the LORD, him that offereth in the high place, and him that offereth to his gods.
48.36 לו  עַל-כֵּן לִבִּי לְמוֹאָב, כַּחֲלִלִים יֶהֱמֶה, וְלִבִּי אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי קִיר-חֶרֶשׂ, כַּחֲלִילִים יֶהֱמֶה; עַל-כֵּן יִתְרַת עָשָׂה, אָבָדוּ.	36 Therefore my heart moaneth for Moab like pipes, and my heart moaneth like pipes for the men of Kir-heres; therefore the abundance that he hath gotten is perished.
48.37 לז  כִּי כָל-רֹאשׁ קָרְחָה, וְכָל-זָקָן גְּרֻעָה; עַל כָּל-יָדַיִם גְּדֻדֹת, וְעַל-מָתְנַיִם שָׂק.	37 For every head is bald, and every beard clipped; upon all the hands are cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.
48.38 לח  עַל כָּל-גַּגּוֹת מוֹאָב וּבִרְחֹבֹתֶיהָ, כֻּלֹּה מִסְפֵּד:  כִּי-שָׁבַרְתִּי אֶת-מוֹאָב, כִּכְלִי אֵין-חֵפֶץ בּוֹ--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	38 On all the housetops of Moab and in the broad places thereof there is lamentation every where; for I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein is no pleasure, saith the LORD.
48.39 לט  אֵיךְ חַתָּה הֵילִילוּ, אֵיךְ הִפְנָה-עֹרֶף מוֹאָב בּוֹשׁ; וְהָיָה מוֹאָב לִשְׂחֹק וְלִמְחִתָּה, לְכָל-סְבִיבָיו.  {ס}	39 'How is it broken down!' wail ye! 'How hath Moab turned the back with shame!' so shall Moab become a derision and a dismay to all that are round about him. {S}
48.40 מ  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה כַנֶּשֶׁר יִדְאֶה; וּפָרַשׂ כְּנָפָיו, אֶל-מוֹאָב.	40 For thus saith the LORD: Behold, he shall swoop as a vulture, and shall spread out his wings against Moab.
48.41 מא  נִלְכְּדָה, הַקְּרִיּוֹת, וְהַמְּצָדוֹת, נִתְפָּשָׂה; וְהָיָה לֵב גִּבּוֹרֵי מוֹאָב, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כְּלֵב, אִשָּׁה מְצֵרָה.	41 The cities are taken, and the strongholds are seized, and the heart of the mighty men of Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
48.42 מב  וְנִשְׁמַד מוֹאָב, מֵעָם:  כִּי עַל-יְהוָה, הִגְדִּיל.	42 And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath magnified himself against the LORD.
48.43 מג  פַּחַד וָפַחַת, וָפָח--עָלֶיךָ יוֹשֵׁב מוֹאָב, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	43 Terror, and the pit, and the trap, are upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD.
48.44 מד  הניס (הַנָּס) מִפְּנֵי הַפַּחַד, יִפֹּל אֶל-הַפַּחַת, וְהָעֹלֶה מִן-הַפַּחַת, יִלָּכֵד בַּפָּח:  כִּי-אָבִיא אֵלֶיהָ אֶל-מוֹאָב שְׁנַת פְּקֻדָּתָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	44 He that fleeth from the terror shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the trap; for I will bring upon her, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the LORD.
48.45 מה  בְּצֵל חֶשְׁבּוֹן עָמְדוּ, מִכֹּחַ נָסִים:  כִּי-אֵשׁ יָצָא מֵחֶשְׁבּוֹן, וְלֶהָבָה מִבֵּין סִיחוֹן, וַתֹּאכַל פְּאַת מוֹאָב, וְקָדְקֹד בְּנֵי שָׁאוֹן.	45 In the shadow of Heshbon the fugitives stand without strength; for a fire is gone forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and it devoureth the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.
48.46 מו  אוֹי-לְךָ מוֹאָב, אָבַד עַם-כְּמוֹשׁ:  כִּי-לֻקְּחוּ בָנֶיךָ בַּשֶּׁבִי, וּבְנֹתֶיךָ בַּשִּׁבְיָה.	46 Woe unto thee, O Moab! The people of Chemosh is undone; for thy sons are taken away captive, and thy daughters into captivity.
48.47 מז  וְשַׁבְתִּי שְׁבוּת-מוֹאָב בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה; עַד-הֵנָּה, מִשְׁפַּט מוֹאָב.  {ס}	47 Yet will I turn the captivity of Moab in the end of days, saith the LORD. Thus far is the judgment of Moab. {S}
49.1 א  לִבְנֵי עַמּוֹן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הֲבָנִים אֵין לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-יוֹרֵשׁ אֵין לוֹ--מַדּוּעַ, יָרַשׁ מַלְכָּם אֶת-גָּד, וְעַמּוֹ, בְּעָרָיו יָשָׁב.	1 Of the children of Ammon. Thus saith the LORD: Hath Israel no sons? Hath he no heir? Why then doth Malcam take possession of Gad, and his people dwell in the cities thereof?
49.2 ב  לָכֵן הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְהִשְׁמַעְתִּי אֶל-רַבַּת בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן תְּרוּעַת מִלְחָמָה וְהָיְתָה לְתֵל שְׁמָמָה, וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, בָּאֵשׁ תִּצַּתְנָה; וְיָרַשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-יֹרְשָׁיו, אָמַר יְהוָה.	2 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard against Rabbah of the children of Ammon; and it shall become a desolate mound, and her daughters shall be burned with fire; then shall Israel dispossess them that did dispossess him, saith the LORD.
49.3 ג  הֵילִילִי חֶשְׁבּוֹן כִּי שֻׁדְּדָה-עַי, צְעַקְנָה בְּנוֹת רַבָּה--חֲגֹרְנָה שַׂקִּים, סְפֹדְנָה וְהִתְשׁוֹטַטְנָה בַּגְּדֵרוֹת:  כִּי מַלְכָּם בַּגּוֹלָה יֵלֵךְ, כֹּהֲנָיו וְשָׂרָיו יַחְדָּיו.	3 Wail, O Heshbon, for Ai is undone; cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro among the folds; for Malcam shall go into captivity, his priests and his princes together.
49.4 ד  מַה-תִּתְהַלְלִי, בָּעֲמָקִים--זָב עִמְקֵךְ, הַבַּת הַשּׁוֹבֵבָה; הַבֹּטְחָה, בְּאֹצְרֹתֶיהָ, מִי, יָבוֹא אֵלָי.	4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that didst trust in thy treasures: 'Who shall come unto me?'
49.5 ה  הִנְנִי מֵבִיא עָלַיִךְ פַּחַד, נְאֻם-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת--מִכָּל-סְבִיבָיִךְ; וְנִדַּחְתֶּם אִישׁ לְפָנָיו, וְאֵין מְקַבֵּץ לַנֹּדֵד.	5 Behold, I will bring a terror upon thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts, from all that are round about thee; and ye shall be driven out every man right forth, and there shall be none to gather up him that wandereth.
49.6 ו  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, אָשִׁיב אֶת-שְׁבוּת בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	6 But afterward I will bring back the captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the LORD. {P}
49.7 ז  לֶאֱדוֹם, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הַאֵין עוֹד חָכְמָה, בְּתֵימָן; אָבְדָה עֵצָה מִבָּנִים, נִסְרְחָה חָכְמָתָם.	7 Of Edom. Thus saith the LORD of hosts: Is wisdom no more in Teman? Is counsel perished from the prudent? Is their wisdom vanished?
49.8 ח  נֻסוּ הָפְנוּ הֶעְמִיקוּ לָשֶׁבֶת, יֹשְׁבֵי דְּדָן:  כִּי אֵיד עֵשָׂו הֵבֵאתִי עָלָיו, עֵת פְּקַדְתִּיו.	8 Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants of Dedan; for I do bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I shall punish him.
49.9 ט  אִם-בֹּצְרִים בָּאוּ לָךְ, לֹא יַשְׁאִרוּ עוֹלֵלוֹת; אִם-גַּנָּבִים בַּלַּיְלָה, הִשְׁחִיתוּ דַיָּם.	9 If grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, would they not destroy till they had enough?
49.10 י  כִּי-אֲנִי חָשַׂפְתִּי אֶת-עֵשָׂו, גִּלֵּיתִי אֶת-מִסְתָּרָיו, וְנֶחְבָּה, לֹא יוּכָל; שֻׁדַּד זַרְעוֹ וְאֶחָיו וּשְׁכֵנָיו, וְאֵינֶנּוּ.	10 But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself; his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not.
49.11 יא  עָזְבָה יְתֹמֶיךָ, אֲנִי אֲחַיֶּה; וְאַלְמְנוֹתֶיךָ, עָלַי תִּבְטָחוּ.  {ס}	11 Leave thy fatherless children, I will rear them, and let thy widows trust in Me. {S}
49.12 יב  כִּי-כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנֵּה אֲשֶׁר-אֵין מִשְׁפָּטָם לִשְׁתּוֹת הַכּוֹס שָׁתוֹ יִשְׁתּוּ, וְאַתָּה הוּא, נָקֹה תִּנָּקֶה:  לֹא תִנָּקֶה, כִּי שָׁתֹה תִּשְׁתֶּה.	12 For thus saith the LORD: Behold, they to whom it pertained not to drink of the cup shall assuredly drink; and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink.
49.13 יג  כִּי בִי נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, כִּי-לְשַׁמָּה לְחֶרְפָּה לְחֹרֶב וְלִקְלָלָה תִּהְיֶה בָצְרָה; וְכָל-עָרֶיהָ תִהְיֶינָה, לְחָרְבוֹת עוֹלָם.	13 For I have sworn by Myself, saith the LORD, that Bozrah shall become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.
49.14 יד  שְׁמוּעָה שָׁמַעְתִּי מֵאֵת יְהוָה, וְצִיר בַּגּוֹיִם שָׁלוּחַ; הִתְקַבְּצוּ וּבֹאוּ עָלֶיהָ, וְקוּמוּ לַמִּלְחָמָה.	14 I have heard a message from the LORD, and an ambassador is sent among the nations: 'Gather yourselves together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle.'
49.15 טו  כִּי-הִנֵּה קָטֹן נְתַתִּיךָ, בַּגּוֹיִם--בָּזוּי, בָּאָדָם.	15 For, behold, I make thee small among the nations, and despised among men.
49.16 טז  תִּפְלַצְתְּךָ הִשִּׁיא אֹתָךְ, זְדוֹן לִבֶּךָ, שֹׁכְנִי בְּחַגְוֵי הַסֶּלַע, תֹּפְשִׂי מְרוֹם גִּבְעָה:  כִּי-תַגְבִּיהַּ כַּנֶּשֶׁר קִנֶּךָ, מִשָּׁם אוֹרִידְךָ נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	16 Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, even the pride of thy heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the hill; though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the LORD.
49.17 יז  וְהָיְתָה אֱדוֹם, לְשַׁמָּה; כֹּל עֹבֵר עָלֶיהָ, יִשֹּׁם וְיִשְׁרֹק עַל-כָּל-מַכּוֹתֶהָ.	17 And Edom shall become an astonishment; every one that passeth by it shall be astonished and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof.
49.18 יח  כְּמַהְפֵּכַת סְדֹם וַעֲמֹרָה, וּשְׁכֵנֶיהָ--אָמַר יְהוָה; לֹא-יֵשֵׁב שָׁם אִישׁ, וְלֹא-יָגוּר בָּהּ בֶּן-אָדָם.	18 As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the LORD, no man shall abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein.
49.19 יט  הִנֵּה כְּאַרְיֵה יַעֲלֶה מִגְּאוֹן הַיַּרְדֵּן, אֶל-נְוֵה אֵיתָן--כִּי-אַרְגִּיעָה אֲרִיצֶנּוּ מֵעָלֶיהָ, וּמִי בָחוּר אֵלֶיהָ אֶפְקֹד:  כִּי מִי כָמוֹנִי, וּמִי יֹעִידֶנִּי, וּמִי-זֶה רֹעֶה, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲמֹד לְפָנָי.  {ס}	19 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the thickets of the Jordan against the strong habitation; for I will suddenly make him run away from it, and whoso is chosen, him will I appoint over it; for who is like Me? and who will appoint Me a time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before Me? {S}
49.20 כ  לָכֵן שִׁמְעוּ עֲצַת-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר יָעַץ אֶל-אֱדוֹם, וּמַחְשְׁבוֹתָיו, אֲשֶׁר חָשַׁב אֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי תֵימָן:  אִם-לוֹא יִסְחָבוּם צְעִירֵי הַצֹּאן, אִם-לֹא יַשִּׁים עֲלֵיהֶם נְוֵהֶם.	20 Therefore hear ye the counsel of the LORD, that He hath taken against Edom; and His purposes, that He hath purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: surely the least of the flock shall drag them away, surely their habitation shall be appalled at them.
49.21 כא  מִקּוֹל נִפְלָם, רָעֲשָׁה הָאָרֶץ:  צְעָקָה, בְּיַם-סוּף נִשְׁמַע קוֹלָהּ.	21 The earth quaketh at the noise of their fall; there is a cry, the noise whereof is heard in the Red Sea.
49.22 כב  הִנֵּה כַנֶּשֶׁר יַעֲלֶה וְיִדְאֶה, וְיִפְרֹשׂ כְּנָפָיו עַל-בָּצְרָה; וְהָיָה לֵב גִּבּוֹרֵי אֱדוֹם, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, כְּלֵב, אִשָּׁה מְצֵרָה.  {פ}	22 Behold, he shall come up and swoop down as the vulture, and spread out his wings against Bozrah; and the heart of the mighty men of Edom at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. {P}
49.23 כג  לְדַמֶּשֶׂק, בּוֹשָׁה חֲמָת וְאַרְפָּד--כִּי-שְׁמֻעָה רָעָה שָׁמְעוּ, נָמֹגוּ; בַּיָּם דְּאָגָה, הַשְׁקֵט לֹא יוּכָל.	23 Of Damascus. Hamath is ashamed, and Arpad; for they have heard evil tidings, they are melted away; there is trouble in the sea; it cannot be quiet.
49.24 כד  רָפְתָה דַמֶּשֶׂק הִפְנְתָה לָנוּס, וְרֶטֶט הֶחֱזִיקָה; צָרָה וַחֲבָלִים אֲחָזַתָּה, כַּיּוֹלֵדָה.	24 Damascus is waxed feeble, she turneth herself to flee, and trembling hath seized on her; anguish and pangs have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.
49.25 כה  אֵיךְ לֹא-עֻזְּבָה, עִיר תהלה (תְּהִלָּת)--קִרְיַת, מְשׂוֹשִׂי.	25 'How is the city of praise left unrepaired, the city of my joy?'
49.26 כו  לָכֵן יִפְּלוּ בַחוּרֶיהָ, בִּרְחֹבֹתֶיהָ; וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה יִדַּמּוּ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	26 Therefore her young men shall fall in her broad places, and all the men of war shall be brought to silence in that day, saith the LORD of hosts.
49.27 כז  וְהִצַּתִּי אֵשׁ, בְּחוֹמַת דַּמָּשֶׂק; וְאָכְלָה, אַרְמְנוֹת בֶּן-הֲדָד.  {פ}	27 And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad. {P}
49.28 כח  לְקֵדָר וּלְמַמְלְכוֹת חָצוֹר, אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה נבוכדראצור (נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר) מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה:  קוּמוּ עֲלוּ אֶל-קֵדָר, וְשָׁדְדוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי-קֶדֶם.	28 Of Kedar, and of the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote. Thus saith the LORD: Arise ye, go up against Kedar, and spoil the children of the east.
49.29 כט  אָהֳלֵיהֶם וְצֹאנָם יִקָּחוּ, יְרִיעוֹתֵיהֶם וְכָל-כְּלֵיהֶם וּגְמַלֵּיהֶם יִשְׂאוּ לָהֶם; וְקָרְאוּ עֲלֵיהֶם מָגוֹר, מִסָּבִיב.	29 Their tents and their flocks shall they take, they shall carry away for themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their camels; and they shall proclaim against them a terror on every side.
49.30 ל  נֻסוּ נֻּדוּ מְאֹד הֶעְמִיקוּ לָשֶׁבֶת, יֹשְׁבֵי חָצוֹר--נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  כִּי-יָעַץ עֲלֵיכֶם נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, עֵצָה, וְחָשַׁב עליהם (עֲלֵיכֶם), מַחֲשָׁבָה.	30 Flee ye, flit far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the LORD; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.
49.31 לא  קוּמוּ עֲלוּ, אֶל-גּוֹי שְׁלֵיו יוֹשֵׁב לָבֶטַח--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; לֹא-דְלָתַיִם וְלֹא-בְרִיחַ לוֹ, בָּדָד יִשְׁכֹּנוּ.	31 Arise, get you up against a nation that is at ease, that dwelleth without care, saith the LORD; that have neither gates nor bars, that dwell alone.
49.32 לב  וְהָיוּ גְמַלֵּיהֶם לָבַז, וַהֲמוֹן מִקְנֵיהֶם לְשָׁלָל, וְזֵרִתִים לְכָל-רוּחַ, קְצוּצֵי פֵאָה; וּמִכָּל-עֲבָרָיו אָבִיא אֶת-אֵידָם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	32 And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their cattle a spoil; and I will scatter unto all winds them that have the corners polled; and I will bring their calamity from every side of them, saith the LORD.
49.33 לג  וְהָיְתָה חָצוֹר לִמְעוֹן תַּנִּים, שְׁמָמָה--עַד-עוֹלָם:  לֹא-יֵשֵׁב שָׁם אִישׁ, וְלֹא-יָגוּר בָּהּ בֶּן-אָדָם.  {ס}	33 And Hazor shall be a dwelling-place of jackals, a desolation for ever; no man shall abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein. {S}
49.34 לד  אֲשֶׁר הָיָה דְבַר-יְהוָה אֶל-יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶל-עֵילָם:  בְּרֵאשִׁית, מַלְכוּת צִדְקִיָּה מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה--לֵאמֹר.	34 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying:
49.35 לה  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הִנְנִי שֹׁבֵר אֶת-קֶשֶׁת עֵילָם, רֵאשִׁית, גְּבוּרָתָם.	35 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.
49.36 לו  וְהֵבֵאתִי אֶל-עֵילָם אַרְבַּע רוּחוֹת, מֵאַרְבַּע קְצוֹת הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְזֵרִתִים, לְכֹל הָרֻחוֹת הָאֵלֶּה; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה הַגּוֹי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָבוֹא שָׁם נִדְּחֵי עולם (עֵילָם).	36 And I will bring against Elam the four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the dispersed of Elam shall not come.
49.37 לז  וְהַחְתַּתִּי אֶת-עֵילָם לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיהֶם וְלִפְנֵי מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשָׁם, וְהֵבֵאתִי עֲלֵיהֶם רָעָה אֶת-חֲרוֹן אַפִּי--נְאֻם-יְהוָה; וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי אַחֲרֵיהֶם אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, עַד כַּלּוֹתִי אוֹתָם.	37 And I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life; and I will bring evil upon them, even My fierce anger, saith the LORD; and I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them;
49.38 לח  וְשַׂמְתִּי כִסְאִי, בְּעֵילָם; וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי מִשָּׁם מֶלֶךְ וְשָׂרִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	38 And I will set My throne in Elam, and will destroy from thence king and princes, saith the LORD.
49.39 לט  וְהָיָה בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים, אשוב (אָשִׁיב) אֶת-שבית (שְׁבוּת) עֵילָם--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	39 But it shall come to pass in the end of days, that I will bring back the captivity of Elam, saith the LORD. {P}
50.1 א  הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-בָּבֶל--אֶל-אֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים:  בְּיַד, יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא.	1 The word that the LORD spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.
50.2 ב  הַגִּידוּ בַגּוֹיִם וְהַשְׁמִיעוּ וּשְׂאוּ-נֵס, הַשְׁמִיעוּ אַל-תְּכַחֵדוּ; אִמְרוּ נִלְכְּדָה בָבֶל הֹבִישׁ בֵּל, חַת מְרֹדָךְ, הֹבִישׁוּ עֲצַבֶּיהָ, חַתּוּ גִּלּוּלֶיהָ.	2 Declare ye among the nations and announce, and set up a standard; announce, and conceal not; say: 'Babylon is taken, Bel is put to shame, Merodach is dismayed; her images are put to shame, her idols are dismayed.'
50.3 ג  כִּי עָלָה עָלֶיהָ גּוֹי מִצָּפוֹן, הוּא-יָשִׁית אֶת-אַרְצָהּ לְשַׁמָּה, וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה יוֹשֵׁב, בָּהּ:  מֵאָדָם וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה, נָדוּ הָלָכוּ.	3 For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein; they are fled, they are gone, both man and beast.
50.4 ד  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה וּבָעֵת הַהִיא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, יָבֹאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הֵמָּה וּבְנֵי-יְהוּדָה, יַחְדָּו; הָלוֹךְ וּבָכוֹ יֵלֵכוּ, וְאֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם יְבַקֵּשׁוּ.	4 In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together; they shall go on their way weeping, and shall seek the LORD their God.
50.5 ה  צִיּוֹן יִשְׁאָלוּ, דֶּרֶךְ הֵנָּה פְנֵיהֶם; בֹּאוּ וְנִלְווּ אֶל-יְהוָה, בְּרִית עוֹלָם לֹא תִשָּׁכֵחַ.	5 They shall inquire concerning Zion with their faces hitherward: 'Come ye, and join yourselves to the LORD in an everlasting covenant that shall not be forgotten.'
50.6 ו  צֹאן אֹבְדוֹת, היה (הָיוּ) עַמִּי--רֹעֵיהֶם הִתְעוּם, הָרִים שובבים (שׁוֹבְבוּם); מֵהַר אֶל-גִּבְעָה הָלָכוּ, שָׁכְחוּ רִבְצָם.	6 My people hath been lost sheep; their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains; they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their resting-place.
50.7 ז  כָּל-מוֹצְאֵיהֶם אֲכָלוּם, וְצָרֵיהֶם אָמְרוּ לֹא נֶאְשָׁם; תַּחַת, אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ לַיהוָה נְוֵה-צֶדֶק, וּמִקְוֵה אֲבוֹתֵיהֶם, יְהוָה.  {ס}	7 All that found them have devoured them; and their adversaries said: 'We are not guilty'; because they have sinned against the LORD, the habitation of justice, even the LORD, the hope of their fathers. {S}
50.8 ח  נֻדוּ מִתּוֹךְ בָּבֶל, וּמֵאֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים יצאו (צֵאוּ); וִהְיוּ, כְּעַתּוּדִים לִפְנֵי-צֹאן.	8 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before the flocks.
50.9 ט  כִּי הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי מֵעִיר וּמַעֲלֶה עַל-בָּבֶל קְהַל-גּוֹיִם גְּדֹלִים, מֵאֶרֶץ צָפוֹן, וְעָרְכוּ לָהּ, מִשָּׁם תִּלָּכֵד; חִצָּיו כְּגִבּוֹר מַשְׁכִּיל, לֹא יָשׁוּב רֵיקָם.	9 For, lo, I will stir up and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great nations from the north country; and they shall set themselves in array against her, from thence she shall be taken; their arrows shall be as of a mighty man that maketh childless; none shall return in vain.
50.10 י  וְהָיְתָה כַשְׂדִּים, לְשָׁלָל:  כָּל-שֹׁלְלֶיהָ יִשְׂבָּעוּ, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	10 And Chaldea shall be a spoil; all that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the LORD.
50.11 יא  כִּי תשמחי (תִשְׂמְחוּ) כִּי תעלזי (תַעַלְזוּ), שֹׁסֵי נַחֲלָתִי:  כִּי תפושי (תָפוּשׁוּ) כְּעֶגְלָה דָשָׁה, ותצהלי (וְתִצְהֲלוּ) כָּאַבִּרִים.	11 Because ye are glad, because ye rejoice, O ye that plunder My heritage, because ye gambol as a heifer at grass, and neigh as strong horses;
50.12 יב  בּוֹשָׁה אִמְּכֶם מְאֹד, חָפְרָה יוֹלַדְתְּכֶם; הִנֵּה אַחֲרִית גּוֹיִם, מִדְבָּר צִיָּה וַעֲרָבָה.	12 Your mother shall be sore ashamed, she that bore you shall be confounded; behold, the hindermost of the nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.
50.13 יג  מִקֶּצֶף יְהוָה לֹא תֵשֵׁב, וְהָיְתָה שְׁמָמָה כֻּלָּהּ; כֹּל עֹבֵר עַל-בָּבֶל, יִשֹּׁם וְיִשְׁרֹק עַל-כָּל-מַכּוֹתֶיהָ.	13 Because of the wrath of the LORD it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate; every one that goeth by Babylon shall be appalled and hiss at all her plagues.
50.14 יד  עִרְכוּ עַל-בָּבֶל סָבִיב, כָּל-דֹּרְכֵי קֶשֶׁת, יְדוּ אֵלֶיהָ, אַל-תַּחְמְלוּ אֶל-חֵץ:  כִּי לַיהוָה, חָטָאָה.	14 Set yourselves in array against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows; for she hath sinned against the LORD.
50.15 טו  הָרִיעוּ עָלֶיהָ סָבִיב, נָתְנָה יָדָהּ, נָפְלוּ אשויתיה (אָשְׁיוֹתֶיהָ), נֶהֶרְסוּ חוֹמוֹתֶיהָ:  כִּי נִקְמַת יְהוָה הִיא הִנָּקְמוּ בָהּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשְׂתָה עֲשׂוּ-לָהּ.	15 Shout against her round about, she hath submitted herself; her buttresses are fallen, her walls are thrown down; for it is the vengeance of the LORD, take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do unto her.
50.16 טז  כִּרְתוּ זוֹרֵעַ מִבָּבֶל, וְתֹפֵשׂ מַגָּל בְּעֵת קָצִיר--מִפְּנֵי, חֶרֶב הַיּוֹנָה, אִישׁ אֶל-עַמּוֹ יִפְנוּ, וְאִישׁ לְאַרְצוֹ יָנֻסוּ.  {ס}	16 Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest; for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own land. {S}
50.17 יז  שֶׂה פְזוּרָה יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲרָיוֹת הִדִּיחוּ; הָרִאשׁוֹן אֲכָלוֹ, מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, וְזֶה הָאַחֲרוֹן עִצְּמוֹ, נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.  {פ}	17 Israel is a scattered sheep, the lions have driven him away; first the king of Assyria hath devoured him, and last this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones. {P}
50.18 יח  לָכֵן, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִנְנִי פֹקֵד אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, וְאֶל-אַרְצוֹ--כַּאֲשֶׁר פָּקַדְתִּי, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר.	18 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.
50.19 יט  וְשֹׁבַבְתִּי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-נָוֵהוּ, וְרָעָה הַכַּרְמֶל וְהַבָּשָׁן; וּבְהַר אֶפְרַיִם וְהַגִּלְעָד, תִּשְׂבַּע נַפְשׁוֹ.	19 And I will bring Israel back to his pasture, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon the hills of Ephraim and in Gilead.
50.20 כ  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם וּבָעֵת הַהִיא נְאֻם-יְהוָה, יְבֻקַּשׁ אֶת-עֲוֺן יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאֵינֶנּוּ, וְאֶת-חַטֹּאת יְהוּדָה, וְלֹא תִמָּצֶאינָה:  כִּי אֶסְלַח, לַאֲשֶׁר אַשְׁאִיר.  {פ}	20 In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I leave as a remnant. {P}
50.21 כא  עַל-הָאָרֶץ מְרָתַיִם עֲלֵה עָלֶיהָ, וְאֶל-יוֹשְׁבֵי פְּקוֹד; חֲרֹב וְהַחֲרֵם אַחֲרֵיהֶם, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וַעֲשֵׂה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִיךָ.  {ס}	21 Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod; waste and utterly destroy after them, saith the LORD, and do according to all that I have commanded thee. {S}
50.22 כב  קוֹל מִלְחָמָה, בָּאָרֶץ--וְשֶׁבֶר, גָּדוֹל.	22 Hark! battle is in the land, and great destruction.
50.23 כג  אֵיךְ נִגְדַּע וַיִּשָּׁבֵר, פַּטִּישׁ כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; אֵיךְ הָיְתָה לְשַׁמָּה בָּבֶל, בַּגּוֹיִם.	23 How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! How is Babylon become a desolation among the nations!
50.24 כד  יָקֹשְׁתִּי לָךְ וְגַם-נִלְכַּדְתְּ בָּבֶל, וְאַתְּ לֹא יָדָעַתְּ; נִמְצֵאת, וְגַם-נִתְפַּשְׂתְּ--כִּי בַיהוָה, הִתְגָּרִית.	24 I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware; thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the LORD.
50.25 כה  פָּתַח יְהוָה אֶת-אוֹצָרוֹ, וַיּוֹצֵא אֶת-כְּלֵי זַעְמוֹ:  כִּי-מְלָאכָה הִיא, לַאדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת--בְּאֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים.	25 The LORD hath opened His armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of His indignation; for it is a work that the Lord GOD of hosts hath to do in the land of the Chaldeans.
50.26 כו  בֹּאוּ-לָהּ מִקֵּץ פִּתְחוּ מַאֲבֻסֶיהָ, סָלּוּהָ כְמוֹ-עֲרֵמִים וְהַחֲרִימוּהָ; אַל-תְּהִי-לָהּ, שְׁאֵרִית.	26 Come against her from every quarter, open her granaries, cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly; let nothing of her be left.
50.27 כז  חִרְבוּ, כָּל-פָּרֶיהָ, יֵרְדוּ, לַטָּבַח; הוֹי עֲלֵיהֶם, כִּי-בָא יוֹמָם עֵת פְּקֻדָּתָם.  {ס}	27 Slay all her bullocks, let them go down to the slaughter; woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation. {S}
50.28 כח  קוֹל נָסִים וּפְלֵטִים, מֵאֶרֶץ בָּבֶל:  לְהַגִּיד בְּצִיּוֹן, אֶת-נִקְמַת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--נִקְמַת, הֵיכָלוֹ.	28 Hark! they flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, the vengeance of His temple.
50.29 כט  הַשְׁמִיעוּ אֶל-בָּבֶל רַבִּים כָּל-דֹּרְכֵי קֶשֶׁת חֲנוּ עָלֶיהָ סָבִיב, אַל-יְהִי-   (לָהּ) פְּלֵיטָה, שַׁלְּמוּ-לָהּ כְּפָעֳלָהּ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר עָשְׂתָה עֲשׂוּ-לָהּ:  כִּי אֶל-יְהוָה זָדָה, אֶל-קְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	29 Call together the archers against Babylon, all them that bend the bow; encamp against her round about, let none thereof escape; recompense her according to her work, according to all that she hath done, do unto her: for she hath been arrogant against the LORD, against the Holy One of Israel.
50.30 ל  לָכֵן יִפְּלוּ בַחוּרֶיהָ, בִּרְחֹבֹתֶיהָ; וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי מִלְחַמְתָּהּ יִדַּמּוּ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {פ}	30 Therefore shall her young men fall in her broad places, and all her men of war shall be brought to silence in that day, saith the LORD. {P}
50.31 לא  הִנְנִי אֵלֶיךָ זָדוֹן, נְאֻם-אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה צְבָאוֹת:  כִּי בָּא יוֹמְךָ, עֵת פְּקַדְתִּיךָ.	31 Behold, I am against thee, O thou most arrogant, saith the Lord GOD of hosts; for thy day is come, the time that I will punish thee.
50.32 לב  וְכָשַׁל זָדוֹן וְנָפַל, וְאֵין לוֹ מֵקִים; וְהִצַּתִּי אֵשׁ בְּעָרָיו, וְאָכְלָה כָּל-סְבִיבֹתָיו.  {ס}	32 And the most arrogant shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up; and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all that are round about him. {S}
50.33 לג  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, עֲשׁוּקִים בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבְנֵי-יְהוּדָה יַחְדָּו; וְכָל-שֹׁבֵיהֶם הֶחֱזִיקוּ בָם, מֵאֲנוּ שַׁלְּחָם.	33 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: The children of Israel and the children of Judah are oppressed together; and all that took them captives hold them fast; they refuse to let them go.
50.34 לד  גֹּאֲלָם חָזָק, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת שְׁמוֹ--רִיב יָרִיב, אֶת-רִיבָם:  לְמַעַן הִרְגִּיעַ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְהִרְגִּיז לְיֹשְׁבֵי בָבֶל.	34 Their Redeemer is strong, the LORD of hosts is His name; He will thoroughly plead their cause, that He may give rest to the earth, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.
50.35 לה  חֶרֶב עַל-כַּשְׂדִּים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וְאֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי בָבֶל, וְאֶל-שָׂרֶיהָ וְאֶל-חֲכָמֶיהָ.	35 A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the LORD, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.
50.36 לו  חֶרֶב אֶל-הַבַּדִּים, וְנֹאָלוּ; חֶרֶב אֶל-גִּבּוֹרֶיהָ, וָחָתּוּ.	36 A sword is upon the boasters, and they shall become fools; a sword is upon her mighty men, and they shall be dismayed.
50.37 לז  חֶרֶב אֶל-סוּסָיו וְאֶל-רִכְבּוֹ, וְאֶל-כָּל-הָעֶרֶב אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹכָהּ--וְהָיוּ לְנָשִׁים; חֶרֶב אֶל-אוֹצְרֹתֶיהָ, וּבֻזָּזוּ.	37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are in the midst of her, and they shall become as women; a sword is upon her treasures, and they shall be robbed.
50.38 לח  חֹרֶב אֶל-מֵימֶיהָ, וְיָבֵשׁוּ:  כִּי אֶרֶץ פְּסִלִים הִיא, וּבָאֵימִים יִתְהֹלָלוּ.	38 A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be dried up; for it is a land of graven images, and they are mad upon things of horror.
50.39 לט  לָכֵן, יֵשְׁבוּ צִיִּים אֶת-אִיִּים, וְיָשְׁבוּ בָהּ, בְּנוֹת יַעֲנָה; וְלֹא-תֵשֵׁב עוֹד לָנֶצַח, וְלֹא תִשְׁכּוֹן עַד-דּוֹר וָדֹר.	39 Therefore the wild-cats with the jackals shall dwell there, and the ostriches shall dwell therein; and it shall be no more inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.
50.40 מ  כְּמַהְפֵּכַת אֱלֹהִים אֶת-סְדֹם וְאֶת-עֲמֹרָה, וְאֶת-שְׁכֵנֶיהָ--נְאֻם-יְהוָה:  לֹא-יֵשֵׁב שָׁם אִישׁ, וְלֹא-יָגוּר בָּהּ בֶּן-אָדָם.	40 As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the LORD; so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein.
50.41 מא  הִנֵּה עַם בָּא, מִצָּפוֹן; וְגוֹי גָּדוֹל וּמְלָכִים רַבִּים, יֵעֹרוּ מִיַּרְכְּתֵי-אָרֶץ.	41 Behold, a people cometh from the north, and a great nation, and many kings shall be roused from the uttermost parts of the earth.
50.42 מב  קֶשֶׁת וְכִידֹן יַחֲזִיקוּ, אַכְזָרִי הֵמָּה וְלֹא יְרַחֵמוּ--קוֹלָם כַּיָּם יֶהֱמֶה, וְעַל-סוּסִים יִרְכָּבוּ; עָרוּךְ, כְּאִישׁ לַמִּלְחָמָה, עָלַיִךְ, בַּת-בָּבֶל.	42 They lay hold on bow and spear, they are cruel, and have no compassion; their voice is like the roaring sea, and they ride upon horses; set in array, as a man for war, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.
50.43 מג  שָׁמַע מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶת-שִׁמְעָם, וְרָפוּ יָדָיו; צָרָה, הֶחֱזִיקַתְהוּ--חִיל, כַּיּוֹלֵדָה.	43 The king of Babylon hath heard the fame of them, and his hands wax feeble; anguish hath taken hold of him, and pain, as of a woman in travail.
50.44 מד  הִנֵּה כְּאַרְיֵה יַעֲלֶה מִגְּאוֹן הַיַּרְדֵּן, אֶל-נְוֵה אֵיתָן--כִּי-אַרְגִּעָה ארוצם (אֲרִיצֵם) מֵעָלֶיהָ, וּמִי בָחוּר אֵלֶיהָ אֶפְקֹד:  כִּי מִי כָמוֹנִי, וּמִי יוֹעִדֶנִּי, וּמִי-זֶה רֹעֶה, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲמֹד לְפָנָי.	44 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the thickets of the Jordan against the strong habitation; for I will suddenly make them run away from it, and whoso is chosen, him will I appoint over it; for who is like Me? and who will appoint Me a time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before Me?
50.45 מה  לָכֵן שִׁמְעוּ עֲצַת-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר יָעַץ אֶל-בָּבֶל, וּמַחְשְׁבוֹתָיו, אֲשֶׁר חָשַׁב אֶל-אֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים:  אִם-לֹא יִסְחָבוּם צְעִירֵי הַצֹּאן, אִם-לֹא יַשִּׁים עֲלֵיהֶם נָוֶה.	45 Therefore hear ye the counsel of the LORD, that He hath taken against Babylon, and His purposes, that He hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: surely the least of the flock shall drag them away, surely their habitation shall be appalled at them.
50.46 מו  מִקּוֹל נִתְפְּשָׂה בָבֶל, נִרְעֲשָׁה הָאָרֶץ; וּזְעָקָה, בַּגּוֹיִם נִשְׁמָע.  {ס}	46 At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth quaketh, and the cry is heard among the nations. {S}
51.1 א  כֹּה, אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי מֵעִיר עַל-בָּבֶל, וְאֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי לֵב קָמָי--רוּחַ, מַשְׁחִית.	1 Thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in Leb-kamai, a destroying wind.
51.2 ב  וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי לְבָבֶל זָרִים וְזֵרוּהָ, וִיבֹקְקוּ אֶת-אַרְצָהּ:  כִּי-הָיוּ עָלֶיהָ מִסָּבִיב, בְּיוֹם רָעָה.	2 And I will send unto Babylon strangers, that shall fan her, and they shall empty her land; for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about.
51.3 ג  אֶל-יִדְרֹךְ ידרך (  ) הַדֹּרֵךְ קַשְׁתּוֹ, וְאֶל-יִתְעַל בְּסִרְיֹנוֹ; וְאַל-תַּחְמְלוּ, אֶל-בַּחֻרֶיהָ--הַחֲרִימוּ, כָּל-צְבָאָהּ.	3 Let the archer bend his bow against her, and let him lift himself up against her in his coat of mail; and spare ye not her young men, destroy ye utterly all her host.
51.4 ד  וְנָפְלוּ חֲלָלִים, בְּאֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים; וּמְדֻקָּרִים, בְּחוּצוֹתֶיהָ.	4 And they shall fall down slain in the land of the Chaldeans, and thrust through in her streets.
51.5 ה  כִּי לֹא-אַלְמָן יִשְׂרָאֵל וִיהוּדָה, מֵאֱלֹהָיו--מֵיְהוָה, צְבָאוֹת:  כִּי אַרְצָם מָלְאָה אָשָׁם, מִקְּדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 For Israel is not widowed, nor Judah, of his God, of the LORD of hosts; for their land is full of guilt against the Holy One of Israel.
51.6 ו  נֻסוּ מִתּוֹךְ בָּבֶל, וּמַלְּטוּ אִישׁ נַפְשׁוֹ--אַל-תִּדַּמּוּ, בַּעֲוֺנָהּ:  כִּי עֵת נְקָמָה הִיא, לַיהוָה--גְּמוּל, הוּא מְשַׁלֵּם לָהּ.	6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and save every man his life, be not cut off in her iniquity; for it is the time of the LORD'S vengeance; He will render unto her a recompense.
51.7 ז  כּוֹס-זָהָב בָּבֶל, בְּיַד-יְהוָה--מְשַׁכֶּרֶת, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ:  מִיֵּינָהּ שָׁתוּ גוֹיִם, עַל-כֵּן יִתְהֹלְלוּ גוֹיִם.	7 Babylon hath been a golden cup in LORD'S hand, that made all the earth drunken; the nations have drunk of her wine, therefore the nations are mad.
51.8 ח  פִּתְאֹם נָפְלָה בָבֶל, וַתִּשָּׁבֵר; הֵילִילוּ עָלֶיהָ, קְחוּ צֳרִי לְמַכְאוֹבָהּ--אוּלַי, תֵּרָפֵא.	8 Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed, wail for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.
51.9 ט  רִפִּאנוּ אֶת-בָּבֶל, וְלֹא נִרְפָּתָה--עִזְבוּהָ, וְנֵלֵךְ אִישׁ לְאַרְצוֹ:  כִּי-נָגַע אֶל-הַשָּׁמַיִם מִשְׁפָּטָהּ, וְנִשָּׂא עַד-שְׁחָקִים.	9 We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country; for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.
51.10 י  הוֹצִיא יְהוָה, אֶת-צִדְקֹתֵינוּ; בֹּאוּ וּנְסַפְּרָה בְצִיּוֹן, אֶת-מַעֲשֵׂה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {ס}	10 The LORD hath brought forth our victory; come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the LORD our God. {S}
51.11 יא  הָבֵרוּ הַחִצִּים, מִלְאוּ הַשְּׁלָטִים--הֵעִיר יְהוָה אֶת-רוּחַ מַלְכֵי מָדַי, כִּי-עַל-בָּבֶל מְזִמָּתוֹ לְהַשְׁחִיתָהּ:  כִּי-נִקְמַת יְהוָה הִיא, נִקְמַת הֵיכָלוֹ.	11 Make bright the arrows, fill the quivers, the LORD hath roused the spirit of the kings of the Medes; because His device is against Babylon, to destroy it; for it is the vengeance of the LORD, the vengeance of His temple.
51.12 יב  אֶל-חוֹמֹת בָּבֶל שְׂאוּ-נֵס, הַחֲזִיקוּ הַמִּשְׁמָר--הָקִימוּ שֹׁמְרִים, הָכִינוּ הָאֹרְבִים:  כִּי, גַּם-זָמַם יְהוָה--גַּם-עָשָׂה, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר אֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי בָבֶל.	12 Set up a standard against the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set the watchmen, prepare the ambushes; for the LORD hath both devised and done that which He spoke concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.
51.13 יג  שכנתי (שֹׁכַנְתְּ) עַל-מַיִם רַבִּים, רַבַּת אוֹצָרֹת; בָּא קִצֵּךְ, אַמַּת בִּצְעֵךְ.	13 O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, the measure of thy covetousness.
51.14 יד  נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, בְּנַפְשׁוֹ:  כִּי אִם-מִלֵּאתִיךְ אָדָם כַּיֶּלֶק, וְעָנוּ עָלַיִךְ הֵידָד.  {ס}	14 The LORD of hosts hath sworn by Himself: Surely I will fill thee with men, as with the canker-worm, and they shall lift up a shout against thee. {S}
51.15 טו  עֹשֵׂה אֶרֶץ בְּכֹחוֹ, מֵכִין תֵּבֵל בְּחָכְמָתוֹ; וּבִתְבוּנָתוֹ, נָטָה שָׁמָיִם.	15 He that hath made the earth by His power, that hath established the world by His wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by His discernment;
51.16 טז  לְקוֹל תִּתּוֹ הֲמוֹן מַיִם, בַּשָּׁמַיִם, וַיַּעַל נְשִׂאִים, מִקְצֵה-אָרֶץ; בְּרָקִים לַמָּטָר עָשָׂה, וַיּוֹצֵא רוּחַ מֵאֹצְרֹתָיו.	16 At the sound of His giving a multitude of waters in the heavens, He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; He maketh lightnings at the time of the rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of His treasuries;
51.17 יז  נִבְעַר כָּל-אָדָם מִדַּעַת, הֹבִישׁ כָּל-צֹרֵף מִפָּסֶל:  כִּי שֶׁקֶר נִסְכּוֹ, וְלֹא-רוּחַ בָּם.	17 Every man is proved to be brutish, for the knowledge--every goldsmith is put to shame by the graven image--that his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.
51.18 יח  הֶבֶל הֵמָּה, מַעֲשֵׂה תַּעְתֻּעִים; בְּעֵת פְּקֻדָּתָם, יֹאבֵדוּ.	18 They are vanity, a work of delusion; in the time of their visitation they shall perish,
51.19 יט  לֹא-כְאֵלֶּה חֵלֶק יַעֲקוֹב, כִּי-יוֹצֵר הַכֹּל הוּא--וְשֵׁבֶט, נַחֲלָתוֹ:  יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ.  {פ}	19 The portion of Jacob is not like these; for He is the former of all things, and [Israel] is the tribe of His inheritance; the LORD of hosts is His name. {P}
51.20 כ  מַפֵּץ-אַתָּה לִי, כְּלֵי מִלְחָמָה; וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ גּוֹיִם, וְהִשְׁחַתִּי בְךָ מַמְלָכוֹת.	20 Thou art My maul and weapons of war, and with thee will I shatter the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;
51.21 כא  וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ, סוּס וְרֹכְבוֹ; וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ, רֶכֶב וְרֹכְבוֹ.	21 And with thee will I shatter the horse and his rider, and with thee will I shatter the chariot and him that rideth therein;
51.22 כב  וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ אִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה, וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ זָקֵן וָנָעַר; וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ, בָּחוּר וּבְתוּלָה.	22 And with thee will I shatter man and woman, and with thee will I shatter the old man and the youth, and with thee will I shatter the young man and the maid;
51.23 כג  וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ רֹעֶה וְעֶדְרוֹ, וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ אִכָּר וְצִמְדּוֹ; וְנִפַּצְתִּי בְךָ, פַּחוֹת וּסְגָנִים.	23 And with thee will I shatter the shepherd and his flock, and with thee will I shatter the husbandman and his yoke of oxen, and with thee will I shatter governors and deputies.
51.24 כד  וְשִׁלַּמְתִּי לְבָבֶל וּלְכֹל יוֹשְׁבֵי כַשְׂדִּים, אֵת כָּל-רָעָתָם אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ בְצִיּוֹן--לְעֵינֵיכֶם:  נְאֻם, יְהוָה.  {ס}	24 And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion, in your sight; saith the LORD. {S}
51.25 כה  הִנְנִי אֵלֶיךָ הַר הַמַּשְׁחִית, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, הַמַּשְׁחִית, אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וְנָטִיתִי אֶת-יָדִי עָלֶיךָ, וְגִלְגַּלְתִּיךָ מִן-הַסְּלָעִים, וּנְתַתִּיךָ, לְהַר שְׂרֵפָה.	25 Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the LORD, which destroyest all the earth; and I will stretch out My hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.
51.26 כו  וְלֹא-יִקְחוּ מִמְּךָ אֶבֶן לְפִנָּה, וְאֶבֶן לְמוֹסָדוֹת:  כִּי-שִׁמְמוֹת עוֹלָם תִּהְיֶה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	26 And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the LORD.
51.27 כז  שְׂאוּ-נֵס בָּאָרֶץ, תִּקְעוּ שׁוֹפָר בַּגּוֹיִם קַדְּשׁוּ עָלֶיהָ גּוֹיִם--הַשְׁמִיעוּ עָלֶיהָ מַמְלְכוֹת אֲרָרַט, מִנִּי וְאַשְׁכְּנָז; פִּקְדוּ עָלֶיהָ טִפְסָר, הַעֲלוּ-סוּס כְּיֶלֶק סָמָר.	27 Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the horn among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz; appoint a marshal against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough canker-worm.
51.28 כח  קַדְּשׁוּ עָלֶיהָ גוֹיִם אֶת-מַלְכֵי מָדַי, אֶת-פַּחוֹתֶיהָ וְאֶת-כָּל-סְגָנֶיהָ, וְאֵת, כָּל-אֶרֶץ מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ.	28 Prepare against her the nations, the kings of the Medes, the governors thereof, and all the deputies thereof, and all the land of his dominion.
51.29 כט  וַתִּרְעַשׁ הָאָרֶץ, וַתָּחֹל:  כִּי קָמָה עַל-בָּבֶל, מַחְשְׁבוֹת יְהוָה, לָשׂוּם אֶת-אֶרֶץ בָּבֶל לְשַׁמָּה, מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב.	29 And the land quaketh and is in pain; for the purposes of the LORD are performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant.
51.30 ל  חָדְלוּ גִבּוֹרֵי בָבֶל לְהִלָּחֵם, יָשְׁבוּ בַּמְּצָדוֹת--נָשְׁתָה גְבוּרָתָם, הָיוּ לְנָשִׁים; הִצִּיתוּ מִשְׁכְּנֹתֶיהָ, נִשְׁבְּרוּ בְרִיחֶיהָ.	30 The mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight, they remain in their strongholds; their might hath failed, they are become as women; her dwelling-places are set on fire; her bars are broken.
51.31 לא  רָץ לִקְרַאת-רָץ יָרוּץ, וּמַגִּיד לִקְרַאת מַגִּיד--לְהַגִּיד לְמֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, כִּי-נִלְכְּדָה עִירוֹ מִקָּצֶה.	31 One post runneth to meet another, and one messenger to meet an other, to tell the king of Babylon that his city is taken on every quarter;
51.32 לב  וְהַמַּעְבָּרוֹת נִתְפָּשׂוּ, וְאֶת-הָאֲגַמִּים שָׂרְפוּ בָאֵשׁ; וְאַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, נִבְהָלוּ.  {ס}	32 And the fords are seized, and the castles they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted. {S}
51.33 לג  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּת-בָּבֶל, כְּגֹרֶן עֵת הִדְרִיכָהּ:  עוֹד מְעַט, וּבָאָה עֵת-הַקָּצִיר לָהּ.	33 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor at the time when it is trodden; yet a little while, and the time of harvest shall come for her.
51.34 לד  אכלנו (אֲכָלַנִי) הממנו (הֲמָמַנִי), נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, הציגנו (הִצִּיגַנִי) כְּלִי רִיק, בלענו (בְּלָעַנִי) כַּתַּנִּין מִלָּא כְרֵשׂוֹ מֵעֲדָנָי; הדיחנו (הֱדִיחָנִי).	34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath set me down as an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his maw with my delicacies; he hath washed me clean.
51.35 לה  חֲמָסִי וּשְׁאֵרִי עַל-בָּבֶל, תֹּאמַר יֹשֶׁבֶת צִיּוֹן; וְדָמִי אֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי כַשְׂדִּים, תֹּאמַר יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}	35 'The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon', shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and: 'My blood be upon the inhabitants of Chaldea', shall Jerusalem say. {S}
51.36 לו  לָכֵן, כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, הִנְנִי-רָב אֶת-רִיבֵךְ, וְנִקַּמְתִּי אֶת-נִקְמָתֵךְ; וְהַחֲרַבְתִּי, אֶת-יַמָּהּ, וְהֹבַשְׁתִּי, אֶת-מְקוֹרָהּ.	36 Therefore thus saith the LORD: Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her fountain dry.
51.37 לז  וְהָיְתָה בָבֶל לְגַלִּים מְעוֹן-תַּנִּים שַׁמָּה וּשְׁרֵקָה, מֵאֵין יוֹשֵׁב.	37 And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling-place for jackals, an astonishment, and a hissing, without inhabitant.
51.38 לח  יַחְדָּו, כַּכְּפִרִים יִשְׁאָגוּ; נָעֲרוּ, כְּגוֹרֵי אֲרָיוֹת.	38 They shall roar together like young lions; they shall growl as lions' whelps.
51.39 לט  בְּחֻמָּם אָשִׁית אֶת-מִשְׁתֵּיהֶם, וְהִשְׁכַּרְתִּים לְמַעַן יַעֲלֹזוּ, וְיָשְׁנוּ שְׁנַת-עוֹלָם, וְלֹא יָקִיצוּ--נְאֻם, יְהוָה.	39 With their poison I will prepare their feast, and I will make them drunken, that they may be convulsed, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the LORD.
51.40 מ  אוֹרִידֵם, כְּכָרִים לִטְבוֹחַ--כְּאֵילִים, עִם-עַתּוּדִים.	40 I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he-goats.
51.41 מא  אֵיךְ נִלְכְּדָה שֵׁשַׁךְ, וַתִּתָּפֵשׂ תְּהִלַּת כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; אֵיךְ הָיְתָה לְשַׁמָּה בָּבֶל, בַּגּוֹיִם.	41 How is Sheshach taken! and the praise of the whole earth seized! How is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!
51.42 מב  עָלָה עַל-בָּבֶל, הַיָּם; בַּהֲמוֹן גַּלָּיו, נִכְסָתָה.	42 The sea is come up upon Babylon; she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof.
51.43 מג  הָיוּ עָרֶיהָ לְשַׁמָּה, אֶרֶץ צִיָּה וַעֲרָבָה:  אֶרֶץ, לֹא-יֵשֵׁב בָּהֵן כָּל-אִישׁ, וְלֹא-יַעֲבֹר בָּהֵן, בֶּן-אָדָם.	43 Her cities are become a desolation, a dry land, and a desert, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass thereby.
51.44 מד  וּפָקַדְתִּי עַל-בֵּל בְּבָבֶל, וְהֹצֵאתִי אֶת-בִּלְעוֹ מִפִּיו, וְלֹא-יִנְהֲרוּ אֵלָיו עוֹד, גּוֹיִם; גַּם-חוֹמַת בָּבֶל, נָפָלָה.	44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up, and the nations shall not flow any more unto him; yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.
51.45 מה  צְאוּ מִתּוֹכָהּ עַמִּי, וּמַלְּטוּ אִישׁ אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ--מֵחֲרוֹן, אַף-יְהוָה.	45 My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and save yourselves every man from the fierce anger of the LORD.
51.46 מו  וּפֶן-יֵרַךְ לְבַבְכֶם וְתִירְאוּ, בַּשְּׁמוּעָה הַנִּשְׁמַעַת בָּאָרֶץ; וּבָא בַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁמוּעָה, וְאַחֲרָיו בַּשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁמוּעָה, וְחָמָס בָּאָרֶץ, וּמֹשֵׁל עַל-מֹשֵׁל.	46 And let not your heart faint, neither fear ye, for the rumour that shall be heard in the land; for a rumour shall come one year, and after that in another year a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.
51.47 מז  לָכֵן, הִנֵּה יָמִים בָּאִים, וּפָקַדְתִּי עַל-פְּסִילֵי בָבֶל, וְכָל-אַרְצָהּ תֵּבוֹשׁ; וְכָל-חֲלָלֶיהָ, יִפְּלוּ בְתוֹכָהּ.	47 Therefore behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon, and her whole land shall be ashamed; and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.
51.48 מח  וְרִנְּנוּ עַל-בָּבֶל שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר בָּהֶם:  כִּי מִצָּפוֹן יָבוֹא-לָהּ הַשּׁוֹדְדִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה.	48 Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for joy over Babylon; for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, saith the LORD.
51.49 מט  גַּם-בָּבֶל, לִנְפֹּל חַלְלֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; גַּם-לְבָבֶל נָפְלוּ, חַלְלֵי כָל-הָאָרֶץ.	49 As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the land.
51.50 נ  פְּלֵטִים מֵחֶרֶב, הִלְכוּ אַל-תַּעֲמֹדוּ; זִכְרוּ מֵרָחוֹק אֶת-יְהוָה, וִירוּשָׁלִַם תַּעֲלֶה עַל-לְבַבְכֶם.	50 Ye that have escaped the sword, go ye, stand not still; remember the LORD from afar, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.
51.51 נא  בֹּשְׁנוּ כִּי-שָׁמַעְנוּ חֶרְפָּה, כִּסְּתָה כְלִמָּה פָּנֵינוּ:  כִּי בָּאוּ זָרִים, עַל-מִקְדְּשֵׁי בֵּית יְהוָה.  {פ}	51 'We are ashamed, because we have heard reproach, confusion hath covered our faces; for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the LORD'S house.' {P}
51.52 נב  לָכֵן הִנֵּה-יָמִים בָּאִים, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וּפָקַדְתִּי, עַל-פְּסִילֶיהָ; וּבְכָל-אַרְצָהּ, יֶאֱנֹק חָלָל.	52 Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will do judgment upon her graven images; and through all her land the wounded shall groan.
51.53 נג  כִּי-תַעֲלֶה בָבֶל הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְכִי תְבַצֵּר מְרוֹם עֻזָּהּ:  מֵאִתִּי, יָבֹאוּ שֹׁדְדִים לָהּ--נְאֻם-יְהוָה.  {ס}	53 Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from Me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the LORD. {S}
51.54 נד  קוֹל זְעָקָה, מִבָּבֶל; וְשֶׁבֶר גָּדוֹל, מֵאֶרֶץ כַּשְׂדִּים.	54 Hark! a cry from Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans!
51.55 נה  כִּי-שֹׁדֵד יְהוָה אֶת-בָּבֶל, וְאִבַּד מִמֶּנָּה קוֹל גָּדוֹל; וְהָמוּ גַלֵּיהֶם כְּמַיִם רַבִּים, נִתַּן שְׁאוֹן קוֹלָם.	55 For the LORD spoileth Babylon, and destroyeth out of her the great voice; and their waves roar like many waters, the noise of their voice is uttered;
51.56 נו  כִּי בָא עָלֶיהָ עַל-בָּבֶל, שׁוֹדֵד, וְנִלְכְּדוּ גִּבּוֹרֶיהָ, חִתְּתָה קַשְּׁתוֹתָם:  כִּי אֵל גְּמֻלוֹת יְהוָה, שַׁלֵּם יְשַׁלֵּם.	56 For the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, their bows are shattered; for the LORD is a God of recompenses, He will surely requite.
51.57 נז  וְהִשְׁכַּרְתִּי שָׂרֶיהָ וַחֲכָמֶיהָ פַּחוֹתֶיהָ וּסְגָנֶיהָ, וְגִבּוֹרֶיהָ, וְיָשְׁנוּ שְׁנַת-עוֹלָם, וְלֹא יָקִיצוּ:  נְאֻם-הַמֶּלֶךְ--יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, שְׁמוֹ.  {ס}	57 And I will make drunk her princes and her wise men, her governors and her deputies, and her mighty men; and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts. {S}
51.58 נח  כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, חֹמוֹת בָּבֶל הָרְחָבָה עַרְעֵר תִּתְעַרְעָר, וּשְׁעָרֶיהָ הַגְּבֹהִים, בָּאֵשׁ יִצַּתּוּ; וְיִגְעוּ עַמִּים בְּדֵי-רִיק וּלְאֻמִּים בְּדֵי-אֵשׁ, וְיָעֵפוּ.  {ס}	58 Thus saith the LORD of hosts: the broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly overthrown, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the peoples shall labour for vanity, and the nations for the fire; and they shall be weary. {S}
51.59 נט  הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יִרְמְיָהוּ הַנָּבִיא, אֶת-שְׂרָיָה בֶן-נֵרִיָּה בֶּן-מַחְסֵיָה, בְּלֶכְתּוֹ אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה בָּבֶל, בִּשְׁנַת הָרְבִעִית לְמָלְכוֹ; וּשְׂרָיָה, שַׂר מְנוּחָה.	59 The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. Now Seraiah was quartermaster.
51.60 ס  וַיִּכְתֹּב יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-תָּבוֹא אֶל-בָּבֶל--אֶל-סֵפֶר אֶחָד; אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, הַכְּתֻבִים אֶל-בָּבֶל.	60 And Jeremiah wrote in one book all the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written concerning Babylon.
51.61 סא  וַיֹּאמֶר יִרְמְיָהוּ, אֶל-שְׂרָיָה:  כְּבֹאֲךָ בָבֶל--וְרָאִיתָ, וְקָרָאתָ אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah: 'When thou comest to Babylon, then see that thou read all these words,
51.62 סב  וְאָמַרְתָּ, יְהוָה אַתָּה דִבַּרְתָּ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הַזֶּה לְהַכְרִיתוֹ, לְבִלְתִּי הֱיוֹת-בּוֹ יוֹשֵׁב, לְמֵאָדָם וְעַד-בְּהֵמָה:  כִּי-שִׁמְמוֹת עוֹלָם, תִּהְיֶה.	62 and say: O LORD, Thou hast spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that none shall dwell therein, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for ever.
51.63 סג  וְהָיָה, כְּכַלֹּתְךָ, לִקְרֹא, אֶת-הַסֵּפֶר הַזֶּה; תִּקְשֹׁר עָלָיו אֶבֶן, וְהִשְׁלַכְתּוֹ אֶל-תּוֹךְ פְּרָת.	63 And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of the Euphrates;
51.64 סד  וְאָמַרְתָּ, כָּכָה תִּשְׁקַע בָּבֶל וְלֹא-תָקוּם מִפְּנֵי הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי מֵבִיא עָלֶיהָ--וְיָעֵפוּ:  עַד-הֵנָּה, דִּבְרֵי יִרְמְיָהוּ.  {פ}	64 and thou shalt say: Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise again because of the evil that I will bring upon her; and they shall be weary.' Thus far are the words of Jeremiah. {P}
52.1 א  בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים וְאַחַת שָׁנָה, צִדְקִיָּהוּ בְמָלְכוֹ, וְאַחַת עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, מָלַךְ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ, חמיטל (חֲמוּטַל) בַּת-יִרְמְיָהוּ מִלִּבְנָה.	1 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
52.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, יְהוֹיָקִם.	2 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
52.3 ג  כִּי עַל-אַף יְהוָה, הָיְתָה בִּירוּשָׁלִַם וִיהוּדָה, עַד-הִשְׁלִיכוֹ אוֹתָם, מֵעַל פָּנָיו; וַיִּמְרֹד צִדְקִיָּהוּ, בְּמֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל.	3 For through the anger of the LORD did it come to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until He had cast them out from His presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
52.4 ד  וַיְהִי בַשָּׁנָה הַתְּשִׁעִית לְמָלְכוֹ, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָעֲשִׂירִי בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ, בָּא נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל הוּא וְכָל-חֵילוֹ עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיַּחֲנוּ עָלֶיהָ; וַיִּבְנוּ עָלֶיהָ דָּיֵק, סָבִיב.	4 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it round about.
52.5 ה  וַתָּבֹא הָעִיר, בַּמָּצוֹר, עַד עַשְׁתֵּי עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַמֶּלֶךְ צִדְקִיָּהוּ.	5 So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
52.6 ו  בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרְבִיעִי בְּתִשְׁעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ, וַיֶּחֱזַק הָרָעָב בָּעִיר; וְלֹא-הָיָה לֶחֶם, לְעַם הָאָרֶץ.	6 In the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
52.7 ז  וַתִּבָּקַע הָעִיר, וְכָל-אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה יִבְרְחוּ וַיֵּצְאוּ מֵהָעִיר לַיְלָה דֶּרֶךְ שַׁעַר בֵּין-הַחֹמֹתַיִם אֲשֶׁר עַל-גַּן הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְכַשְׂדִּים עַל-הָעִיר, סָבִיב; וַיֵּלְכוּ, דֶּרֶךְ הָעֲרָבָה.	7 Then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden--now the Chaldeans were against the city round about--and they went by the way of the Arabah.
52.8 ח  וַיִּרְדְּפוּ חֵיל-כַּשְׂדִּים אַחֲרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּשִּׂיגוּ אֶת-צִדְקִיָּהוּ בְּעַרְבֹת יְרֵחוֹ; וְכָל-חֵילוֹ--נָפֹצוּ, מֵעָלָיו.	8 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him.
52.9 ט  וַיִּתְפְּשׂוּ, אֶת-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וַיַּעֲלוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל רִבְלָתָה, בְּאֶרֶץ חֲמָת; וַיְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ, מִשְׁפָּטִים.	9 Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; and he gave judgment upon him.
52.10 י  וַיִּשְׁחַט מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל אֶת-בְּנֵי צִדְקִיָּהוּ, לְעֵינָיו; וְגַם אֶת-כָּל-שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, שָׁחַט בְּרִבְלָתָה.	10 And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes; he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.
52.11 יא  וְאֶת-עֵינֵי צִדְקִיָּהוּ, עִוֵּר; וַיַּאַסְרֵהוּ בַנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם, וַיְבִאֵהוּ מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל בָּבֶלָה, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ בבית- (בֵית-) הַפְּקֻדֹּת, עַד-יוֹם מוֹתוֹ.	11 And he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.
52.12 יב  וּבַחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי, בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ, הִיא שְׁנַת תְּשַׁע-עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, לַמֶּלֶךְ נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל--בָּא, נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, עָמַד לִפְנֵי מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.	12 Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, who stood before the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem;
52.13 יג  וַיִּשְׂרֹף אֶת-בֵּית-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-בֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְאֵת כָּל-בָּתֵּי יְרוּשָׁלִַם וְאֶת-כָּל-בֵּית הַגָּדוֹל, שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ.	13 and he burned the house of the LORD, and the king's house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great man's house, burned he with fire.
52.14 יד  וְאֶת-כָּל-חֹמוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, סָבִיב, נָתְצוּ כָּל-חֵיל כַּשְׂדִּים, אֲשֶׁר אֶת-רַב-טַבָּחִים.	14 And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, broke down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.
52.15 טו  וּמִדַּלּוֹת הָעָם וְאֶת-יֶתֶר הָעָם הַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּעִיר, וְאֶת-הַנֹּפְלִים אֲשֶׁר נָפְלוּ אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, וְאֵת, יֶתֶר הָאָמוֹן--הֶגְלָה, נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים.	15 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the poorest sort of the people, and the residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the residue of the multitude.
52.16 טז  וּמִדַּלּוֹת הָאָרֶץ--הִשְׁאִיר, נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים:  לְכֹרְמִים, וּלְיֹגְבִים.	16 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
52.17 יז  וְאֶת-עַמּוּדֵי הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר לְבֵית-יְהוָה, וְאֶת-הַמְּכֹנוֹת וְאֶת-יָם הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית-יְהוָה--שִׁבְּרוּ כַשְׂדִּים; וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-כָּל-נְחֻשְׁתָּם, בָּבֶלָה.	17 And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD, and the bases and the brazen sea that were in the house of the LORD, did the Chaldeans break in pieces, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.
52.18 יח  וְאֶת-הַסִּרוֹת וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמְזַמְּרוֹת וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקֹת וְאֶת-הַכַּפּוֹת, וְאֵת כָּל-כְּלֵי הַנְּחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר-יְשָׁרְתוּ בָהֶם--לָקָחוּ.	18 The pots also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the basins, and the pans, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.
52.19 יט  וְאֶת-הַסִּפִּים וְאֶת-הַמַּחְתּוֹת וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקוֹת וְאֶת-הַסִּירוֹת וְאֶת-הַמְּנֹרוֹת, וְאֶת-הַכַּפּוֹת וְאֶת-הַמְּנַקִּיּוֹת, אֲשֶׁר זָהָב זָהָב, וַאֲשֶׁר-כֶּסֶף כָּסֶף--לָקַח, רַב-טַבָּחִים.	19 And the cups, and the fire-pans, and the basins, and the pots, and the candlesticks, and the pans, and the bowls--that which was of gold, in gold, and that which was of silver, in silver--the captain of the guard took away.
52.20 כ  הָעַמּוּדִים שְׁנַיִם, הַיָּם אֶחָד וְהַבָּקָר שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר נְחֹשֶׁת אֲשֶׁר-תַּחַת הַמְּכֹנוֹת, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה הַמֶּלֶךְ שְׁלֹמֹה, לְבֵית יְהוָה--לֹא-הָיָה מִשְׁקָל, לִנְחֻשְׁתָּם כָּל-הַכֵּלִים הָאֵלֶּה.	20 The two pillars, the one sea, and the twelve brazen bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made for the house of the LORD--the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
52.21 כא  וְהָעַמּוּדִים, שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה קומה (קוֹמַת) הָעַמֻּד הָאֶחָד, וְחוּט שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה אַמָּה, יְסֻבֶּנּוּ; וְעָבְיוֹ אַרְבַּע אֶצְבָּעוֹת, נָבוּב.	21 And as for the pillars, the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a line of twelve cubits did compass it; and the thickness thereof was four fingers; it was hollow.
52.22 כב  וְכֹתֶרֶת עָלָיו נְחֹשֶׁת, וְקוֹמַת הַכֹּתֶרֶת הָאַחַת חָמֵשׁ אַמּוֹת, וּשְׂבָכָה וְרִמּוֹנִים עַל-הַכּוֹתֶרֶת סָבִיב, הַכֹּל נְחֹשֶׁת; וְכָאֵלֶּה לַעַמּוּד הַשֵּׁנִי, וְרִמּוֹנִים.	22 And a capital of brass was upon it; and the height of the one capital was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the capital round about, all of brass; and the second pillar also had like unto these, and pomegranates.
52.23 כג  וַיִּהְיוּ, הָרִמֹּנִים--תִּשְׁעִים וְשִׁשָּׁה, רוּחָה:  כָּל-הָרִמּוֹנִים מֵאָה עַל-הַשְּׂבָכָה, סָבִיב.  {ס}	23 And there were ninety and six pomegranates on the outside; all the pomegranates were a hundred upon the network round about. {S}
52.24 כד  וַיִּקַּח רַב-טַבָּחִים, אֶת-שְׂרָיָה כֹּהֵן הָרֹאשׁ, וְאֶת-צְפַנְיָה, כֹּהֵן הַמִּשְׁנֶה--וְאֶת-שְׁלֹשֶׁת, שֹׁמְרֵי הַסַּף.	24 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door;
52.25 כה  וּמִן-הָעִיר לָקַח סָרִיס אֶחָד אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה פָקִיד עַל-אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, וְשִׁבְעָה אֲנָשִׁים מֵרֹאֵי פְנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ אֲשֶׁר נִמְצְאוּ בָעִיר, וְאֵת סֹפֵר שַׂר הַצָּבָא, הַמַּצְבִּא אֶת-עַם הָאָרֶץ; וְשִׁשִּׁים אִישׁ מֵעַם הָאָרֶץ, הַנִּמְצְאִים בְּתוֹךְ הָעִיר.	25 and out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of war; and seven men of them that saw the king's face, who were found in the city; and the scribe of the captain of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.
52.26 כו  וַיִּקַּח אוֹתָם, נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים; וַיֹּלֶךְ אוֹתָם אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל, רִבְלָתָה.	26 And Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
52.27 כז  וַיַּכֶּה אוֹתָם מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל וַיְמִתֵם בְּרִבְלָה, בְּאֶרֶץ חֲמָת; וַיִּגֶל יְהוּדָה, מֵעַל אַדְמָתוֹ.  {ס}	27 And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land. {S}
52.28 כח  זֶה הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר הֶגְלָה נְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר:  בִּשְׁנַת-שֶׁבַע--יְהוּדִים, שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים וְעֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.	28 This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty;
52.29 כט  בִּשְׁנַת שְׁמוֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה, לִנְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר:  מִירוּשָׁלִַם--נֶפֶשׁ, שְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.	29 in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar, from Jerusalem, eight hundred thirty and two persons;
52.30 ל  בִּשְׁנַת שָׁלֹשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים, לִנְבוּכַדְרֶאצַּר, הֶגְלָה נְבוּזַרְאֲדָן רַב-טַבָּחִים, יְהוּדִים נֶפֶשׁ שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה; כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ, אַרְבַּעַת אֲלָפִים וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	30 in the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons; all the persons were four thousand and six hundred. {S}
52.31 לא  וַיְהִי בִשְׁלֹשִׁים וָשֶׁבַע שָׁנָה, לְגָלוּת יְהוֹיָכִן מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, בִּשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר חֹדֶשׁ, בְּעֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה לַחֹדֶשׁ:  נָשָׂא אֱוִיל מְרֹדַךְ מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל בִּשְׁנַת מַלְכֻתוֹ, אֶת-רֹאשׁ יְהוֹיָכִין מֶלֶךְ-יְהוּדָה, וַיֹּצֵא אֹתוֹ, מִבֵּית הכליא (הַכְּלוּא).	31 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison.
52.32 לב  וַיְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ, טֹבוֹת; וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-כִּסְאוֹ, מִמַּעַל לְכִסֵּא מלכים (הַמְּלָכִים) אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, בְּבָבֶל.	32 And he spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon.
52.33 לג  וְשִׁנָּה, אֵת בִּגְדֵי כִלְאוֹ; וְאָכַל לֶחֶם לְפָנָיו תָּמִיד, כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּו.	33 And he changed his prison garments, and did eat bread before him continually all the days of his life.
52.34 לד  וַאֲרֻחָתוֹ, אֲרֻחַת תָּמִיד נִתְּנָה-לּוֹ מֵאֵת מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ--עַד-יוֹם מוֹתוֹ:  כֹּל, יְמֵי חַיָּיו.  {ש}	34 And for his allowance, there was a continual allowance given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life. {P}
