1.1 א  אִישׁ הָיָה בְאֶרֶץ-עוּץ, אִיּוֹב שְׁמוֹ; וְהָיָה הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, תָּם וְיָשָׁר וִירֵא אֱלֹהִים--וְסָר מֵרָע.    1 There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was whole-hearted and upright, and one that feared God, and shunned evil.
1.2 ב  וַיִּוָּלְדוּ לוֹ שִׁבְעָה בָנִים, וְשָׁלוֹשׁ בָּנוֹת.    2 And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.
1.3 ג  וַיְהִי מִקְנֵהוּ שִׁבְעַת אַלְפֵי-צֹאן וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אַלְפֵי גְמַלִּים, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת צֶמֶד-בָּקָר וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת אֲתוֹנוֹת, וַעֲבֻדָּה, רַבָּה מְאֹד; וַיְהִי הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, גָּדוֹל מִכָּל-בְּנֵי-קֶדֶם.    3 His possessions also were seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the children of the east.
1.4 ד  וְהָלְכוּ בָנָיו וְעָשׂוּ מִשְׁתֶּה, בֵּית אִישׁ יוֹמוֹ; וְשָׁלְחוּ, וְקָרְאוּ לִשְׁלֹשֶׁת אַחְיֹתֵיהֶם, לֶאֱכֹל וְלִשְׁתּוֹת, עִמָּהֶם.    4 And his sons used to go and hold a feast in the house of each one upon his day; and they would send and invite their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
1.5 ה  וַיְהִי כִּי הִקִּיפוּ יְמֵי הַמִּשְׁתֶּה וַיִּשְׁלַח אִיּוֹב וַיְקַדְּשֵׁם, וְהִשְׁכִּים בַּבֹּקֶר וְהֶעֱלָה עֹלוֹת מִסְפַּר כֻּלָּם--כִּי אָמַר אִיּוֹב, אוּלַי חָטְאוּ בָנַי וּבֵרְכוּ אֱלֹהִים בִּלְבָבָם:  כָּכָה יַעֲשֶׂה אִיּוֹב, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {פ}    5 And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of them all; for Job said: 'It may be that my sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts.' Thus did Job continually. {P}
1.6 ו  וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם--וַיָּבֹאוּ בְּנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, לְהִתְיַצֵּב עַל-יְהוָה; וַיָּבוֹא גַם-הַשָּׂטָן, בְּתוֹכָם.    6 Now it fell upon a day, that the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them.
1.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הַשָּׂטָן, מֵאַיִן תָּבֹא; וַיַּעַן הַשָּׂטָן אֶת-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר, מִשּׁוּט בָּאָרֶץ, וּמֵהִתְהַלֵּךְ בָּהּ.    7 And the LORD said unto Satan: 'Whence comest thou?' Then Satan answered the LORD, and said: 'From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.'
1.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הַשָּׂטָן, הֲשַׂמְתָּ לִבְּךָ עַל-עַבְדִּי אִיּוֹב:  כִּי אֵין כָּמֹהוּ בָּאָרֶץ, אִישׁ תָּם וְיָשָׁר יְרֵא אֱלֹהִים וְסָר מֵרָע.    8 And the LORD said unto Satan: 'Hast thou considered My servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a whole-hearted and an upright man, one that feareth God, and shunneth evil?'
1.9 ט  וַיַּעַן הַשָּׂטָן אֶת-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  הַחִנָּם, יָרֵא אִיּוֹב אֱלֹהִים.    9 Then Satan answered the LORD, and said: 'Doth Job fear God for nought?
1.10 י  הֲלֹא-את (אַתָּה) שַׂכְתָּ בַעֲדוֹ וּבְעַד-בֵּיתוֹ, וּבְעַד כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ--מִסָּבִיב:  מַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו בֵּרַכְתָּ, וּמִקְנֵהוּ פָּרַץ בָּאָרֶץ.    10 Hast not Thou made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath, on every side? Thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his possessions are increased in the land.
1.11 יא  וְאוּלָם שְׁלַח-נָא יָדְךָ, וְגַע בְּכָל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ--אִם-לֹא עַל-פָּנֶיךָ, יְבָרְכֶךָּ.    11 But put forth Thy hand now, and touch all that he hath, surely he will blaspheme Thee to Thy face.'
1.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הַשָּׂטָן, הִנֵּה כָל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ בְּיָדֶךָ--רַק אֵלָיו, אַל-תִּשְׁלַח יָדֶךָ; וַיֵּצֵא, הַשָּׂטָן, מֵעִם, פְּנֵי יְהוָה.    12 And the LORD said unto Satan: 'Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thy hand.' So Satan went forth from the presence of the LORD.
1.13 יג  וַיְהִי, הַיּוֹם; וּבָנָיו וּבְנֹתָיו אֹכְלִים וְשֹׁתִים יַיִן, בְּבֵית אֲחִיהֶם הַבְּכוֹר.    13 And it fell on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house,
1.14 יד  וּמַלְאָךְ בָּא אֶל-אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר:  הַבָּקָר הָיוּ חֹרְשׁוֹת, וְהָאֲתֹנוֹת רֹעוֹת עַל-יְדֵיהֶם.    14 that there came a messenger unto Job, and said: 'The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside them;
1.15 טו  וַתִּפֹּל שְׁבָא וַתִּקָּחֵם, וְאֶת-הַנְּעָרִים הִכּוּ לְפִי-חָרֶב; וָאִמָּלְטָה רַק-אֲנִי לְבַדִּי, לְהַגִּיד לָךְ.    15 and the Sabeans made a raid, and took them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.'
1.16 טז  עוֹד זֶה מְדַבֵּר, וְזֶה בָּא וַיֹּאמַר, אֵשׁ אֱלֹהִים נָפְלָה מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַתִּבְעַר בַּצֹּאן וּבַנְּעָרִים וַתֹּאכְלֵם; וָאִמָּלְטָה רַק-אֲנִי לְבַדִּי, לְהַגִּיד לָךְ.    16 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said: 'A fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.'
1.17 יז  עוֹד זֶה מְדַבֵּר, וְזֶה בָּא וַיֹּאמַר, כַּשְׂדִּים שָׂמוּ שְׁלֹשָׁה רָאשִׁים וַיִּפְשְׁטוּ עַל-הַגְּמַלִּים וַיִּקָּחוּם, וְאֶת-הַנְּעָרִים הִכּוּ לְפִי-חָרֶב; וָאִמָּלְטָה רַק-אֲנִי לְבַדִּי, לְהַגִּיד לָךְ.    17 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said: 'The Chaldeans set themselves in three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have taken them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.'
1.18 יח  עַד זֶה מְדַבֵּר, וְזֶה בָּא וַיֹּאמַר:  בָּנֶיךָ וּבְנוֹתֶיךָ אֹכְלִים וְשֹׁתִים יַיִן, בְּבֵית אֲחִיהֶם הַבְּכוֹר.    18 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said: 'Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house;
1.19 יט  וְהִנֵּה רוּחַ גְּדוֹלָה בָּאָה מֵעֵבֶר הַמִּדְבָּר, וַיִּגַּע בְּאַרְבַּע פִּנּוֹת הַבַּיִת, וַיִּפֹּל עַל-הַנְּעָרִים, וַיָּמוּתוּ; וָאִמָּלְטָה רַק-אֲנִי לְבַדִּי, לְהַגִּיד לָךְ.    19 And, behold, there came a great wind from across the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young people, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.'
1.20 כ  וַיָּקָם אִיּוֹב וַיִּקְרַע אֶת-מְעִלוֹ, וַיָּגָז אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיִּפֹּל אַרְצָה, וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ.    20 Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped;
1.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר עָרֹם יָצָתִי מִבֶּטֶן אִמִּי, וְעָרֹם אָשׁוּב שָׁמָּה--יְהוָה נָתַן, וַיהוָה לָקָח; יְהִי שֵׁם יְהוָה, מְבֹרָךְ.    21 And he said; naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither; the LORD gave, and the LORD hath taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD.
1.22 כב  בְּכָל-זֹאת, לֹא-חָטָא אִיּוֹב; וְלֹא-נָתַן תִּפְלָה, לֵאלֹהִים.  {פ}    22 For all this Job sinned not, nor ascribed aught unseemly to God. {P}
2.1 א  וַיְהִי הַיּוֹם--וַיָּבֹאוּ בְּנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, לְהִתְיַצֵּב עַל-יְהוָה; וַיָּבוֹא גַם-הַשָּׂטָן בְּתֹכָם, לְהִתְיַצֵּב עַל-יְהוָה.    1 Again it fell upon a day, that the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the LORD.
2.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הַשָּׂטָן, אֵי מִזֶּה תָּבֹא; וַיַּעַן הַשָּׂטָן אֶת-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר, מִשֻּׁט בָּאָרֶץ, וּמֵהִתְהַלֵּךְ בָּהּ.    2 And the LORD said unto Satan: 'From whence comest thou?' And Satan answered the LORD, and said: 'From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.'
2.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הַשָּׂטָן, הֲשַׂמְתָּ לִבְּךָ אֶל-עַבְדִּי אִיּוֹב--כִּי אֵין כָּמֹהוּ בָּאָרֶץ אִישׁ תָּם וְיָשָׁר יְרֵא אֱלֹהִים, וְסָר מֵרָע; וְעֹדֶנּוּ מַחֲזִיק בְּתֻמָּתוֹ, וַתְּסִיתֵנִי בוֹ לְבַלְּעוֹ חִנָּם.    3 And the LORD said unto Satan: 'Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a whole-hearted and an upright man, one that feareth God, and shunneth evil? and he still holdeth fast his integrity, although thou didst move Me against him, to destroy him without cause.'
2.4 ד  וַיַּעַן הַשָּׂטָן אֶת-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  עוֹר בְּעַד-עוֹר, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר לָאִישׁ--יִתֵּן, בְּעַד נַפְשׁוֹ.    4 And Satan answered the LORD, and said: 'Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life.
2.5 ה  אוּלָם שְׁלַח-נָא יָדְךָ, וְגַע אֶל-עַצְמוֹ וְאֶל-בְּשָׂרוֹ--אִם-לֹא אֶל-פָּנֶיךָ, יְבָרְכֶךָּ.    5 But put forth Thy hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, surely he will blaspheme Thee to Thy face.'
2.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-הַשָּׂטָן, הִנּוֹ בְיָדֶךָ:  אַךְ, אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ שְׁמֹר.    6 And the LORD said unto Satan: 'Behold, he is in thy hand; only spare his life.'
2.7 ז  וַיֵּצֵא, הַשָּׂטָן, מֵאֵת, פְּנֵי יְהוָה; וַיַּךְ אֶת-אִיּוֹב בִּשְׁחִין רָע, מִכַּף רַגְלוֹ עד (וְעַד) קָדְקֳדוֹ.    7 So Satan went forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot even unto his crown.
2.8 ח  וַיִּקַּח-לוֹ חֶרֶשׂ, לְהִתְגָּרֵד בּוֹ; וְהוּא, יֹשֵׁב בְּתוֹךְ-הָאֵפֶר.    8 And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself therewith; and he sat among the ashes.
2.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ אִשְׁתּוֹ, עֹדְךָ מַחֲזִיק בְּתֻמָּתֶךָ; בָּרֵךְ אֱלֹהִים, וָמֻת.    9 Then said his wife unto him: 'Dost thou still hold fast thine integrity? blaspheme God, and die.'
2.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ, כְּדַבֵּר אַחַת הַנְּבָלוֹת תְּדַבֵּרִי--גַּם אֶת-הַטּוֹב נְקַבֵּל מֵאֵת הָאֱלֹהִים, וְאֶת-הָרָע לֹא נְקַבֵּל; בְּכָל-זֹאת לֹא-חָטָא אִיּוֹב, בִּשְׂפָתָיו.  {פ}    10 But he said unto her: 'Thou speakest as one of the impious women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?' For all this did not Job sin with his lips. {P}
2.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת רֵעֵי אִיּוֹב, אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת הַבָּאָה עָלָיו, וַיָּבֹאוּ אִישׁ מִמְּקֹמוֹ, אֱלִיפַז הַתֵּימָנִי וּבִלְדַּד הַשּׁוּחִי וְצוֹפַר הַנַּעֲמָתִי; וַיִּוָּעֲדוּ יַחְדָּו, לָבוֹא לָנוּד-לוֹ וּלְנַחֲמוֹ.    11 Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place, Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; and they made an appointment together to come to bemoan him and to comfort him.
2.12 יב  וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-עֵינֵיהֶם מֵרָחוֹק וְלֹא הִכִּירֻהוּ, וַיִּשְׂאוּ קוֹלָם וַיִּבְכּוּ; וַיִּקְרְעוּ אִישׁ מְעִלוֹ, וַיִּזְרְקוּ עָפָר עַל-רָאשֵׁיהֶם הַשָּׁמָיְמָה.    12 And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and threw dust upon their heads toward heaven.
2.13 יג  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ אִתּוֹ לָאָרֶץ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים וְשִׁבְעַת לֵילוֹת; וְאֵין-דֹּבֵר אֵלָיו, דָּבָר--כִּי רָאוּ, כִּי-גָדַל הַכְּאֵב מְאֹד.    13 So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spoke a word unto him; for they saw that his grief was very great.
3.1 א  אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, פָּתַח אִיּוֹב אֶת-פִּיהוּ, וַיְקַלֵּל, אֶת-יוֹמוֹ.  {פ}    1 After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day. {P}
3.2 ב                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    2 {S} And Job spoke, and said:
3.3 ג  יֹאבַד יוֹם, אִוָּלֶד בּוֹ;    וְהַלַּיְלָה אָמַר, הֹרָה גָבֶר.    3 Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night wherein it was said: 'A man-child is brought forth.'
3.4 ד  הַיּוֹם הַהוּא,    יְהִי-חֹשֶׁךְ: אַל-יִדְרְשֵׁהוּ אֱלוֹהַּ מִמַּעַל;    וְאַל-תּוֹפַע עָלָיו נְהָרָה.    4 Let that day be darkness; {N} let not God inquire after it from above, neither let the light shine upon it.
3.5 ה  יִגְאָלֻהוּ, חֹשֶׁךְ וְצַלְמָוֶת--תִּשְׁכָּן-עָלָיו עֲנָנָה;    יְבַעֲתֻהוּ, כִּמְרִירֵי יוֹם.    5 Let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own; let a cloud dwell upon it; let all that maketh black the day terrify it.
3.6 ו  הַלַּיְלָה הַהוּא,    יִקָּחֵהוּ-אֹפֶל: אַל-יִחַדְּ, בִּימֵי שָׁנָה;    בְּמִסְפַּר יְרָחִים, אַל-יָבֹא.    6 As for that night, let thick darkness seize upon it; {N} let it not rejoice among the days of the year; let it not come into the number of the months.
3.7 ז  הִנֵּה הַלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, יְהִי גַלְמוּד;    אַל-תָּבוֹא רְנָנָה בוֹ.    7 Lo, let that night be desolate; let no joyful voice come therein.
3.8 ח  יִקְּבֻהוּ אֹרְרֵי-יוֹם;    הָעֲתִידִים, עֹרֵר לִוְיָתָן.    8 Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to rouse up leviathan.
3.9 ט  יֶחְשְׁכוּ, כּוֹכְבֵי נִשְׁפּוֹ:    יְקַו-לְאוֹר וָאַיִן; וְאַל-יִרְאֶה, בְּעַפְעַפֵּי-שָׁחַר.    9 Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light, but have none; neither let it behold the eyelids of the morning;
3.10 י  כִּי לֹא סָגַר, דַּלְתֵי בִטְנִי;    וַיַּסְתֵּר עָמָל, מֵעֵינָי.    10 Because it shut not up the doors of my [mother's] womb, nor hid trouble from mine eyes.
3.11 יא  לָמָּה לֹּא מֵרֶחֶם אָמוּת;    מִבֶּטֶן יָצָאתִי וְאֶגְוָע.    11 Why died I not from the womb? Why did I not perish at birth?
3.12 יב  מַדּוּעַ, קִדְּמוּנִי בִרְכָּיִם;    וּמַה-שָּׁדַיִם, כִּי אִינָק.    12 Why did the knees receive me? And wherefore the breasts, that I should suck?
3.13 יג  כִּי-עַתָּה, שָׁכַבְתִּי וְאֶשְׁקוֹט;    יָשַׁנְתִּי, אָז יָנוּחַ לִי.    13 For now should I have lain still and been quiet; I should have slept; then had I been at rest--
3.14 יד  עִם-מְלָכִים, וְיֹעֲצֵי אָרֶץ;    הַבֹּנִים חֳרָבוֹת לָמוֹ.    14 With kings and counsellors of the earth, who built up waste places for themselves;
3.15 טו  אוֹ עִם-שָׂרִים, זָהָב לָהֶם;    הַמְמַלְאִים בָּתֵּיהֶם כָּסֶף.    15 Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver;
3.16 טז  אוֹ כְנֵפֶל טָמוּן, לֹא אֶהְיֶה;    כְּעֹלְלִים, לֹא-רָאוּ אוֹר.    16 Or as a hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants that never saw light.
3.17 יז  שָׁם רְשָׁעִים, חָדְלוּ רֹגֶז;    וְשָׁם יָנוּחוּ, יְגִיעֵי כֹחַ.    17 There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary are at rest.
3.18 יח  יַחַד, אֲסִירִים שַׁאֲנָנוּ;    לֹא שָׁמְעוּ, קוֹל נֹגֵשׂ.    18 There the prisoners are at ease together; they hear not the voice of the taskmaster.
3.19 יט  קָטֹן וְגָדוֹל, שָׁם הוּא;    וְעֶבֶד, חָפְשִׁי מֵאֲדֹנָיו.    19 The small and great are there alike; and the servant is free from his master.
3.20 כ  לָמָּה יִתֵּן לְעָמֵל אוֹר;    וְחַיִּים, לְמָרֵי נָפֶשׁ.    20 Wherewith is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul--
3.21 כא  הַמְחַכִּים לַמָּוֶת וְאֵינֶנּוּ;    וַיַּחְפְּרֻהוּ, מִמַּטְמוֹנִים.    21 Who long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures;
3.22 כב  הַשְּׂמֵחִים אֱלֵי-גִיל--    יָשִׂישׂוּ, כִּי יִמְצְאוּ-קָבֶר.    22 Who rejoice unto exultation, and are glad, when they can find the grave?--
3.23 כג  לְגֶבֶר, אֲשֶׁר-דַּרְכּוֹ נִסְתָּרָה;    וַיָּסֶךְ אֱלוֹהַּ בַּעֲדוֹ.    23 To a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in?
3.24 כד  כִּי-לִפְנֵי לַחְמִי, אַנְחָתִי תָבֹא;    וַיִּתְּכוּ כַמַּיִם, שַׁאֲגֹתָי.    24 For my sighing cometh instead of my food, and my roarings are poured out like water.
3.25 כה  כִּי פַחַד פָּחַדְתִּי, וַיֶּאֱתָיֵנִי;    וַאֲשֶׁר יָגֹרְתִּי, יָבֹא לִי.    25 For the thing which I did fear is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of hath overtaken me.
3.26 כו  לֹא שָׁלַוְתִּי, וְלֹא שָׁקַטְתִּי וְלֹא-נָחְתִּי;    וַיָּבֹא רֹגֶז.    26 I was not at ease, neither was I quiet, neither had I rest; but trouble came.
4.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, אֱלִיפַז הַתֵּימָנִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:
4.2 ב  הֲנִסָּה דָבָר אֵלֶיךָ תִּלְאֶה;    וַעְצֹר בְּמִלִּין, מִי יוּכָל.    2 If one venture a word unto thee, wilt thou be weary? But who can withhold himself from speaking?
4.3 ג  הִנֵּה, יִסַּרְתָּ רַבִּים;    וְיָדַיִם רָפוֹת תְּחַזֵּק.    3 Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the weak hands.
4.4 ד  כּוֹשֵׁל, יְקִימוּן מִלֶּיךָ;    וּבִרְכַּיִם כֹּרְעוֹת תְּאַמֵּץ.    4 Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast strengthened the feeble knees.
4.5 ה  כִּי עַתָּה, תָּבוֹא אֵלֶיךָ וַתֵּלֶא;    תִּגַּע עָדֶיךָ, וַתִּבָּהֵל.    5 But now it is come upon thee, and thou art weary; it toucheth thee, and thou art affrighted.
4.6 ו  הֲלֹא יִרְאָתְךָ, כִּסְלָתֶךָ;    תִּקְוָתְךָ, וְתֹם דְּרָכֶיךָ.    6 Is not thy fear of God thy confidence, and thy hope the integrity of thy ways?
4.7 ז  זְכָר-נָא--מִי הוּא נָקִי אָבָד;    וְאֵיפֹה, יְשָׁרִים נִכְחָדוּ.    7 Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? Or where were the upright cut off?
4.8 ח  כַּאֲשֶׁר רָאִיתִי, חֹרְשֵׁי אָוֶן;    וְזֹרְעֵי עָמָל יִקְצְרֻהוּ.    8 According as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow mischief, reap the same.
4.9 ט  מִנִּשְׁמַת אֱלוֹהַּ יֹאבֵדוּ;    וּמֵרוּחַ אַפּוֹ יִכְלוּ.    9 By the breath of God they perish, and by the blast of His anger are they consumed.
4.10 י  שַׁאֲגַת אַרְיֵה, וְקוֹל שָׁחַל;    וְשִׁנֵּי כְפִירִים נִתָּעוּ.    10 The lion roareth, and the fierce lion howleth--yet the teeth of the young lions are broken.
4.11 יא  לַיִשׁ, אֹבֵד מִבְּלִי-טָרֶף;    וּבְנֵי לָבִיא, יִתְפָּרָדוּ.    11 The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the whelps of the lioness are scattered abroad.
4.12 יב  וְאֵלַי, דָּבָר יְגֻנָּב;    וַתִּקַּח אָזְנִי, שֵׁמֶץ מֶנְהוּ.    12 Now a word was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a whisper thereof.
4.13 יג  בִּשְׂעִפִּים, מֵחֶזְיֹנוֹת לָיְלָה;    בִּנְפֹל תַּרְדֵּמָה, עַל-אֲנָשִׁים.    13 In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth on men,
4.14 יד  פַּחַד קְרָאַנִי, וּרְעָדָה;    וְרֹב עַצְמוֹתַי הִפְחִיד.    14 Fear came upon me, and trembling, and all my bones were made to shake.
4.15 טו  וְרוּחַ, עַל-פָּנַי יַחֲלֹף;    תְּסַמֵּר, שַׂעֲרַת בְּשָׂרִי.    15 Then a spirit passed before my face, that made the hair of my flesh to stand up.
4.16 טז  יַעֲמֹד, וְלֹא-אַכִּיר מַרְאֵהוּ--    תְּמוּנָה, לְנֶגֶד עֵינָי; דְּמָמָה וָקוֹל    אֶשְׁמָע.    16 It stood still, but I could not discern the appearance thereof; a form was before mine eyes; {N} I heard a still voice:
4.17 יז  הַאֱנוֹשׁ, מֵאֱלוֹהַּ יִצְדָּק;    אִם מֵעֹשֵׂהוּ, יִטְהַר-גָּבֶר.    17 'Shall mortal man be just before God? Shall a man be pure before his Maker?
4.18 יח  הֵן בַּעֲבָדָיו, לֹא יַאֲמִין;    וּבְמַלְאָכָיו, יָשִׂים תָּהֳלָה.    18 Behold, He putteth no trust in His servants, and His angels He chargeth with folly;
4.19 יט  אַף, שֹׁכְנֵי בָתֵּי-חֹמֶר--אֲשֶׁר-בֶּעָפָר יְסוֹדָם:    יְדַכְּאוּם, לִפְנֵי-עָשׁ.    19 How much more them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the moth!
4.20 כ  מִבֹּקֶר לָעֶרֶב יֻכַּתּוּ;    מִבְּלִי מֵשִׂים, לָנֶצַח יֹאבֵדוּ.    20 Betwixt morning and evening they are shattered; they perish for ever without any regarding it.
4.21 כא  הֲלֹא-נִסַּע יִתְרָם בָּם;    יָמוּתוּ, וְלֹא בְחָכְמָה.    21 Is not their tent-cord plucked up within them? They die, and that without wisdom.'
5.1 א  קְרָא-נָא, הֲיֵשׁ עוֹנֶךָּ;    וְאֶל-מִי מִקְּדֹשִׁים תִּפְנֶה.    1 Call now; is there any that will answer thee? And to which of the holy ones wilt thou turn?
5.2 ב  כִּי-לֶאֱוִיל, יַהֲרָג-כָּעַשׂ;    וּפֹתֶה, תָּמִית קִנְאָה.    2 For anger killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth the silly one.
5.3 ג  אֲנִי-רָאִיתִי, אֱוִיל מַשְׁרִישׁ;    וָאֶקּוֹב נָוֵהוּ פִתְאֹם.    3 I have seen the foolish taking root; but suddenly I beheld his habitation cursed.
5.4 ד  יִרְחֲקוּ בָנָיו מִיֶּשַׁע;    וְיִדַּכְּאוּ בַשַּׁעַר, וְאֵין מַצִּיל.    4 His children are far from safety, and are crushed in the gate, with none to deliver them.
5.5 ה  אֲשֶׁר קְצִירוֹ, רָעֵב יֹאכֵל--וְאֶל-מִצִּנִּים יִקָּחֵהוּ;    וְשָׁאַף צַמִּים חֵילָם.    5 Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the thorns, and the snare gapeth for their substance.
5.6 ו  כִּי, לֹא-יֵצֵא מֵעָפָר אָוֶן;    וּמֵאֲדָמָה, לֹא-יִצְמַח עָמָל.    6 For affliction cometh not forth from the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground;
5.7 ז  כִּי-אָדָם, לְעָמָל יוּלָּד;    וּבְנֵי-רֶשֶׁף, יַגְבִּיהוּ עוּף.    7 But man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
5.8 ח  אוּלָם--אֲנִי, אֶדְרֹשׁ אֶל-אֵל;    וְאֶל-אֱלֹהִים, אָשִׂים דִּבְרָתִי.    8 But as for me, I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause;
5.9 ט  עֹשֶׂה גְדֹלוֹת, וְאֵין חֵקֶר;    נִפְלָאוֹת, עַד-אֵין מִסְפָּר.    9 Who doeth great things and unsearchable, marvellous things without number;
5.10 י  הַנֹּתֵן מָטָר, עַל-פְּנֵי-אָרֶץ;    וְשֹׁלֵחַ מַיִם, עַל-פְּנֵי חוּצוֹת.    10 Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon the fields;
5.11 יא  לָשׂוּם שְׁפָלִים לְמָרוֹם;    וְקֹדְרִים, שָׂגְבוּ יֶשַׁע.    11 So that He setteth up on high those that are low, and those that mourn are exalted to safety.
5.12 יב  מֵפֵר, מַחְשְׁבוֹת עֲרוּמִים;    וְלֹא-תַעֲשֶׂנָה יְדֵיהֶם, תֻּשִׁיָּה.    12 He frustrateth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands can perform nothing substantial.
5.13 יג  לֹכֵד חֲכָמִים בְּעָרְמָם;    וַעֲצַת נִפְתָּלִים נִמְהָרָה.    13 He taketh the wise in their own craftiness; and the counsel of the wily is carried headlong.
5.14 יד  יוֹמָם יְפַגְּשׁוּ-חֹשֶׁךְ;    וְכַלַּיְלָה, יְמַשְׁשׁוּ בַצָּהֳרָיִם.    14 They meet with darkness in the day-time, and grope at noonday as in the night.
5.15 טו  וַיֹּשַׁע מֵחֶרֶב, מִפִּיהֶם;    וּמִיַּד חָזָק אֶבְיוֹן.    15 But He saveth from the sword of their mouth, even the needy from the hand of the mighty.
5.16 טז  וַתְּהִי לַדַּל תִּקְוָה;    וְעֹלָתָה, קָפְצָה פִּיהָ.    16 So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.
5.17 יז  הִנֵּה אַשְׁרֵי אֱנוֹשׁ, יוֹכִחֶנּוּ אֱלוֹהַּ;    וּמוּסַר שַׁדַּי, אַל-תִּמְאָס.    17 Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth; therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty.
5.18 יח  כִּי הוּא יַכְאִיב וְיֶחְבָּשׁ;    יִמְחַץ, וְיָדָו תִּרְפֶּינָה.    18 For He maketh sore, and bindeth up; He woundeth, and His hands make whole.
5.19 יט  בְּשֵׁשׁ צָרוֹת, יַצִּילֶךָּ;    וּבְשֶׁבַע, לֹא-יִגַּע בְּךָ רָע.    19 He will deliver thee in six troubles; yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.
5.20 כ  בְּרָעָב, פָּדְךָ מִמָּוֶת;    וּבְמִלְחָמָה, מִידֵי חָרֶב.    20 In famine He will redeem thee from death; and in war from the power of the sword.
5.21 כא  בְּשׁוֹט לָשׁוֹן, תֵּחָבֵא;    וְלֹא-תִירָא מִשֹּׁד, כִּי יָבוֹא.    21 Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue; neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.
5.22 כב  לְשֹׁד וּלְכָפָן תִּשְׂחָק;    וּמֵחַיַּת הָאָרֶץ, אַל-תִּירָא.    22 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh; neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
5.23 כג  כִּי עִם-אַבְנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה בְרִיתֶךָ;    וְחַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, הָשְׁלְמָה-לָּךְ.    23 For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field; and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
5.24 כד  וְיָדַעְתָּ, כִּי-שָׁלוֹם אָהֳלֶךָ;    וּפָקַדְתָּ נָוְךָ, וְלֹא תֶחֱטָא.    24 And thou shalt know that thy tent is in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt miss nothing.
5.25 כה  וְיָדַעְתָּ, כִּי-רַב זַרְעֶךָ;    וְצֶאֱצָאֶיךָ, כְּעֵשֶׂב הָאָרֶץ.    25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
5.26 כו  תָּבוֹא בְכֶלַח אֱלֵי-קָבֶר;    כַּעֲלוֹת גָּדִישׁ בְּעִתּוֹ.    26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a ripe age, like as a shock of corn cometh in in its season.
5.27 כז  הִנֵּה-זֹאת חֲקַרְנוּהָ כֶּן-הִיא;    שְׁמָעֶנָּה, וְאַתָּה דַע-לָךְ.    27 Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy good.
6.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
6.2 ב  לוּ--שָׁקוֹל יִשָּׁקֵל כַּעְשִׂי;    והיתי (וְהַוָּתִי), בְּמֹאזְנַיִם יִשְׂאוּ-יָחַד.    2 Oh that my vexation were but weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances altogether!
6.3 ג  כִּי-עַתָּה--מֵחוֹל יַמִּים יִכְבָּד;    עַל-כֵּן, דְּבָרַי לָעוּ.    3 For now it would be heavier than the sand of the seas; therefore are my words broken.
6.4 ד  כִּי חִצֵּי שַׁדַּי, עִמָּדִי--אֲשֶׁר חֲמָתָם, שֹׁתָה רוּחִי;    בִּעוּתֵי אֱלוֹהַּ יַעַרְכוּנִי.    4 For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof my spirit drinketh up; the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
6.5 ה  הֲיִנְהַק-פֶּרֶא עֲלֵי-דֶשֶׁא;    אִם יִגְעֶה-שּׁוֹר, עַל-בְּלִילוֹ.    5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?
6.6 ו  הֲיֵאָכֵל תָּפֵל, מִבְּלִי-מֶלַח;    אִם-יֶשׁ-טַעַם, בְּרִיר חַלָּמוּת.    6 Can that which hath no savour be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the juice of mallows?
6.7 ז  מֵאֲנָה לִנְגּוֹעַ נַפְשִׁי;    הֵמָּה, כִּדְוֵי לַחְמִי.    7 My soul refuseth to touch them; they are as the sickness of my flesh.
6.8 ח  מִי-יִתֵּן, תָּבוֹא שֶׁאֱלָתִי;    וְתִקְוָתִי, יִתֵּן אֱלוֹהַּ.    8 Oh that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
6.9 ט  וְיֹאֵל אֱלוֹהַּ, וִידַכְּאֵנִי;    יַתֵּר יָדוֹ, וִיבַצְּעֵנִי.    9 Even that it would please God to crush me; that He would let loose His hand, and cut me off!
6.10 י  וּתְהִי-עוֹד, נֶחָמָתִי--    וַאֲסַלְּדָה בְחִילָה, לֹא יַחְמוֹל: כִּי-לֹא כִחַדְתִּי,    אִמְרֵי קָדוֹשׁ.    10 Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would exult in pain, though He spare not; {N} for I have not denied the words of the Holy One.
6.11 יא  מַה-כֹּחִי כִי-אֲיַחֵל;    וּמַה-קִּצִּי, כִּי-אַאֲרִיךְ נַפְשִׁי.    11 What is my strength, that I should wait? and what is mine end, that I should be patient?
6.12 יב  אִם-כֹּחַ אֲבָנִים כֹּחִי;    אִם-בְּשָׂרִי נָחוּשׁ.    12 Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?
6.13 יג  הַאִם אֵין עֶזְרָתִי בִי;    וְתֻשִׁיָּה, נִדְּחָה מִמֶּנִּי.    13 Is it that I have no help in me, and that sound wisdom is driven quite from me?
6.14 יד  לַמָּס מֵרֵעֵהוּ חָסֶד;    וְיִרְאַת שַׁדַּי יַעֲזוֹב.    14 To him that is ready to faint kindness is due from his friend, even to him that forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.
6.15 טו  אַחַי, בָּגְדוּ כְמוֹ-נָחַל;    כַּאֲפִיק נְחָלִים יַעֲבֹרוּ.    15 My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, as the channel of brooks that overflow,
6.16 טז  הַקֹּדְרִים מִנִּי-קָרַח;    עָלֵימוֹ, יִתְעַלֶּם-שָׁלֶג.    16 Which are black by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow hideth itself;
6.17 יז  בְּעֵת יְזֹרְבוּ נִצְמָתוּ;    בְּחֻמּוֹ, נִדְעֲכוּ מִמְּקוֹמָם.    17 What time they wax warm, they vanish, when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.
6.18 יח  יִלָּפְתוּ, אָרְחוֹת דַּרְכָּם;    יַעֲלוּ בַתֹּהוּ וְיֹאבֵדוּ.    18 The paths of their way do wind, they go up into the waste, and are lost.
6.19 יט  הִבִּיטוּ, אָרְחוֹת תֵּמָא;    הֲלִיכֹת שְׁבָא, קִוּוּ-לָמוֹ.    19 The caravans of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them--
6.20 כ  בֹּשׁוּ כִּי-בָטָח;    בָּאוּ עָדֶיהָ, וַיֶּחְפָּרוּ.    20 They were ashamed because they had hoped; they came thither, and were confounded.
6.21 כא  כִּי-עַתָּה, הֱיִיתֶם לֹא;    תִּרְאוּ חֲתַת, וַתִּירָאוּ.    21 For now ye are become His; ye see a terror, and are afraid.
6.22 כב  הֲכִי-אָמַרְתִּי, הָבוּ לִי;    וּמִכֹּחֲכֶם, שִׁחֲדוּ בַעֲדִי.    22 Did I say: 'Give unto me'? or: 'Offer a present for me of your substance'?
6.23 כג  וּמַלְּטוּנִי מִיַּד-צָר;    וּמִיַּד עָרִיצִים תִּפְדּוּנִי.    23 or: 'Deliver me from the adversary's hand'? or: 'Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors'?
6.24 כד  הוֹרוּנִי, וַאֲנִי אַחֲרִישׁ;    וּמַה-שָּׁגִיתִי, הָבִינוּ לִי.    24 Teach me, and I will hold my peace; and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.
6.25 כה  מַה-נִּמְרְצוּ אִמְרֵי-יֹשֶׁר;    וּמַה-יּוֹכִיחַ הוֹכֵחַ מִכֶּם.    25 How forcible are words of uprightness! But what doth your arguing argue?
6.26 כו  הַלְהוֹכַח מִלִּים תַּחְשֹׁבוּ;    וּלְרוּחַ, אִמְרֵי נֹאָשׁ.    26 Do ye hold words to be an argument, but the speeches of one that is desperate to be wind?
6.27 כז  אַף-עַל-יָתוֹם תַּפִּילוּ;    וְתִכְרוּ, עַל-רֵיעֲכֶם.    27 Yea, ye would cast lots upon the fatherless, and dig a pit for your friend.
6.28 כח  וְעַתָּה, הוֹאִילוּ פְנוּ-בִי;    וְעַל-פְּנֵיכֶם, אִם-אֲכַזֵּב.    28 Now therefore be pleased to look upon me; for surely I shall not lie to your face.
6.29 כט  שׁוּבוּ-נָא, אַל-תְּהִי עַוְלָה;    ושבי (וְשֻׁבוּ) עוֹד, צִדְקִי-בָהּ.    29 Return, I pray you, let there be no injustice; yea, return again, my cause is righteous.
6.30 ל  הֲיֵשׁ-בִּלְשׁוֹנִי עַוְלָה;    אִם-חִכִּי, לֹא-יָבִין הַוּוֹת.    30 Is there injustice on my tongue? Cannot my taste discern crafty devices?
7.1 א  הֲלֹא-צָבָא לֶאֱנוֹשׁ על- (עֲלֵי-) אָרֶץ;    וְכִימֵי שָׂכִיר יָמָיו.    1 Is there not a time of service to man upon earth? And are not his days like the days of a hireling?
7.2 ב  כְּעֶבֶד יִשְׁאַף-צֵל;    וּכְשָׂכִיר, יְקַוֶּה פָעֳלוֹ.    2 As a servant that eagerly longeth for the shadow, and as a hireling that looketh for his wages;
7.3 ג  כֵּן הָנְחַלְתִּי לִי, יַרְחֵי-שָׁוְא;    וְלֵילוֹת עָמָל, מִנּוּ-לִי.    3 So am I made to possess--months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.
7.4 ד  אִם-שָׁכַבְתִּי--    וְאָמַרְתִּי, מָתַי אָקוּם וּמִדַּד-עָרֶב; וְשָׂבַעְתִּי נְדֻדִים    עֲדֵי-נָשֶׁף.    4 When I lie down, I say: 'When shall I arise?' But the night is long, {N} and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.
7.5 ה  לָבַשׁ בְּשָׂרִי רִמָּה, וגיש (וְגוּשׁ) עָפָר;    עוֹרִי רָגַע, וַיִּמָּאֵס.    5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin closeth up and breaketh out afresh.
7.6 ו  יָמַי קַלּוּ, מִנִּי-אָרֶג;    וַיִּכְלוּ, בְּאֶפֶס תִּקְוָה.    6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope.
7.7 ז  זְכֹר, כִּי-רוּחַ חַיָּי;    לֹא-תָשׁוּב עֵינִי, לִרְאוֹת טוֹב.    7 O remember that my life is a breath; mine eye shall no more see good.
7.8 ח  לֹא-תְשׁוּרֵנִי, עֵין רֹאִי;    עֵינֶיךָ בִּי וְאֵינֶנִּי.    8 The eye of him that seeth me shall behold me no more; while Thine eyes are upon me, I am gone.
7.9 ט  כָּלָה עָנָן, וַיֵּלַךְ;    כֵּן יוֹרֵד שְׁאוֹל, לֹא יַעֲלֶה.    9 As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away, so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more.
7.10 י  לֹא-יָשׁוּב עוֹד לְבֵיתוֹ;    וְלֹא-יַכִּירֶנּוּ עוֹד מְקֹמוֹ.    10 He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more.
7.11 יא  גַּם-אֲנִי,    לֹא אֶחֱשָׂךְ-פִּי: אֲדַבְּרָה, בְּצַר רוּחִי;    אָשִׂיחָה, בְּמַר נַפְשִׁי.    11 Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; {N} I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
7.12 יב  הֲיָם-אָנִי, אִם-תַּנִּין:    כִּי-תָשִׂים עָלַי מִשְׁמָר.    12 Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, that Thou settest a watch over me?
7.13 יג  כִּי-אָמַרְתִּי, תְּנַחֲמֵנִי עַרְשִׂי;    יִשָּׂא בְשִׂיחִי, מִשְׁכָּבִי.    13 When I say: 'My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint';
7.14 יד  וְחִתַּתַּנִי בַחֲלֹמוֹת;    וּמֵחֶזְיֹנוֹת תְּבַעֲתַנִּי.    14 Then Thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions;
7.15 טו  וַתִּבְחַר מַחֲנָק נַפְשִׁי;    מָוֶת, מֵעַצְמוֹתָי.    15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than these my bones.
7.16 טז  מָאַסְתִּי, לֹא-לְעֹלָם אֶחְיֶה;    חֲדַל מִמֶּנִּי, כִּי-הֶבֶל יָמָי.    16 I loathe it; I shall not live alway; let me alone; for my days are vanity.
7.17 יז  מָה-אֱנוֹשׁ, כִּי תְגַדְּלֶנּוּ;    וְכִי-תָשִׁית אֵלָיו לִבֶּךָ.    17 What is man, that Thou shouldest magnify him, and that Thou shouldest set Thy heart upon him,
7.18 יח  וַתִּפְקְדֶנּוּ לִבְקָרִים;    לִרְגָעִים, תִּבְחָנֶנּוּ.    18 And that Thou shouldest remember him every morning, and try him every moment?
7.19 יט  כַּמָּה, לֹא-תִשְׁעֶה מִמֶּנִּי;    לֹא-תַרְפֵּנִי, עַד-בִּלְעִי רֻקִּי.    19 How long wilt Thou not look away from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?
7.20 כ  חָטָאתִי, מָה אֶפְעַל לָךְ--    נֹצֵר הָאָדָם: לָמָה שַׂמְתַּנִי לְמִפְגָּע לָךְ;    וָאֶהְיֶה עָלַי לְמַשָּׂא.    20 If I have sinned, what do I unto Thee, O Thou watcher of men? {N} Why hast Thou set me as a mark for Thee, so that I am a burden to myself?
7.21 כא  וּמֶה, לֹא-תִשָּׂא פִשְׁעִי--    וְתַעֲבִיר אֶת-עֲוֺנִי: כִּי-עַתָּה, לֶעָפָר אֶשְׁכָּב;    וְשִׁחַרְתַּנִי וְאֵינֶנִּי.    21 And why dost Thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? {N} For now shall I lie down in the dust; and Thou wilt seek me, but I shall not be.
8.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, בִּלְדַּד הַשּׁוּחִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said:
8.2 ב  עַד-אָן, תְּמַלֶּל-אֵלֶּה;    וְרוּחַ כַּבִּיר, אִמְרֵי-פִיךָ.    2 How long wilt thou speak these things, seeing that the words of thy mouth are as a mighty wind?
8.3 ג  הַאֵל, יְעַוֵּת מִשְׁפָּט;    וְאִם-שַׁדַּי, יְעַוֵּת-צֶדֶק.    3 Doth God pervert judgment? Or doth the Almighty pervert justice?
8.4 ד  אִם-בָּנֶיךָ חָטְאוּ-לוֹ;    וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם, בְּיַד-פִּשְׁעָם.    4 If thy children sinned against Him, He delivered them into the hand of their transgression.
8.5 ה  אִם-אַתָּה, תְּשַׁחֵר אֶל-אֵל;    וְאֶל-שַׁדַּי, תִּתְחַנָּן.    5 If thou wouldest seek earnestly unto God, and make thy supplication to the Almighty;
8.6 ו  אִם-זַךְ וְיָשָׁר, אָתָּה:    כִּי-עַתָּה, יָעִיר עָלֶיךָ; וְשִׁלַּם, נְוַת צִדְקֶךָ.    6 If thou wert pure and upright; surely now He would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
8.7 ז  וְהָיָה רֵאשִׁיתְךָ מִצְעָר;    וְאַחֲרִיתְךָ, יִשְׂגֶּה מְאֹד.    7 And though thy beginning was small, yet thy end should greatly increase.
8.8 ח  כִּי-שְׁאַל-נָא, לְדֹר רִישׁוֹן;    וְכוֹנֵן, לְחֵקֶר אֲבוֹתָם.    8 For inquire, I pray thee, of the former generation, and apply thyself to that which their fathers have searched out--
8.9 ט  כִּי-תְמוֹל אֲנַחְנוּ, וְלֹא נֵדָע:    כִּי צֵל יָמֵינוּ עֲלֵי-אָרֶץ.    9 For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow--
8.10 י  הֲלֹא-הֵם יוֹרוּךָ, יֹאמְרוּ לָךְ;    וּמִלִּבָּם, יוֹצִאוּ מִלִּים.    10 Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?
8.11 יא  הֲיִגְאֶה-גֹּמֶא, בְּלֹא בִצָּה;    יִשְׂגֶּה-אָחוּ בְלִי-מָיִם.    11 Can the rush shoot up without mire? Can the reed-grass grow without water?
8.12 יב  עֹדֶנּוּ בְאִבּוֹ, לֹא יִקָּטֵף;    וְלִפְנֵי כָל-חָצִיר יִיבָשׁ.    12 Whilst it is yet in its greenness, and not cut down, it withereth before any other herb.
8.13 יג  כֵּן--אָרְחוֹת, כָּל-שֹׁכְחֵי אֵל;    וְתִקְוַת חָנֵף תֹּאבֵד.    13 So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hope of the godless man shall perish;
8.14 יד  אֲשֶׁר-יָקוֹט כִּסְלוֹ;    וּבֵית עַכָּבִישׁ, מִבְטַחוֹ.    14 Whose confidence is gossamer, and whose trust is a spider's web.
8.15 טו  יִשָּׁעֵן עַל-בֵּיתוֹ, וְלֹא יַעֲמֹד;    יַחֲזִיק בּוֹ, וְלֹא יָקוּם.    15 He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold fast thereby, but it shall not endure.
8.16 טז  רָטֹב הוּא, לִפְנֵי-שָׁמֶשׁ;    וְעַל גַּנָּתוֹ, יֹנַקְתּוֹ תֵצֵא.    16 He is green before the sun, and his shoots go forth over his garden.
8.17 יז  עַל-גַּל, שָׁרָשָׁיו יְסֻבָּכוּ;    בֵּית אֲבָנִים יֶחֱזֶה.    17 His roots are wrapped about the heap, he beholdeth the place of stones.
8.18 יח  אִם-יְבַלְּעֶנּוּ מִמְּקֹמוֹ;    וְכִחֶשׁ בּוֹ, לֹא רְאִיתִיךָ.    18 If he be destroyed from his place, then it shall deny him: 'I have not seen thee.'
8.19 יט  הֶן-הוּא, מְשׂוֹשׂ דַּרְכּוֹ;    וּמֵעָפָר, אַחֵר יִצְמָחוּ.    19 Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others spring.
8.20 כ  הֶן-אֵל, לֹא יִמְאַס-תָּם;    וְלֹא-יַחֲזִיק, בְּיַד-מְרֵעִים.    20 Behold, God will not cast away an innocent man, neither will He uphold the evil-doers;
8.21 כא  עַד-יְמַלֵּה שְׂחוֹק פִּיךָ;    וּשְׂפָתֶיךָ תְרוּעָה.    21 Till He fill thy mouth with laughter, and thy lips with shouting.
8.22 כב  שֹׂנְאֶיךָ יִלְבְּשׁוּ-בֹשֶׁת;    וְאֹהֶל רְשָׁעִים אֵינֶנּוּ.    22 They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the tent of the wicked shall be no more.
9.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
9.2 ב  אָמְנָם, יָדַעְתִּי כִי-כֵן;    וּמַה-יִּצְדַּק אֱנוֹשׁ עִם-אֵל.    2 Of a truth I know that it is so; and how can man be just with God?
9.3 ג  אִם-יַחְפֹּץ, לָרִיב עִמּוֹ--    לֹא-יַעֲנֶנּוּ, אַחַת מִנִּי-אָלֶף.    3 If one should desire to contend with Him, he could not answer Him one of a thousand.
9.4 ד  חֲכַם לֵבָב, וְאַמִּיץ כֹּחַ--    מִי-הִקְשָׁה אֵלָיו, וַיִּשְׁלָם.    4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who hath hardened himself against Him, and prospered?
9.5 ה  הַמַּעְתִּיק הָרִים, וְלֹא יָדָעוּ--    אֲשֶׁר הֲפָכָם בְּאַפּוֹ.    5 Who removeth the mountains, and they know it not, when He overturneth them in His anger.
9.6 ו  הַמַּרְגִּיז אֶרֶץ, מִמְּקוֹמָהּ;    וְעַמּוּדֶיהָ, יִתְפַּלָּצוּן.    6 Who shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.
9.7 ז  הָאֹמֵר לַחֶרֶס, וְלֹא יִזְרָח;    וּבְעַד כּוֹכָבִים יַחְתֹּם.    7 Who commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the stars.
9.8 ח  נֹטֶה שָׁמַיִם לְבַדּוֹ;    וְדוֹרֵךְ, עַל-בָּמֳתֵי יָם.    8 Who alone stretcheth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves of the sea.
9.9 ט  עֹשֶׂה-עָשׁ, כְּסִיל וְכִימָה;    וְחַדְרֵי תֵמָן.    9 Who maketh the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, and the chambers of the south.
9.10 י  עֹשֶׂה גְדֹלוֹת, עַד-אֵין חֵקֶר;    וְנִפְלָאוֹת, עַד-אֵין מִסְפָּר.    10 Who doeth great things past finding out; yea, marvellous things without number.
9.11 יא  הֵן יַעֲבֹר עָלַי, וְלֹא אֶרְאֶה;    וְיַחֲלֹף, וְלֹא-אָבִין לוֹ.    11 Lo, He goeth by me, and I see Him not. He passeth on also, but I perceive Him not.
9.12 יב  הֵן יַחְתֹּף, מִי יְשִׁיבֶנּוּ;    מִי-יֹאמַר אֵלָיו, מַה-תַּעֲשֶׂה.    12 Behold, He snatcheth away, who can hinder Him? Who will say unto Him: 'What doest Thou?'
9.13 יג  אֱלוֹהַּ, לֹא-יָשִׁיב אַפּוֹ;    תַּחְתָּו שָׁחֲחוּ, עֹזְרֵי רָהַב.    13 God will not withdraw His anger; the helpers of Rahab did stoop under Him.
9.14 יד  אַף, כִּי-אָנֹכִי אֶעֱנֶנּוּ;    אֶבְחֲרָה דְבָרַי עִמּוֹ.    14 How much less shall I answer Him, and choose out my arguments with Him?
9.15 טו  אֲשֶׁר אִם-צָדַקְתִּי, לֹא אֶעֱנֶה;    לִמְשֹׁפְטִי, אֶתְחַנָּן.    15 Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer; I would make supplication to Him that contendeth with me.
9.16 טז  אִם-קָרָאתִי וַיַּעֲנֵנִי--    לֹא-אַאֲמִין, כִּי-יַאֲזִין קוֹלִי.    16 If I had called, and He had answered me; yet would I not believe that He would hearken unto my voice--
9.17 יז  אֲשֶׁר-בִּשְׂעָרָה יְשׁוּפֵנִי;    וְהִרְבָּה פְצָעַי חִנָּם.    17 He that would break me with a tempest, and multiply my wounds without cause;
9.18 יח  לֹא-יִתְּנֵנִי, הָשֵׁב רוּחִי:    כִּי יַשְׂבִּעַנִי, מַמְּרֹרִים.    18 That would not suffer me to take my breath, but fill me with bitterness.
9.19 יט  אִם-לְכֹחַ אַמִּיץ הִנֵּה;    וְאִם-לְמִשְׁפָּט, מִי יוֹעִידֵנִי.    19 If it be a matter of strength, lo, He is mighty! and if of justice, who will appoint me a time?
9.20 כ  אִם-אֶצְדָּק, פִּי יַרְשִׁיעֵנִי;    תָּם-אָנִי, וַיַּעְקְשֵׁנִי.    20 Though I be righteous, mine own mouth shall condemn me; though I be innocent, He shall prove me perverse.
9.21 כא  תָּם-אָנִי, לֹא-אֵדַע נַפְשִׁי;    אֶמְאַס חַיָּי.    21 I am innocent--I regard not myself, I despise my life.
9.22 כב  אַחַת, הִיא:    עַל-כֵּן אָמַרְתִּי--תָּם וְרָשָׁע, הוּא מְכַלֶּה.    22 It is all one--therefore I say: He destroyeth the innocent and the wicked.
9.23 כג  אִם-שׁוֹט, יָמִית פִּתְאֹם--    לְמַסַּת נְקִיִּם יִלְעָג.    23 If the scourge slay suddenly, He will mock at the calamity of the guiltless.
9.24 כד  אֶרֶץ, נִתְּנָה בְיַד-רָשָׁע--    פְּנֵי-שֹׁפְטֶיהָ יְכַסֶּה; אִם-לֹא אֵפוֹא    מִי-הוּא.    24 The earth is given into the hand of the wicked; he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; {N} if it be not He, who then is it?
9.25 כה  וְיָמַי קַלּוּ, מִנִּי-רָץ;    בָּרְחוּ, לֹא-רָאוּ טוֹבָה.    25 Now my days are swifter than a runner; they flee away, they see no good.
9.26 כו  חָלְפוּ, עִם-אֳנִיּוֹת אֵבֶה;    כְּנֶשֶׁר, יָטוּשׂ עֲלֵי-אֹכֶל.    26 They are passed away as the swift ships; as the vulture that swoopeth on the prey.
9.27 כז  אִם-אָמְרִי, אֶשְׁכְּחָה שִׂיחִי;    אֶעֶזְבָה פָנַי וְאַבְלִיגָה.    27 If I say: 'I will forget my complaint, I will put off my sad countenance, and be of good cheer',
9.28 כח  יָגֹרְתִּי כָל-עַצְּבֹתָי;    יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-לֹא תְנַקֵּנִי.    28 I am afraid of all my pains, I know that Thou wilt not hold me guiltless.
9.29 כט  אָנֹכִי אֶרְשָׁע;    לָמָּה-זֶּה, הֶבֶל אִיגָע.    29 I shall be condemned; why then do I labour in vain?
9.30 ל  אִם-הִתְרָחַצְתִּי במו- (בְמֵי-) שָׁלֶג;    וַהֲזִכּוֹתִי, בְּבֹר כַּפָּי.    30 If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean;
9.31 לא  אָז, בַּשַּׁחַת תִּטְבְּלֵנִי;    וְתִעֲבוּנִי, שַׂלְמוֹתָי.    31 Yet wilt Thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
9.32 לב  כִּי-לֹא-אִישׁ כָּמוֹנִי אֶעֱנֶנּוּ;    נָבוֹא יַחְדָּו, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט.    32 For He is not a man, as I am, that I should answer Him, that we should come together in judgment.
9.33 לג  לֹא יֵשׁ-בֵּינֵינוּ מוֹכִיחַ--    יָשֵׁת יָדוֹ עַל-שְׁנֵינוּ.    33 There is no arbiter betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.
9.34 לד  יָסֵר מֵעָלַי שִׁבְטוֹ;    וְאֵמָתוֹ, אַל-תְּבַעֲתַנִּי.    34 Let Him take His rod away from me, and let not His terror make me afraid;
9.35 לה  אֲדַבְּרָה, וְלֹא אִירָאֶנּוּ:    כִּי לֹא-כֵן אָנֹכִי, עִמָּדִי.    35 Then would I speak, and not fear Him; for I am not so with myself.
10.1 א  נָקְטָה נַפְשִׁי, בְּחַיָּי:    אֶעֶזְבָה עָלַי שִׂיחִי; אֲדַבְּרָה, בְּמַר נַפְשִׁי.    1 My soul is weary of my life; I will give free course to my complaint; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
10.2 ב  אֹמַר אֶל-אֱלוֹהַּ, אַל-תַּרְשִׁיעֵנִי;    הוֹדִיעֵנִי, עַל מַה-תְּרִיבֵנִי.    2 I will say unto God: Do not condemn me; make me know wherefore Thou contendest with me.
10.3 ג  הֲטוֹב לְךָ, כִּי-תַעֲשֹׁק--כִּי-תִמְאַס, יְגִיעַ כַּפֶּיךָ;    וְעַל-עֲצַת רְשָׁעִים הוֹפָעְתָּ.    3 Is it good unto Thee that Thou shouldest oppress, that Thou shouldest despise the work of Thy hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
10.4 ד  הַעֵינֵי בָשָׂר לָךְ:    אִם-כִּרְאוֹת אֱנוֹשׁ תִּרְאֶה.    4 Hast Thou eyes of flesh? or seest Thou as man seeth?
10.5 ה  הֲכִימֵי אֱנוֹשׁ יָמֶיךָ:    אִם-שְׁנוֹתֶיךָ, כִּימֵי גָבֶר.    5 Are Thy days as the days of man, or Thy years as a man's days,
10.6 ו  כִּי-תְבַקֵּשׁ לַעֲוֺנִי;    וּלְחַטָּאתִי תִדְרוֹשׁ.    6 That Thou inquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin,
10.7 ז  עַל-דַּעְתְּךָ, כִּי-לֹא אֶרְשָׁע;    וְאֵין מִיָּדְךָ מַצִּיל.    7 Although Thou knowest that I shall not be condemned; and there is none that can deliver out of Thy hand?
10.8 ח  יָדֶיךָ עִצְּבוּנִי, וַיַּעֲשׂוּנִי;    יַחַד סָבִיב, וַתְּבַלְּעֵנִי.    8 Thy hands have framed me and fashioned me together round about; yet Thou dost destroy me!
10.9 ט  זְכָר-נָא, כִּי-כַחֹמֶר עֲשִׂיתָנִי;    וְאֶל-עָפָר תְּשִׁיבֵנִי.    9 Remember, I beseech Thee, that Thou hast fashioned me as clay; and wilt Thou bring me into dust again?
10.10 י  הֲלֹא כֶחָלָב, תַּתִּיכֵנִי;    וְכַגְּבִנָּה, תַּקְפִּיאֵנִי.    10 Hast Thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?
10.11 יא  עוֹר וּבָשָׂר, תַּלְבִּישֵׁנִי;    וּבַעֲצָמוֹת וְגִידִים, תְּשֹׂכְכֵנִי.    11 Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and knit me together with bones and sinews.
10.12 יב  חַיִּים וָחֶסֶד, עָשִׂיתָ עִמָּדִי;    וּפְקֻדָּתְךָ, שָׁמְרָה רוּחִי.    12 Thou hast granted me life and favour, and Thy providence hath preserved my spirit.
10.13 יג  וְאֵלֶּה, צָפַנְתָּ בִלְבָבֶךָ;    יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-זֹאת עִמָּךְ.    13 Yet these things Thou didst hide in Thy heart; I know that this is with Thee;
10.14 יד  אִם-חָטָאתִי וּשְׁמַרְתָּנִי;    וּמֵעֲוֺנִי, לֹא תְנַקֵּנִי.    14 If I sin, then Thou markest me, and Thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity.
10.15 טו  אִם-רָשַׁעְתִּי, אַלְלַי לִי--    וְצָדַקְתִּי, לֹא-אֶשָּׂא רֹאשִׁי; שְׂבַע קָלוֹן,    וּרְאֵה עָנְיִי.    15 If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet shall I not lift up my head-- {N} being filled with ignominy and looking upon mine affliction.
10.16 טז  וְיִגְאֶה, כַּשַּׁחַל תְּצוּדֵנִי;    וְתָשֹׁב, תִּתְפַּלָּא-בִי.    16 And if it exalt itself, Thou huntest me as a lion; and again Thou showest Thyself marvellous upon me.
10.17 יז  תְּחַדֵּשׁ עֵדֶיךָ, נֶגְדִּי, וְתֶרֶב כַּעַשְׂךָ, עִמָּדִי;    חֲלִיפוֹת וְצָבָא עִמִּי.    17 Thou renewest Thy witnesses against me, and increasest Thine indignation upon me; host succeeding host against me.
10.18 יח  וְלָמָּה מֵרֶחֶם, הֹצֵאתָנִי;    אֶגְוַע, וְעַיִן לֹא-תִרְאֵנִי.    18 Wherefore then hast Thou brought me forth out of the womb? Would that I had perished, and no eye had seen me!
10.19 יט  כַּאֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיִיתִי אֶהְיֶה;    מִבֶּטֶן, לַקֶּבֶר אוּבָל.    19 I should have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.
10.20 כ  הֲלֹא-מְעַט יָמַי יחדל (וַחֲדָל);    ישית (וְשִׁית) מִמֶּנִּי, וְאַבְלִיגָה מְּעָט.    20 Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,
10.21 כא  בְּטֶרֶם אֵלֵךְ, וְלֹא אָשׁוּב--    אֶל-אֶרֶץ חֹשֶׁךְ וְצַלְמָוֶת.    21 Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and of the shadow of death;
10.22 כב  אֶרֶץ עֵפָתָה, כְּמוֹ אֹפֶל--צַלְמָוֶת, וְלֹא סְדָרִים;    וַתֹּפַע כְּמוֹ-אֹפֶל.    22 A land of thick darkness, as darkness itself; a land of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as darkness.
11.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, צֹפַר הַנַּעֲמָתִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said:
11.2 ב  הֲרֹב דְּבָרִים, לֹא יֵעָנֶה;    וְאִם-אִישׁ שְׂפָתַיִם יִצְדָּק.    2 Should not the multitude of words be answered? And should a man full of talk be accounted right?
11.3 ג  בַּדֶּיךָ, מְתִים יַחֲרִישׁוּ;    וַתִּלְעַג, וְאֵין מַכְלִם.    3 Thy boastings have made men hold their peace, and thou hast mocked, with none to make thee ashamed;
11.4 ד  וַתֹּאמֶר, זַךְ לִקְחִי;    וּבַר, הָיִיתִי בְעֵינֶיךָ.    4 And thou hast said: 'My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in Thine eyes.'
11.5 ה  וְאוּלָם--מִי-יִתֵּן אֱלוֹהַּ דַּבֵּר;    וְיִפְתַּח שְׂפָתָיו עִמָּךְ.    5 But oh that God would speak, and open His lips against thee;
11.6 ו  וְיַגֶּד-לְךָ, תַּעֲלֻמוֹת חָכְמָה--    כִּי-כִפְלַיִם לְתוּשִׁיָּה: וְדַע--    כִּי-יַשֶּׁה לְךָ אֱלוֹהַּ, מֵעֲוֺנֶךָ.    6 And that He would tell thee the secrets of wisdom, that sound wisdom is manifold! {N} Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.
11.7 ז  הַחֵקֶר אֱלוֹהַּ תִּמְצָא;    אִם עַד-תַּכְלִית שַׁדַּי תִּמְצָא.    7 Canst thou find out the deep things of God? Canst thou attain unto the purpose of the Almighty?
11.8 ח  גָּבְהֵי שָׁמַיִם, מַה-תִּפְעָל;    עֲמֻקָּה מִשְּׁאוֹל, מַה-תֵּדָע.    8 It is high as heaven; what canst thou do? Deeper than the nether-world; what canst thou know?
11.9 ט  אֲרֻכָּה מֵאֶרֶץ מִדָּהּ;    וּרְחָבָה, מִנִּי-יָם.    9 The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
11.10 י  אִם-יַחֲלֹף וְיַסְגִּיר;    וְיַקְהִיל, וּמִי יְשִׁיבֶנּוּ.    10 If He pass by, and shut up, or gather in, then who can hinder Him?
11.11 יא  כִּי-הוּא, יָדַע מְתֵי-שָׁוְא;    וַיַּרְא-אָוֶן, וְלֹא יִתְבּוֹנָן.    11 For He knoweth base men; and when He seeth iniquity, will He not then consider it?
11.12 יב  וְאִישׁ נָבוּב, יִלָּבֵב;    וְעַיִר פֶּרֶא, אָדָם יִוָּלֵד.    12 But an empty man will get understanding, when a wild ass's colt is born a man.
11.13 יג  אִם-אַתָּה, הֲכִינוֹתָ לִבֶּךָ;    וּפָרַשְׂתָּ אֵלָיו כַּפֶּיךָ.    13 If thou set thy heart aright, and stretch out thy hands toward Him--
11.14 יד  אִם-אָוֶן בְּיָדְךָ, הַרְחִיקֵהוּ;    וְאַל-תַּשְׁכֵּן בְּאֹהָלֶיךָ עַוְלָה.    14 If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not unrighteousness dwell in thy tents--
11.15 טו  כִּי-אָז, תִּשָּׂא פָנֶיךָ מִמּוּם;    וְהָיִיתָ מֻצָק, וְלֹא תִירָא.    15 Surely then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear;
11.16 טז  כִּי-אַתָּה, עָמָל תִּשְׁכָּח;    כְּמַיִם עָבְרוּ תִזְכֹּר.    16 For thou shalt forget thy misery; thou shalt remember it as waters that are passed away;
11.17 יז  וּמִצָּהֳרַיִם, יָקוּם חָלֶד;    תָּעֻפָה, כַּבֹּקֶר תִּהְיֶה.    17 And thy life shall be clearer than the noonday; though there be darkness, it shall be as the morning.
11.18 יח  וּבָטַחְתָּ, כִּי-יֵשׁ תִּקְוָה;    וְחָפַרְתָּ, לָבֶטַח תִּשְׁכָּב.    18 And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt look about thee, and shalt take thy rest in safety.
11.19 יט  וְרָבַצְתָּ, וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד;    וְחִלּוּ פָנֶיךָ רַבִּים.    19 Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea, many shall make suit unto thee.
11.20 כ  וְעֵינֵי רְשָׁעִים, תִּכְלֶינָה:    וּמָנוֹס, אָבַד מִנְהֶם; וְתִקְוָתָם, מַפַּח-נָפֶשׁ.    20 But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall have no way to flee, and their hope shall be the drooping of the soul.
12.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
12.2 ב  אָמְנָם, כִּי אַתֶּם-עָם;    וְעִמָּכֶם, תָּמוּת חָכְמָה.    2 No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.
12.3 ג  גַּם-לִי לֵבָב, כְּמוֹכֶם--לֹא-נֹפֵל אָנֹכִי מִכֶּם;    וְאֶת-מִי-אֵין כְּמוֹ-אֵלֶּה.    3 But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you; yea, who knoweth not such things as these?
12.4 ד  שְׂחֹק לְרֵעֵהוּ, אֶהְיֶה--קֹרֵא לֶאֱלוֹהַּ, וַיַּעֲנֵהוּ;    שְׂחוֹק, צַדִּיק תָּמִים.    4 I am as one that is a laughing-stock to his neighbour, a man that called upon God, and He answered him; the just, the innocent man is a laughing-stock,
12.5 ה  לַפִּיד בּוּז, לְעַשְׁתּוּת שַׁאֲנָן--    נָכוֹן, לְמוֹעֲדֵי רָגֶל.    5 A contemptible brand in the thought of him that is at ease, a thing ready for them whose foot slippeth.
12.6 ו  יִשְׁלָיוּ אֹהָלִים, לְשֹׁדְדִים, וּבַטֻּחוֹת, לְמַרְגִּיזֵי אֵל--    לַאֲשֶׁר הֵבִיא אֱלוֹהַּ בְּיָדוֹ.    6 The tents of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure, in whatsoever God bringeth into their hand.
12.7 ז  וְאוּלָם--שְׁאַל-נָא בְהֵמוֹת וְתֹרֶךָּ;    וְעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְיַגֶּד-לָךְ.    7 But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee;
12.8 ח  אוֹ שִׂיחַ לָאָרֶץ וְתֹרֶךָּ;    וִיסַפְּרוּ לְךָ, דְּגֵי הַיָּם.    8 Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee;
12.9 ט  מִי, לֹא-יָדַע בְּכָל-אֵלֶּה:    כִּי יַד-יְהוָה, עָשְׂתָה זֹּאת.    9 Who knoweth not among all these, that the hand of the LORD hath wrought this?
12.10 י  אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדוֹ, נֶפֶשׁ כָּל-חָי;    וְרוּחַ, כָּל-בְּשַׂר-אִישׁ.    10 In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.--
12.11 יא  הֲלֹא-אֹזֶן, מִלִּין תִּבְחָן;    וְחֵךְ, אֹכֶל יִטְעַם-לוֹ.    11 Doth not the ear try words, even as the palate tasteth its food?
12.12 יב  בִּישִׁישִׁים חָכְמָה;    וְאֹרֶךְ יָמִים תְּבוּנָה.    12 Is wisdom with aged men, and understanding in length of days?--
12.13 יג  עִמּוֹ, חָכְמָה וּגְבוּרָה;    לוֹ, עֵצָה וּתְבוּנָה.    13 With Him is wisdom and might; He hath counsel and understanding.
12.14 יד  הֵן יַהֲרוֹס, וְלֹא יִבָּנֶה;    יִסְגֹּר עַל-אִישׁ, וְלֹא יִפָּתֵחַ.    14 Behold, He breaketh down, and it cannot be built again; He shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening.
12.15 טו  הֵן יַעְצֹר בַּמַּיִם וְיִבָשׁוּ;    וִישַׁלְּחֵם, וְיַהַפְכוּ אָרֶץ.    15 Behold, He withholdeth the waters, and they dry up; also He sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.
12.16 טז  עִמּוֹ, עֹז וְתוּשִׁיָּה;    לוֹ, שֹׁגֵג וּמַשְׁגֶּה.    16 With Him is strength and sound wisdom; the deceived and the deceiver are His.
12.17 יז  מוֹלִיךְ יוֹעֲצִים שׁוֹלָל;    וְשֹׁפְטִים יְהוֹלֵל.    17 He leadeth counsellors away stripped, and judges maketh He fools.
12.18 יח  מוּסַר מְלָכִים פִּתֵּחַ;    וַיֶּאְסֹר אֵזוֹר, בְּמָתְנֵיהֶם.    18 He looseth the bond of kings, and bindeth their loins with a girdle.
12.19 יט  מוֹלִיךְ כֹּהֲנִים שׁוֹלָל;    וְאֵתָנִים יְסַלֵּף.    19 He leadeth priests away stripped, and overthroweth the mighty.
12.20 כ  מֵסִיר שָׂפָה, לְנֶאֱמָנִים;    וְטַעַם זְקֵנִים יִקָּח.    20 He removeth the speech of men of trust, and taketh away the sense of the elders.
12.21 כא  שׁוֹפֵךְ בּוּז, עַל-נְדִיבִים;    וּמְזִיחַ אֲפִיקִים רִפָּה.    21 He poureth contempt upon princes, and looseth the belt of the strong.
12.22 כב  מְגַלֶּה עֲמֻקוֹת, מִנִּי-חֹשֶׁךְ;    וַיֹּצֵא לָאוֹר צַלְמָוֶת.    22 He uncovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of death.
12.23 כג  מַשְׂגִּיא לַגּוֹיִם, וַיְאַבְּדֵם;    שֹׁטֵחַ לַגּוֹיִם, וַיַּנְחֵם.    23 He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them; He enlargeth the nations, and leadeth them away.
12.24 כד  מֵסִיר--לֵב, רָאשֵׁי עַם-הָאָרֶץ;    וַיַּתְעֵם, בְּתֹהוּ לֹא-דָרֶךְ.    24 He taketh away the heart of the chiefs of the people of the land, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.
12.25 כה  יְמַשְׁשׁוּ-חֹשֶׁךְ וְלֹא-אוֹר;    וַיַּתְעֵם, כַּשִּׁכּוֹר.    25 They grope in the dark without light, and He maketh them to stagger like a drunken man.
13.1 א  הֶן-כֹּל, רָאֲתָה עֵינִי;    שָׁמְעָה אָזְנִי, וַתָּבֶן לָהּ.    1 Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and understood it.
13.2 ב  כְּדַעְתְּכֶם, יָדַעְתִּי גַם-אָנִי:    לֹא-נֹפֵל אָנֹכִי מִכֶּם.    2 What ye know, do I know also; I am not inferior unto you.
13.3 ג  אוּלָם--אֲנִי, אֶל-שַׁדַּי אֲדַבֵּר;    וְהוֹכֵחַ אֶל-אֵל אֶחְפָּץ.    3 Notwithstanding I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.
13.4 ד  וְאוּלָם, אַתֶּם טֹפְלֵי-שָׁקֶר;    רֹפְאֵי אֱלִל כֻּלְּכֶם.    4 But ye are plasterers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.
13.5 ה  מִי-יִתֵּן, הַחֲרֵשׁ תַּחֲרִישׁוּן;    וּתְהִי לָכֶם לְחָכְמָה.    5 Oh that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it would be your wisdom.
13.6 ו  שִׁמְעוּ-נָא תוֹכַחְתִּי;    וְרִבוֹת שְׂפָתַי הַקְשִׁיבוּ.    6 Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
13.7 ז  הַלְאֵל, תְּדַבְּרוּ עַוְלָה;    וְלוֹ, תְּדַבְּרוּ רְמִיָּה.    7 Will ye speak unrighteously for God, and talk deceitfully for Him?
13.8 ח  הֲפָנָיו תִּשָּׂאוּן;    אִם-לָאֵל תְּרִיבוּן.    8 Will ye show Him favour? Will ye contend for God?
13.9 ט  הֲטוֹב, כִּי-יַחְקֹר אֶתְכֶם;    אִם-כְּהָתֵל בֶּאֱנוֹשׁ, תְּהָתֵלּוּ בוֹ.    9 Would it be good that He should search you out? Or as one mocketh a man, will ye mock Him?
13.10 י  הוֹכֵחַ יוֹכִיחַ אֶתְכֶם--    אִם-בַּסֵּתֶר, פָּנִים תִּשָּׂאוּן.    10 He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly show favour.
13.11 יא  הֲלֹא שְׂאֵתוֹ, תְּבַעֵת אֶתְכֶם;    וּפַחְדּוֹ, יִפֹּל עֲלֵיכֶם.    11 Shall not His majesty terrify you, and His dread fall upon you?
13.12 יב  זִכְרֹנֵיכֶם, מִשְׁלֵי-אֵפֶר;    לְגַבֵּי-חֹמֶר, גַּבֵּיכֶם.    12 Your memorials shall be like unto ashes, your eminences to eminences of clay.
13.13 יג  הַחֲרִישׁוּ מִמֶּנִּי, וַאֲדַבְּרָה-אָנִי;    וְיַעֲבֹר עָלַי מָה.    13 Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what will.
13.14 יד  עַל-מָה, אֶשָּׂא בְשָׂרִי בְשִׁנָּי;    וְנַפְשִׁי, אָשִׂים בְּכַפִּי.    14 Wherefore? I will take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in my hand.
13.15 טו  הֵן יִקְטְלֵנִי, לא (לוֹ) אֲיַחֵל;    אַךְ-דְּרָכַי, אֶל-פָּנָיו אוֹכִיחַ.    15 Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him; but I will argue my ways before Him.
13.16 טז  גַּם-הוּא-לִי לִישׁוּעָה:    כִּי-לֹא לְפָנָיו, חָנֵף יָבוֹא.    16 This also shall be my salvation, that a hypocrite cannot come before Him.
13.17 יז  שִׁמְעוּ שָׁמוֹעַ, מִלָּתִי;    וְאַחֲוָתִי, בְּאָזְנֵיכֶם.    17 Hear diligently my speech, and let my declaration be in your ears.
13.18 יח  הִנֵּה-נָא, עָרַכְתִּי מִשְׁפָּט;    יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-אֲנִי אֶצְדָּק.    18 Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be justified.
13.19 יט  מִי-הוּא, יָרִיב עִמָּדִי:    כִּי-עַתָּה אַחֲרִישׁ וְאֶגְוָע.    19 Who is he that will contend with me? For then would I hold my peace and die.
13.20 כ  אַךְ-שְׁתַּיִם, אַל-תַּעַשׂ עִמָּדִי;    אָז מִפָּנֶיךָ, לֹא אֶסָּתֵר.    20 Only do not two things unto me, then will I not hide myself from Thee:
13.21 כא  כַּפְּךָ, מֵעָלַי הַרְחַק;    וְאֵמָתְךָ, אַל-תְּבַעֲתַנִּי.    21 Withdraw Thy hand far from me; and let not Thy terror make me afraid.
13.22 כב  וּקְרָא, וְאָנֹכִי אֶעֱנֶה;    אוֹ-אֲדַבֵּר, וַהֲשִׁיבֵנִי.    22 Then call Thou, and I will answer; or let me speak, and answer Thou me.
13.23 כג  כַּמָּה לִי, עֲוֺנוֹת וְחַטָּאוֹת--    פִּשְׁעִי וְחַטָּאתִי, הֹדִיעֵנִי.    23 How many are mine iniquities and sins? Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
13.24 כד  לָמָּה-פָנֶיךָ תַסְתִּיר;    וְתַחְשְׁבֵנִי לְאוֹיֵב לָךְ.    24 Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face, and holdest me for Thine enemy?
13.25 כה  הֶעָלֶה נִדָּף תַּעֲרוֹץ;    וְאֶת-קַשׁ יָבֵשׁ תִּרְדֹּף.    25 Wilt Thou harass a driven leaf? And wilt Thou pursue the dry stubble?
13.26 כו  כִּי-תִכְתֹּב עָלַי מְרֹרוֹת;    וְתוֹרִישֵׁנִי, עֲוֺנוֹת נְעוּרָי.    26 That Thou shouldest write bitter things against me, and make me to inherit the iniquities of my youth.
13.27 כז  וְתָשֵׂם בַּסַּד, רַגְלַי--    וְתִשְׁמוֹר כָּל-אָרְחוֹתָי; עַל-שָׁרְשֵׁי רַגְלַי,    תִּתְחַקֶּה.    27 Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly unto all my paths; {N} Thou drawest Thee a line about the soles of my feet;
13.28 כח  וְהוּא, כְּרָקָב יִבְלֶה;    כְּבֶגֶד, אֲכָלוֹ עָשׁ.    28 Though I am like a wine-skin that consumeth, like a garment that is moth-eaten.
14.1 א  אָדָם, יְלוּד אִשָּׁה--    קְצַר יָמִים, וּשְׂבַע-רֹגֶז.    1 Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.
14.2 ב  כְּצִיץ יָצָא, וַיִּמָּל;    וַיִּבְרַח כַּצֵּל, וְלֹא יַעֲמוֹד.    2 He cometh forth like a flower, and withereth; he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.
14.3 ג  אַף-עַל-זֶה, פָּקַחְתָּ עֵינֶךָ;    וְאֹתִי תָבִיא בְמִשְׁפָּט עִמָּךְ.    3 And dost Thou open Thine eyes upon such a one, and bringest me into judgment with Thee?
14.4 ד  מִי-יִתֵּן טָהוֹר, מִטָּמֵא--    לֹא אֶחָד.    4 Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.
14.5 ה  אִם חֲרוּצִים, יָמָיו--מִסְפַּר-חֳדָשָׁיו אִתָּךְ:    חֻקָּו עָשִׂיתָ, וְלֹא יַעֲבֹר.    5 Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months is with Thee, and Thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass;
14.6 ו  שְׁעֵה מֵעָלָיו וְיֶחְדָּל--    עַד-יִרְצֶה, כְּשָׂכִיר יוֹמוֹ.    6 Look away from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as a hireling, his day.
14.7 ז  כִּי יֵשׁ לָעֵץ,    תִּקְוָה: אִם-יִכָּרֵת, וְעוֹד יַחֲלִיף;    וְיֹנַקְתּוֹ, לֹא תֶחְדָּל.    7 For there is hope of a tree, {N} if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.
14.8 ח  אִם-יַזְקִין בָּאָרֶץ שָׁרְשׁוֹ;    וּבֶעָפָר, יָמוּת גִּזְעוֹ.    8 Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground;
14.9 ט  מֵרֵיחַ מַיִם יַפְרִחַ;    וְעָשָׂה קָצִיר כְּמוֹ-נָטַע.    9 Yet through the scent of water it will bud, and put forth boughs like a plant.
14.10 י  וְגֶבֶר יָמוּת, וַיֶּחֱלָשׁ;    וַיִּגְוַע אָדָם וְאַיּוֹ.    10 But man dieth, and lieth low; yea, man perisheth, and where is he?
14.11 יא  אָזְלוּ-מַיִם, מִנִּי-יָם;    וְנָהָר, יֶחֱרַב וְיָבֵשׁ.    11 As the waters fail from the sea, and the river is drained dry;
14.12 יב  וְאִישׁ שָׁכַב,    וְלֹא-יָקוּם: עַד-בִּלְתִּי שָׁמַיִם, לֹא יָקִיצוּ;    וְלֹא-יֵעֹרוּ, מִשְּׁנָתָם.    12 So man lieth down and riseth not; {N} till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be roused out of their sleep.
14.13 יג  מִי יִתֵּן, בִּשְׁאוֹל תַּצְפִּנֵנִי--    תַּסְתִּירֵנִי, עַד-שׁוּב אַפֶּךָ; תָּשִׁית לִי חֹק    וְתִזְכְּרֵנִי.    13 Oh that Thou wouldest hide me in the nether-world, that Thou wouldest keep me secret, until Thy wrath be past, {N} that Thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me!--
14.14 יד  אִם-יָמוּת גֶּבֶר,    הֲיִחְיֶה: כָּל-יְמֵי צְבָאִי אֲיַחֵל--    עַד-בּוֹא, חֲלִיפָתִי.    14 If a man die, may he live again? {N} All the days of my service would I wait, till my relief should come--
14.15 טו  תִּקְרָא, וְאָנֹכִי אֶעֱנֶךָּ;    לְמַעֲשֵׂה יָדֶיךָ תִכְסֹף.    15 Thou wouldest call, and I would answer Thee; Thou wouldest have a desire to the work of Thy hands.
14.16 טז  כִּי-עַתָּה, צְעָדַי תִּסְפּוֹר;    לֹא-תִשְׁמֹר, עַל-חַטָּאתִי.    16 But now Thou numberest my steps, Thou dost not even wait for my sin;
14.17 יז  חָתֻם בִּצְרוֹר פִּשְׁעִי;    וַתִּטְפֹּל, עַל-עֲוֺנִי.    17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and Thou heapest up mine iniquity.
14.18 יח  וְאוּלָם, הַר-נוֹפֵל יִבּוֹל;    וְצוּר, יֶעְתַּק מִמְּקֹמוֹ.    18 And surely the mountain falling crumbleth away, and the rock is removed out of its place;
14.19 יט  אֲבָנִים, שָׁחֲקוּ מַיִם--    תִּשְׁטֹף-סְפִיחֶיהָ עֲפַר-אָרֶץ; וְתִקְוַת אֱנוֹשׁ    הֶאֱבַדְתָּ.    19 The waters wear the stones; the overflowings thereof wash away the dust of the earth; {N} so Thou destroyest the hope of man.
14.20 כ  תִּתְקְפֵהוּ לָנֶצַח, וַיַּהֲלֹךְ;    מְשַׁנֶּה פָנָיו, וַתְּשַׁלְּחֵהוּ.    20 Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth; Thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
14.21 כא  יִכְבְּדוּ בָנָיו, וְלֹא יֵדָע;    וְיִצְעֲרוּ, וְלֹא-יָבִין לָמוֹ.    21 His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are brought low, but he regardeth them not.
14.22 כב  אַךְ-בְּשָׂרוֹ, עָלָיו יִכְאָב;    וְנַפְשׁוֹ, עָלָיו תֶּאֱבָל.    22 But his flesh grieveth for him, and his soul mourneth over him.
15.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, אֱלִיפַז הַתֵּימָנִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:
15.2 ב  הֶחָכָם, יַעֲנֶה דַעַת-רוּחַ;    וִימַלֵּא קָדִים בִּטְנוֹ.    2 Should a wise man make answer with windy knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind?
15.3 ג  הוֹכֵחַ בְּדָבָר, לֹא יִסְכּוֹן;    וּמִלִּים, לֹא-יוֹעִיל בָּם.    3 Should he reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches wherewith he can do no good?
15.4 ד  אַף-אַתָּה, תָּפֵר יִרְאָה;    וְתִגְרַע שִׂיחָה, לִפְנֵי-אֵל.    4 Yea, thou doest away with fear, and impairest devotion before God.
15.5 ה  כִּי יְאַלֵּף עֲוֺנְךָ פִיךָ;    וְתִבְחַר, לְשׁוֹן עֲרוּמִים.    5 For thine iniquity teacheth thy mouth, and thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.
15.6 ו  יַרְשִׁיעֲךָ פִיךָ וְלֹא-אָנִי;    וּשְׂפָתֶיךָ, יַעֲנוּ-בָךְ.    6 Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I; yea, thine own lips testify against thee.
15.7 ז  הֲרִאישׁוֹן אָדָם, תִּוָּלֵד;    וְלִפְנֵי גְבָעוֹת חוֹלָלְתָּ.    7 Art thou the first man that was born? Or wast thou brought forth before the hills?
15.8 ח  הַבְסוֹד אֱלוֹהַּ תִּשְׁמָע;    וְתִגְרַע אֵלֶיךָ חָכְמָה.    8 Dost thou hearken in the council of God? And dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself?
15.9 ט  מַה-יָּדַעְתָּ, וְלֹא נֵדָע;    תָּבִין, וְלֹא-עִמָּנוּ הוּא.    9 What knowest thou, that we know not? What understandest thou, which is not in us?
15.10 י  גַּם-שָׂב גַּם-יָשִׁישׁ בָּנוּ--    כַּבִּיר מֵאָבִיךָ יָמִים.    10 With us are both the gray-headed and the very aged men, much older than thy father.
15.11 יא  הַמְעַט מִמְּךָ, תַּנְחוּמוֹת אֵל;    וְדָבָר, לָאַט עִמָּךְ.    11 Are the consolations of God too small for thee, and the word that dealeth gently with thee?
15.12 יב  מַה-יִּקָּחֲךָ לִבֶּךָ;    וּמַה-יִּרְזְמוּן עֵינֶיךָ.    12 Why doth thy heart carry thee away? And why do thine eyes wink?
15.13 יג  כִּי-תָשִׁיב אֶל-אֵל רוּחֶךָ;    וְהֹצֵאתָ מִפִּיךָ מִלִּין.    13 That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and lettest such words go out of thy mouth.
15.14 יד  מָה-אֱנוֹשׁ כִּי-יִזְכֶּה;    וְכִי-יִצְדַּק, יְלוּד אִשָּׁה.    14 What is man, that he should be clean? And he that is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
15.15 טו  הֵן בִּקְדֹשָׁו, לֹא יַאֲמִין;    וְשָׁמַיִם, לֹא-זַכּוּ בְעֵינָיו.    15 Behold, He putteth no trust in His holy ones; yea, the heavens are not clean in His sight.
15.16 טז  אַף, כִּי-נִתְעָב וְנֶאֱלָח;    אִישׁ-שֹׁתֶה כַמַּיִם עַוְלָה.    16 How much less one that is abominable and impure, man who drinketh iniquity like water!
15.17 יז  אֲחַוְךָ שְׁמַע-לִי;    וְזֶה-חָזִיתִי, וַאֲסַפֵּרָה.    17 I will tell thee, hear thou me; and that which I have seen I will declare--
15.18 יח  אֲשֶׁר-חֲכָמִים יַגִּידוּ;    וְלֹא כִחֲדוּ, מֵאֲבוֹתָם.    18 Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it;
15.19 יט  לָהֶם לְבַדָּם, נִתְּנָה הָאָרֶץ;    וְלֹא-עָבַר זָר בְּתוֹכָם.    19 Unto whom alone the land was given, and no stranger passed among them.
15.20 כ  כָּל-יְמֵי רָשָׁע, הוּא מִתְחוֹלֵל;    וּמִסְפַּר שָׁנִים, נִצְפְּנוּ לֶעָרִיץ.    20 The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, even the number of years that are laid up for the oppressor.
15.21 כא  קוֹל-פְּחָדִים בְּאָזְנָיו;    בַּשָּׁלוֹם, שׁוֹדֵד יְבוֹאֶנּוּ.    21 A sound of terrors is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.
15.22 כב  לֹא-יַאֲמִין שׁוּב, מִנִּי-חֹשֶׁךְ;    וצפו (וְצָפוּי) הוּא אֱלֵי-חָרֶב.    22 He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword.
15.23 כג  נֹדֵד הוּא לַלֶּחֶם אַיֵּה;    יָדַע, כִּי-נָכוֹן בְּיָדוֹ יוֹם-חֹשֶׁךְ.    23 He wandereth abroad for bread: 'Where is it?' He knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
15.24 כד  יְבַעֲתֻהוּ, צַר וּמְצוּקָה;    תִּתְקְפֵהוּ, כְּמֶלֶךְ עָתִיד לַכִּידוֹר.    24 Distress and anguish overwhelm him; they prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle.
15.25 כה  כִּי-נָטָה אֶל-אֵל יָדוֹ;    וְאֶל-שַׁדַּי, יִתְגַּבָּר.    25 Because he hath stretched out his hand against God, and behaveth himself proudly against the Almighty;
15.26 כו  יָרוּץ אֵלָיו בְּצַוָּאר;    בַּעֲבִי, גַּבֵּי מָגִנָּיו.    26 He runneth upon him with a stiff neck, with the thick bosses of his bucklers.
15.27 כז  כִּי-כִסָּה פָנָיו בְּחֶלְבּוֹ;    וַיַּעַשׂ פִּימָה עֲלֵי-כָסֶל.    27 Because he hath covered his face with his fatness, and made collops of fat on his loins;
15.28 כח  וַיִּשְׁכּוֹן, עָרִים נִכְחָדוֹת--בָּתִּים, לֹא-יֵשְׁבוּ לָמוֹ:    אֲשֶׁר הִתְעַתְּדוּ לְגַלִּים.    28 And he hath dwelt in desolate cities, in houses which no man would inhabit, which were ready to become heaps.
15.29 כט  לֹא-יֶעְשַׁר, וְלֹא-יָקוּם חֵילוֹ;    וְלֹא-יִטֶּה לָאָרֶץ מִנְלָם.    29 He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall their produce bend to the earth.
15.30 ל  לֹא-יָסוּר, מִנִּי-חֹשֶׁךְ--יֹנַקְתּוֹ, תְּיַבֵּשׁ שַׁלְהָבֶת;    וְיָסוּר, בְּרוּחַ פִּיו.    30 He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of His mouth shall he go away.
15.31 לא  אַל-יַאֲמֵן בַּשָּׁו נִתְעָה:    כִּי-שָׁוְא, תִּהְיֶה תְמוּרָתוֹ.    31 Let him not trust in vanity, deceiving himself; for vanity shall be his recompense.
15.32 לב  בְּלֹא-יוֹמוֹ, תִּמָּלֵא;    וְכִפָּתוֹ, לֹא רַעֲנָנָה.    32 It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be leafy.
15.33 לג  יַחְמֹס כַּגֶּפֶן בִּסְרוֹ;    וְיַשְׁלֵךְ כַּזַּיִת, נִצָּתוֹ.    33 He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive.
15.34 לד  כִּי-עֲדַת חָנֵף גַּלְמוּד;    וְאֵשׁ, אָכְלָה אָהֳלֵי-שֹׁחַד.    34 For the company of the godless shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
15.35 לה  הָרֹה עָמָל, וְיָלֹד אָוֶן;    וּבִטְנָם, תָּכִין מִרְמָה.    35 They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, and their belly prepareth deceit.
16.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
16.2 ב  שָׁמַעְתִּי כְאֵלֶּה רַבּוֹת;    מְנַחֲמֵי עָמָל כֻּלְּכֶם.    2 I have heard many such things; sorry comforters are ye all.
16.3 ג  הֲקֵץ לְדִבְרֵי-רוּחַ;    אוֹ מַה-יַּמְרִיצְךָ, כִּי תַעֲנֶה.    3 Shall windy words have an end? Or what provoketh thee that thou answerest?
16.4 ד  גַּם, אָנֹכִי--    כָּכֶם אֲדַבֵּרָה: לוּ יֵשׁ נַפְשְׁכֶם, תַּחַת נַפְשִׁי--    אַחְבִּירָה עֲלֵיכֶם בְּמִלִּים; וְאָנִיעָה עֲלֵיכֶם,    בְּמוֹ רֹאשִׁי.    4 I also could speak as ye do; {N} if your soul were in my soul's stead, I could join words together against you, {N} and shake my head at you.
16.5 ה  אֲאַמִּצְכֶם בְּמוֹ-פִי;    וְנִיד שְׂפָתַי יַחְשֹׂךְ.    5 I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips would assuage your grief.
16.6 ו  אִם-אֲדַבְּרָה, לֹא-יֵחָשֵׂךְ כְּאֵבִי;    וְאַחְדְּלָה, מַה-מִּנִּי יַהֲלֹךְ.    6 Though I speak, my pain is not assuaged; and though I forbear, what am I eased?
16.7 ז  אַךְ-עַתָּה הֶלְאָנִי;    הֲשִׁמּוֹתָ, כָּל-עֲדָתִי.    7 But now He hath made me weary; Thou hast made desolate all my company.
16.8 ח  וַתִּקְמְטֵנִי, לְעֵד הָיָה;    וַיָּקָם בִּי כַחֲשִׁי, בְּפָנַי יַעֲנֶה.    8 And Thou hast shrivelled me up, which is a witness against me; and my leanness riseth up against me, it testifieth to my face.
16.9 ט  אַפּוֹ טָרַף, וַיִּשְׂטְמֵנִי--חָרַק עָלַי בְּשִׁנָּיו;    צָרִי, יִלְטֹשׁ עֵינָיו לִי.    9 He hath torn me in His wrath, and hated me; He hath gnashed upon me with His teeth; mine adversary sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
16.10 י  פָּעֲרוּ עָלַי, בְּפִיהֶם--בְּחֶרְפָּה, הִכּוּ לְחָיָי;    יַחַד, עָלַי יִתְמַלָּאוּן.    10 They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me upon the cheek scornfully; they gather themselves together against me.
16.11 יא  יַסְגִּירֵנִי אֵל, אֶל עֲוִיל;    וְעַל-יְדֵי רְשָׁעִים יִרְטֵנִי.    11 God delivereth me to the ungodly, and casteth me into the hands of the wicked.
16.12 יב  שָׁלֵו הָיִיתִי, וַיְפַרְפְּרֵנִי--    וְאָחַז בְּעָרְפִּי, וַיְפַצְפְּצֵנִי; וַיְקִימֵנִי לוֹ,    לְמַטָּרָה.    12 I was at ease, and He broke me asunder; yea, He hath taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces; {N} He hath also set me up for His mark.
16.13 יג  יָסֹבּוּ עָלַי, רַבָּיו--    יְפַלַּח כִּלְיוֹתַי, וְלֹא יַחְמֹל; יִשְׁפֹּךְ לָאָרֶץ,    מְרֵרָתִי.    13 His archers compass me round about, He cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare; {N} He poureth out my gall upon the ground.
16.14 יד  יִפְרְצֵנִי פֶרֶץ, עַל-פְּנֵי-פָרֶץ;    יָרֻץ עָלַי כְּגִבּוֹר.    14 He breaketh me with breach upon breach; He runneth upon me like a giant.
16.15 טו  שַׂק תָּפַרְתִּי, עֲלֵי גִלְדִּי;    וְעֹלַלְתִּי בֶעָפָר קַרְנִי.    15 I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and have laid my horn in the dust.
16.16 טז  פָּנַי חמרמרה (חֳמַרְמְרוּ), מִנִּי-בֶכִי;    וְעַל עַפְעַפַּי צַלְמָוֶת.    16 My face is reddened with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death;
16.17 יז  עַל, לֹא-חָמָס בְּכַפָּי;    וּתְפִלָּתִי זַכָּה.    17 Although there is no violence in my hands, and my prayer is pure.
16.18 יח  אֶרֶץ, אַל-תְּכַסִּי דָמִי;    וְאַל-יְהִי מָקוֹם, לְזַעֲקָתִי.    18 O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no resting-place.
16.19 יט  גַּם-עַתָּה, הִנֵּה-בַשָּׁמַיִם עֵדִי;    וְשָׂהֲדִי, בַּמְּרֹמִים.    19 Even now, behold, my Witness is in heaven, and He that testifieth of me is on high.
16.20 כ  מְלִיצַי רֵעָי;    אֶל-אֱלוֹהַּ, דָּלְפָה עֵינִי.    20 Mine inward thoughts are my intercessors, mine eye poureth out tears unto God;
16.21 כא  וְיוֹכַח לְגֶבֶר עִם-אֱלוֹהַּ;    וּבֶן-אָדָם לְרֵעֵהוּ.    21 That He would set aright a man contending with God, as a son of man setteth aright his neighbour!
16.22 כב  כִּי-שְׁנוֹת מִסְפָּר יֶאֱתָיוּ;    וְאֹרַח לֹא-אָשׁוּב אֶהֱלֹךְ.    22 For the years that are few are coming on, and I shall go the way whence I shall not return.
17.1 א  רוּחִי חֻבָּלָה, יָמַי נִזְעָכוּ;    קְבָרִים לִי.    1 My spirit is consumed, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for me.
17.2 ב  אִם-לֹא הֲתֻלִים, עִמָּדִי;    וּבְהַמְּרוֹתָם, תָּלַן עֵינִי.    2 Surely there are mockers with me, and mine eye abideth in their provocation.
17.3 ג  שִׂימָה-נָּא, עָרְבֵנִי עִמָּךְ;    מִי הוּא, לְיָדִי יִתָּקֵעַ.    3 Give now a pledge, be surety for me with Thyself; who else is there that will strike hands with me?
17.4 ד  כִּי-לִבָּם, צָפַנְתָּ מִּשָּׂכֶל;    עַל-כֵּן, לֹא תְרֹמֵם.    4 For Thou hast hid their heart from understanding; therefore shalt Thou not exalt them.
17.5 ה  לְחֵלֶק, יַגִּיד רֵעִים;    וְעֵינֵי בָנָיו תִּכְלֶנָה.    5 He that denounceth his friends for the sake of flattery, even the eyes of his children shall fail.
17.6 ו  וְהִצִּיגַנִי, לִמְשֹׁל עַמִּים;    וְתֹפֶת לְפָנִים אֶהְיֶה.    6 He hath made me also a byword of the people; and I am become one in whose face they spit.
17.7 ז  וַתֵּכַהּ מִכַּעַשׂ עֵינִי;    וִיצֻרַי כַּצֵּל כֻּלָּם.    7 Mine eye also is dimmed by reason of vexation, and all my members are as a shadow.
17.8 ח  יָשֹׁמּוּ יְשָׁרִים עַל-זֹאת;    וְנָקִי, עַל-חָנֵף יִתְעֹרָר.    8 Upright men are astonished at this, and the innocent stirreth up himself against the godless.
17.9 ט  וְיֹאחֵז צַדִּיק דַּרְכּוֹ;    וּטְהָר-יָדַיִם, יֹסִיף אֹמֶץ.    9 Yet the righteous holdeth on his way, and he that hath clean hands waxeth stronger and stronger.
17.10 י  וְאוּלָם--כֻּלָּם תָּשֻׁבוּ, וּבֹאוּ נָא;    וְלֹא-אֶמְצָא בָכֶם חָכָם.    10 But as for you all, do ye return, and come now; and I shall not find a wise man among you.
17.11 יא  יָמַי עָבְרוּ, זִמֹּתַי נִתְּקוּ--    מוֹרָשֵׁי לְבָבִי.    11 My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.
17.12 יב  לַיְלָה, לְיוֹם יָשִׂימוּ;    אוֹר, קָרוֹב מִפְּנֵי-חֹשֶׁךְ.    12 They change the night into day; the light is short because of darkness.
17.13 יג  אִם-אֲקַוֶּה, שְׁאוֹל בֵּיתִי;    בַּחֹשֶׁךְ, רִפַּדְתִּי יְצוּעָי.    13 If I look for the nether-world as my house; if I have spread my couch in the darkness;
17.14 יד  לַשַּׁחַת קָרָאתִי, אָבִי אָתָּה;    אִמִּי וַאֲחֹתִי, לָרִמָּה.    14 If I have said to corruption: 'Thou art my father', to the worm: 'Thou art my mother, and my sister';
17.15 טו  וְאַיֵּה, אֵפוֹ תִקְוָתִי;    וְתִקְוָתִי, מִי יְשׁוּרֶנָּה.    15 Where then is my hope? And as for my hope, who shall see it?
17.16 טז  בַּדֵּי שְׁאֹל תֵּרַדְנָה;    אִם-יַחַד עַל-עָפָר נָחַת.    16 They shall go down to the bars of the nether-world, when we are at rest together in the dust.
18.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, בִּלְדַּד הַשֻּׁחִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said:
18.2 ב  עַד-אָנָה, תְּשִׂימוּן קִנְצֵי לְמִלִּין;    תָּבִינוּ, וְאַחַר נְדַבֵּר.    2 How long will ye lay snares for words? Consider, and afterwards we will speak.
18.3 ג  מַדּוּעַ, נֶחְשַׁבְנוּ כַבְּהֵמָה;    נִטְמִינוּ, בְּעֵינֵיכֶם.    3 Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed dull in your sight?
18.4 ד  טֹרֵף נַפְשׁוֹ, בְּאַפּוֹ:    הַלְמַעַנְךָ, תֵּעָזַב אָרֶץ; וְיֶעְתַּק-צוּר, מִמְּקֹמוֹ.    4 Thou that tearest thyself in thine anger, shall the earth be forsaken for thee? Or shall the rock be removed out of its place?
18.5 ה  גַּם אוֹר רְשָׁעִים יִדְעָךְ;    וְלֹא-יִגַּהּ, שְׁבִיב אִשּׁוֹ.    5 Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.
18.6 ו  אוֹר, חָשַׁךְ בְּאָהֳלוֹ;    וְנֵרוֹ, עָלָיו יִדְעָךְ.    6 The light shall be dark in his tent, and his lamp over him shall be put out.
18.7 ז  יֵצְרוּ, צַעֲדֵי אוֹנוֹ;    וְתַשְׁלִיכֵהוּ עֲצָתוֹ.    7 The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down.
18.8 ח  כִּי-שֻׁלַּח בְּרֶשֶׁת בְּרַגְלָיו;    וְעַל-שְׂבָכָה, יִתְהַלָּךְ.    8 For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walketh upon the toils.
18.9 ט  יֹאחֵז בְּעָקֵב פָּח;    יַחֲזֵק עָלָיו צַמִּים.    9 A gin shall take him by the heel, and a snare shall lay hold on him.
18.10 י  טָמוּן בָּאָרֶץ חַבְלוֹ;    וּמַלְכֻּדְתּוֹ, עֲלֵי נָתִיב.    10 A noose is hid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.
18.11 יא  סָבִיב, בִּעֲתֻהוּ בַלָּהוֹת;    וֶהֱפִיצֻהוּ לְרַגְלָיו.    11 Terrors shall overwhelm him on every side, and shall entrap him at his feet.
18.12 יב  יְהִי-רָעֵב אֹנוֹ;    וְאֵיד, נָכוֹן לְצַלְעוֹ.    12 His trouble shall be ravenous, and calamity shall be ready for his fall.
18.13 יג  יֹאכַל, בַּדֵּי עוֹרוֹ;    יֹאכַל בַּדָּיו, בְּכוֹר מָוֶת.    13 It shall devour the members of his body, yea, the first-born of death shall devour his members.
18.14 יד  יִנָּתֵק מֵאָהֳלוֹ, מִבְטַחוֹ;    וְתַצְעִדֵהוּ, לְמֶלֶךְ בַּלָּהוֹת.    14 That wherein he trusteth shall be plucked out of his tent; and he shall be brought to the king of terrors.
18.15 טו  תִּשְׁכּוֹן בְּאָהֳלוֹ, מִבְּלִילוֹ;    יְזֹרֶה עַל-נָוֵהוּ גָפְרִית.    15 There shall dwell in his tent that which is none of his; brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
18.16 טז  מִתַּחַת, שָׁרָשָׁיו יִבָשׁוּ;    וּמִמַּעַל, יִמַּל קְצִירוֹ.    16 His roots shall dry up beneath, and above shall his branch wither.
18.17 יז  זִכְרוֹ-אָבַד, מִנִּי-אָרֶץ;    וְלֹא-שֵׁם לוֹ, עַל-פְּנֵי-חוּץ.    17 His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name abroad.
18.18 יח  יֶהְדְּפֻהוּ, מֵאוֹר אֶל-חֹשֶׁךְ;    וּמִתֵּבֵל יְנִדֻּהוּ.    18 He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.
18.19 יט  לֹא נִין לוֹ וְלֹא-נֶכֶד בְּעַמּוֹ;    וְאֵין שָׂרִיד, בִּמְגוּרָיו.    19 He shall have neither son nor son's son among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings.
18.20 כ  עַל-יוֹמוֹ, נָשַׁמּוּ אַחֲרֹנִים;    וְקַדְמֹנִים, אָחֲזוּ שָׂעַר.    20 They that come after shall be astonished at his day, as they that went before are affrighted.
18.21 כא  אַךְ-אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁכְּנוֹת עַוָּל;    וְזֶה, מְקוֹם לֹא-יָדַע-אֵל.    21 Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knoweth not God.
19.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
19.2 ב  עַד-אָנָה, תּוֹגְיוּן נַפְשִׁי;    וּתְדַכּאוּנַנִי בְמִלִּים.    2 How long will ye vex my soul, and crush me with words?
19.3 ג  זֶה עֶשֶׂר פְּעָמִים, תַּכְלִימוּנִי;    לֹא-תֵבֹשׁוּ, תַּהְכְּרוּ-לִי.    3 These ten times have ye reproached me; ye are not ashamed that ye deal harshly with me.
19.4 ד  וְאַף-אָמְנָם שָׁגִיתִי;    אִתִּי, תָּלִין מְשׁוּגָתִי.    4 And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.
19.5 ה  אִם-אָמְנָם, עָלַי תַּגְדִּילוּ;    וְתוֹכִיחוּ עָלַי, חֶרְפָּתִי.    5 If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me my reproach;
19.6 ו  דְּעוּ-אֵפוֹ, כִּי-אֱלוֹהַּ עִוְּתָנִי;    וּמְצוּדוֹ, עָלַי הִקִּיף.    6 Know now that God hath subverted my cause, and hath compassed me with His net.
19.7 ז  הֵן אֶצְעַק חָמָס, וְלֹא אֵעָנֶה;    אֲשַׁוַּע, וְאֵין מִשְׁפָּט.    7 Behold, I cry out: 'Violence!' but I am not heard; I cry aloud, but there is no justice.
19.8 ח  אָרְחִי גָדַר, וְלֹא אֶעֱבוֹר;    וְעַל נְתִיבוֹתַי, חֹשֶׁךְ יָשִׂים.    8 He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and hath set darkness in my paths.
19.9 ט  כְּבוֹדִי, מֵעָלַי הִפְשִׁיט;    וַיָּסַר, עֲטֶרֶת רֹאשִׁי.    9 He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head.
19.10 י  יִתְּצֵנִי סָבִיב, וָאֵלַךְ;    וַיַּסַּע כָּעֵץ, תִּקְוָתִי.    10 He hath broken me down on every side, and I am gone; and my hope hath He plucked up like a tree.
19.11 יא  וַיַּחַר עָלַי אַפּוֹ;    וַיַּחְשְׁבֵנִי לוֹ כְצָרָיו.    11 He hath also kindled His wrath against me, and He counteth me unto Him as one of His adversaries.
19.12 יב  יַחַד, יָבֹאוּ גְדוּדָיו--וַיָּסֹלּוּ עָלַי דַּרְכָּם;    וַיַּחֲנוּ סָבִיב לְאָהֳלִי.    12 His troops come on together, and cast up their way against me, and encamp round about my tent.
19.13 יג  אַחַי, מֵעָלַי הִרְחִיק;    וְיֹדְעַי, אַךְ-זָרוּ מִמֶּנִּי.    13 He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are wholly estranged from me.
19.14 יד  חָדְלוּ קְרוֹבָי;    וּמְיֻדָּעַי שְׁכֵחוּנִי.    14 My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.
19.15 טו  גָּרֵי בֵיתִי וְאַמְהֹתַי, לְזָר תַּחְשְׁבֻנִי;    נָכְרִי, הָיִיתִי בְעֵינֵיהֶם.    15 They that dwell in my house, and my maids, count me for a stranger; I am become an alien in their sight.
19.16 טז  לְעַבְדִּי קָרָאתִי, וְלֹא יַעֲנֶה;    בְּמוֹ-פִי, אֶתְחַנֶּן-לוֹ.    16 I call unto my servant, and he giveth me no answer, though I entreat him with my mouth.
19.17 יז  רוּחִי, זָרָה לְאִשְׁתִּי;    וְחַנֹּתִי, לִבְנֵי בִטְנִי.    17 My breath is abhorred of my wife, and I am loathsome to the children of my tribe.
19.18 יח  גַּם-עֲוִילִים, מָאֲסוּ בִי;    אָקוּמָה, וַיְדַבְּרוּ-בִי.    18 Even urchins despised me; if I arise, they speak against me.
19.19 יט  תִּעֲבוּנִי, כָּל-מְתֵי סוֹדִי;    וְזֶה-אָהַבְתִּי, נֶהְפְּכוּ-בִי.    19 All my intimate friends abhor me; and they whom I loved are turned against me.
19.20 כ  בְּעוֹרִי וּבִבְשָׂרִי, דָּבְקָה עַצְמִי;    וָאֶתְמַלְּטָה, בְּעוֹר שִׁנָּי.    20 My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.
19.21 כא  חָנֻּנִי חָנֻּנִי אַתֶּם רֵעָי:    כִּי יַד-אֱלוֹהַּ, נָגְעָה בִּי.    21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me.
19.22 כב  לָמָּה, תִּרְדְּפֻנִי כְמוֹ-אֵל;    וּמִבְּשָׂרִי, לֹא תִשְׂבָּעוּ.    22 Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
19.23 כג  מִי-יִתֵּן אֵפוֹ, וְיִכָּתְבוּן מִלָּי:    מִי-יִתֵּן בַּסֵּפֶר וְיֻחָקוּ.    23 Oh that my words were now written! Oh that they were inscribed in a book!
19.24 כד  בְּעֵט-בַּרְזֶל וְעֹפָרֶת--    לָעַד, בַּצּוּר יֵחָצְבוּן.    24 That with an iron pen and lead they were graven in the rock for ever!
19.25 כה  וַאֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי, גֹּאֲלִי חָי;    וְאַחֲרוֹן, עַל-עָפָר יָקוּם.    25 But as for me, I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He will witness at the last upon the dust;
19.26 כו  וְאַחַר עוֹרִי, נִקְּפוּ-זֹאת;    וּמִבְּשָׂרִי, אֶחֱזֶה אֱלוֹהַּ.    26 And when after my skin this is destroyed, then without my flesh shall I see God;
19.27 כז  אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי, אֶחֱזֶה-לִּי--וְעֵינַי רָאוּ וְלֹא-זָר:    כָּלוּ כִלְיֹתַי בְּחֵקִי.    27 Whom I, even I, shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another's. My reins are consumed within me.
19.28 כח  כִּי תֹאמְרוּ, מַה-נִּרְדָּף-לוֹ;    וְשֹׁרֶשׁ דָּבָר, נִמְצָא-בִי.    28 If ye say: 'How we will persecute him!' seeing that the root of the matter is found in me;
19.29 כט  גּוּרוּ לָכֶם, מִפְּנֵי-חֶרֶב--כִּי-חֵמָה, עֲוֺנוֹת חָרֶב:    לְמַעַן תֵּדְעוּן שדין (שַׁדּוּן).    29 Be ye afraid of the sword; for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.
20.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, צֹפַר הַנַּעֲמָתִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said:
20.2 ב  לָכֵן, שְׂעִפַּי יְשִׁיבוּנִי;    וּבַעֲבוּר, חוּשִׁי בִי.    2 Therefore do my thoughts give answer to me, even by reason of mine agitation that is in me.
20.3 ג  מוּסַר כְּלִמָּתִי אֶשְׁמָע;    וְרוּחַ, מִבִּינָתִי יַעֲנֵנִי.    3 I have heard the reproof which putteth me to shame, but out of my understanding my spirit answereth me.
20.4 ד  הֲזֹאת יָדַעְתָּ, מִנִּי-עַד;    מִנִּי שִׂים אָדָם עֲלֵי-אָרֶץ.    4 Knowest thou not this of old time, since man was placed upon earth,
20.5 ה  כִּי רִנְנַת רְשָׁעִים, מִקָּרוֹב;    וְשִׂמְחַת חָנֵף עֲדֵי-רָגַע.    5 That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the godless but for a moment?
20.6 ו  אִם-יַעֲלֶה לַשָּׁמַיִם שִׂיאוֹ;    וְרֹאשׁוֹ, לָעָב יַגִּיעַ.    6 Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds;
20.7 ז  כְּגֶלְלוֹ, לָנֶצַח יֹאבֵד;    רֹאָיו, יֹאמְרוּ אַיּוֹ.    7 Yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung; they that have seen him shall say: 'Where is he?'
20.8 ח  כַּחֲלוֹם יָעוּף, וְלֹא יִמְצָאֻהוּ;    וְיֻדַּד, כְּחֶזְיוֹן לָיְלָה.    8 He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
20.9 ט  עַיִן שְׁזָפַתּוּ, וְלֹא תוֹסִיף;    וְלֹא-עוֹד, תְּשׁוּרֶנּוּ מְקוֹמוֹ.    9 The eye which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall his place any more behold him.
20.10 י  בָּנָיו, יְרַצּוּ דַלִּים;    וְיָדָיו, תָּשֵׁבְנָה אוֹנוֹ.    10 His children shall appease the poor, and his hands shall restore his wealth.
20.11 יא  עַצְמוֹתָיו, מָלְאוּ עֲלוּמָו;    וְעִמּוֹ, עַל-עָפָר תִּשְׁכָּב.    11 His bones are full of his youth, but it shall lie down with him in the dust.
20.12 יב  אִם-תַּמְתִּיק בְּפִיו רָעָה--    יַכְחִידֶנָּה, תַּחַת לְשֹׁנוֹ.    12 Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue;
20.13 יג  יַחְמֹל עָלֶיהָ, וְלֹא יַעַזְבֶנָּה;    וְיִמְנָעֶנָּה, בְּתוֹךְ חִכּוֹ.    13 Though he spare it, and will not let it go, but keep it still within his mouth;
20.14 יד  לַחְמוֹ, בְּמֵעָיו נֶהְפָּךְ;    מְרוֹרַת פְּתָנִים בְּקִרְבּוֹ.    14 Yet his food in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within him.
20.15 טו  חַיִל בָּלַע, וַיְקִאֶנּוּ;    מִבִּטְנוֹ, יֹרִשֶׁנּוּ אֵל.    15 He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again; God shall cast them out of his belly.
20.16 טז  רֹאשׁ-פְּתָנִים יִינָק;    תַּהַרְגֵהוּ, לְשׁוֹן אֶפְעֶה.    16 He shall suck the poison of asps; the viper's tongue shall slay him.
20.17 יז  אַל-יֵרֶא בִפְלַגּוֹת--    נַהֲרֵי נַחֲלֵי, דְּבַשׁ וְחֶמְאָה.    17 He shall not look upon the rivers, the flowing streams of honey and curd.
20.18 יח  מֵשִׁיב יָגָע, וְלֹא יִבְלָע;    כְּחֵיל תְּמוּרָתוֹ, וְלֹא יַעֲלֹס.    18 That which he laboured for shall he give back, and shall not swallow it down; according to the substance that he hath gotten, he shall not rejoice.
20.19 יט  כִּי-רִצַּץ, עָזַב דַּלִּים;    בַּיִת גָּזַל, וְלֹא יִבְנֵהוּ.    19 For he hath oppressed and forsaken the poor; he hath violently taken away a house, and he shall not build it up.
20.20 כ  כִּי, לֹא-יָדַע שָׁלֵו בְּבִטְנוֹ;    בַּחֲמוּדוֹ, לֹא יְמַלֵּט.    20 Because he knew no quietness within him, in his greed he suffered nought to escape,
20.21 כא  אֵין-שָׂרִיד לְאָכְלוֹ;    עַל-כֵּן, לֹא-יָחִיל טוּבוֹ.    21 There was nothing left that he devoured not--therefore his prosperity shall not endure.
20.22 כב  בִּמְלֹאות שִׂפְקוֹ, יֵצֶר לוֹ;    כָּל-יַד עָמֵל תְּבֹאֶנּוּ.    22 In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits; the hand of every one that is in misery shall come upon him.
20.23 כג  יְהִי, לְמַלֵּא בִטְנוֹ--יְשַׁלַּח-בּוֹ, חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ;    וְיַמְטֵר עָלֵימוֹ, בִּלְחוּמוֹ.    23 It shall be for the filling of his belly; He shall cast the fierceness of His wrath upon him, and shall cause it to rain upon him into his flesh.
20.24 כד  יִבְרַח, מִנֵּשֶׁק בַּרְזֶל;    תַּחְלְפֵהוּ, קֶשֶׁת נְחוּשָׁה.    24 If he flee from the iron weapon, the bow of brass shall strike him through.
20.25 כה  שָׁלַף, וַיֵּצֵא מִגֵּוָה:    וּבָרָק, מִמְּרֹרָתוֹ יַהֲלֹךְ; עָלָיו אֵמִים.    25 He draweth it forth, and it cometh out of his body; yea, the glittering point cometh out of his gall; terrors are upon him.
20.26 כו  כָּל-חֹשֶׁךְ,    טָמוּן לִצְפּוּנָיו: תְּאָכְלֵהוּ, אֵשׁ לֹא-נֻפָּח;    יֵרַע שָׂרִיד בְּאָהֳלוֹ.    26 All darkness is laid up for his treasures; {N} a fire not blown by man shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his tent.
20.27 כז  יְגַלּוּ שָׁמַיִם עֲוֺנוֹ;    וְאֶרֶץ, מִתְקוֹמָמָה לוֹ.    27 The heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him.
20.28 כח  יִגֶל, יְבוּל בֵּיתוֹ;    נִגָּרוֹת, בְּיוֹם אַפּוֹ.    28 The increase of his house shall depart, his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
20.29 כט  זֶה, חֵלֶק-אָדָם רָשָׁע--מֵאֱלֹהִים;    וְנַחֲלַת אִמְרוֹ מֵאֵל.    29 This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God.
21.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
21.2 ב  שִׁמְעוּ שָׁמוֹעַ, מִלָּתִי;    וּתְהִי-זֹאת, תַּנְחוּמֹתֵיכֶם.    2 Hear diligently my speech; and let this be your consolations.
21.3 ג  שָׂאוּנִי, וְאָנֹכִי אֲדַבֵּר;    וְאַחַר דַּבְּרִי תַלְעִיג.    3 Suffer me, that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on.
21.4 ד  הֶאָנֹכִי, לְאָדָם שִׂיחִי;    וְאִם-מַדּוּעַ, לֹא-תִקְצַר רוּחִי.    4 As for me, is my complaint to man? Or why should I not be impatient?
21.5 ה  פְּנוּ-אֵלַי וְהָשַׁמּוּ;    וְשִׂימוּ יָד עַל-פֶּה.    5 Turn unto me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.
21.6 ו  וְאִם-זָכַרְתִּי וְנִבְהָלְתִּי;    וְאָחַז בְּשָׂרִי, פַּלָּצוּת.    6 Even when I remember I am affrighted, and horror hath taketh hold on my flesh.
21.7 ז  מַדּוּעַ, רְשָׁעִים יִחְיוּ;    עָתְקוּ, גַּם-גָּבְרוּ חָיִל.    7 Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, wax mighty in power?
21.8 ח  זַרְעָם נָכוֹן לִפְנֵיהֶם עִמָּם;    וְצֶאֱצָאֵיהֶם, לְעֵינֵיהֶם.    8 Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes.
21.9 ט  בָּתֵּיהֶם שָׁלוֹם מִפָּחַד;    וְלֹא שֵׁבֶט אֱלוֹהַּ עֲלֵיהֶם.    9 Their houses are safe, without fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.
21.10 י  שׁוֹרוֹ עִבַּר, וְלֹא יַגְעִל;    תְּפַלֵּט פָּרָתוֹ, וְלֹא תְשַׁכֵּל.    10 Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.
21.11 יא  יְשַׁלְּחוּ כַצֹּאן, עֲוִילֵיהֶם;    וְיַלְדֵיהֶם, יְרַקֵּדוּן.    11 They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.
21.12 יב  יִשְׂאוּ, כְּתֹף וְכִנּוֹר;    וְיִשְׂמְחוּ, לְקוֹל עוּגָב.    12 They sing to the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the pipe.
21.13 יג  יבלו (יְכַלּוּ) בַטּוֹב יְמֵיהֶם;    וּבְרֶגַע, שְׁאוֹל יֵחָתּוּ.    13 They spend their days in prosperity, and peacefully they go down to the grave.
21.14 יד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָאֵל, סוּר מִמֶּנּוּ;    וְדַעַת דְּרָכֶיךָ, לֹא חָפָצְנוּ.    14 Yet they said unto God: 'Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of Thy ways.
21.15 טו  מַה-שַּׁדַּי כִּי-נַעַבְדֶנּוּ;    וּמַה-נּוֹעִיל, כִּי נִפְגַּע-בּוֹ.    15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve Him? And what profit should we have, if we pray unto Him?'--
21.16 טז  הֵן לֹא בְיָדָם טוּבָם;    עֲצַת רְשָׁעִים, רָחֲקָה מֶנִּי.    16 Lo, their prosperity is not in their hand; the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
21.17 יז  כַּמָּה, נֵר-רְשָׁעִים יִדְעָךְ--    וְיָבֹא עָלֵימוֹ אֵידָם; חֲבָלִים,    יְחַלֵּק בְּאַפּוֹ.    17 How oft is it that the lamp of the wicked is put out? that their calamity cometh upon them? {N} that He distributeth pains in His anger?
21.18 יח  יִהְיוּ, כְּתֶבֶן לִפְנֵי-רוּחַ;    וּכְמֹץ, גְּנָבַתּוּ סוּפָה.    18 That they are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm stealeth away?
21.19 יט  אֱלוֹהַּ, יִצְפֹּן-לְבָנָיו אוֹנוֹ;    יְשַׁלֵּם אֵלָיו וְיֵדָע.    19 'God layeth up his iniquity for his children!'--let Him recompense it unto himself, that he may know it.
21.20 כ  יִרְאוּ עֵינָו כִּידוֹ;    וּמֵחֲמַת שַׁדַּי יִשְׁתֶּה.    20 Let his own eyes see his destruction, and let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
21.21 כא  כִּי מַה-חֶפְצוֹ בְּבֵיתוֹ אַחֲרָיו;    וּמִסְפַּר חֳדָשָׁיו חֻצָּצוּ.    21 For what pleasure hath he in his house after him? seeing the number of his months is determined.
21.22 כב  הַלְאֵל יְלַמֶּד-דָּעַת;    וְהוּא, רָמִים יִשְׁפּוֹט.    22 Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing it is He that judgeth those that are high.
21.23 כג  זֶה--יָמוּת, בְּעֶצֶם תֻּמּוֹ;    כֻּלּוֹ, שַׁלְאֲנַן וְשָׁלֵיו.    23 One dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet;
21.24 כד  עֲטִינָיו, מָלְאוּ חָלָב;    וּמֹחַ עַצְמוֹתָיו יְשֻׁקֶּה.    24 His pails are full of milk, and the marrow of his bones is moistened.
21.25 כה  וְזֶה--יָמוּת, בְּנֶפֶשׁ מָרָה;    וְלֹא-אָכַל, בַּטּוֹבָה.    25 And another dieth in bitterness of soul, and hath never tasted of good.
21.26 כו  יַחַד, עַל-עָפָר יִשְׁכָּבוּ;    וְרִמָּה, תְּכַסֶּה עֲלֵיהֶם.    26 They lie down alike in the dust, and the worm covereth them.
21.27 כז  הֵן יָדַעְתִּי, מַחְשְׁבוֹתֵיכֶם;    וּמְזִמּוֹת, עָלַי תַּחְמֹסוּ.    27 Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully imagine against me.
21.28 כח  כִּי תֹאמְרוּ, אַיֵּה בֵית-נָדִיב;    וְאַיֵּה, אֹהֶל מִשְׁכְּנוֹת רְשָׁעִים.    28 For ye say: 'Where is the house of the prince? And where is the tent wherein the wicked dwelt?'
21.29 כט  הֲלֹא שְׁאֶלְתֶּם, עוֹבְרֵי דָרֶךְ;    וְאֹתֹתָם, לֹא תְנַכֵּרוּ.    29 Have ye not asked them that go by the way; and will ye misdeem their tokens,
21.30 ל  כִּי לְיוֹם אֵיד, יֵחָשֶׂךְ רָע;    לְיוֹם עֲבָרוֹת יוּבָלוּ.    30 That the evil man is reserved to the day of calamity, that they are led forth to the day of wrath?
21.31 לא  מִי-יַגִּיד עַל-פָּנָיו דַּרְכּוֹ;    וְהוּא-עָשָׂה, מִי יְשַׁלֶּם-לוֹ.    31 But who shall declare his way to his face? And who shall repay him what he hath done?
21.32 לב  וְהוּא, לִקְבָרוֹת יוּבָל;    וְעַל-גָּדִישׁ יִשְׁקוֹד.    32 For he is borne to the grave, and watch is kept over his tomb.
21.33 לג  מָתְקוּ-לוֹ, רִגְבֵי-נָחַל:    וְאַחֲרָיו, כָּל-אָדָם יִמְשׁוֹךְ; וּלְפָנָיו, אֵין מִסְפָּר.    33 The clods of the valley are sweet unto him, and all men draw after him, as there were innumerable before him.
21.34 לד  וְאֵיךְ, תְּנַחֲמוּנִי הָבֶל;    וּתְשׁוּבֹתֵיכֶם, נִשְׁאַר-מָעַל.    34 How then comfort ye me in vain? And as for your answers, there remaineth only faithlessness?
22.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, אֱלִיפַז הַתֵּמָנִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said:
22.2 ב  הַלְאֵל יִסְכָּן-גָּבֶר--    כִּי-יִסְכֹּן עָלֵימוֹ מַשְׂכִּיל.    2 Can a man be profitable unto God? Or can he that is wise be profitable unto Him?
22.3 ג  הַחֵפֶץ לְשַׁדַּי, כִּי תִצְדָּק;    וְאִם-בֶּצַע, כִּי-תַתֵּם דְּרָכֶיךָ.    3 Is it any advantage to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? Or is it gain to Him, that thou makest thy ways blameless?
22.4 ד  הֲמִיִּרְאָתְךָ יֹכִיחֶךָ;    יָבוֹא עִמְּךָ, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט.    4 Is it for thy fear of Him that He reproveth thee, that He entereth with thee into judgment?
22.5 ה  הֲלֹא רָעָתְךָ רַבָּה;    וְאֵין-קֵץ, לַעֲוֺנֹתֶיךָ.    5 Is not thy wickedness great? And are not thine iniquities without end?
22.6 ו  כִּי-תַחְבֹּל אַחֶיךָ חִנָּם;    וּבִגְדֵי עֲרוּמִּים תַּפְשִׁיט.    6 For thou hast taken pledges of thy brother for nought, and stripped the naked of their clothing.
22.7 ז  לֹא-מַיִם, עָיֵף תַּשְׁקֶה;    וּמֵרָעֵב, תִּמְנַע-לָחֶם.    7 Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast withholden bread from the hungry.
22.8 ח  וְאִישׁ זְרוֹעַ, לוֹ הָאָרֶץ;    וּנְשׂוּא פָנִים, יֵשֶׁב בָּהּ.    8 And as a mighty man, who hath the earth, and as a man of rank, who dwelleth in it,
22.9 ט  אַלְמָנוֹת, שִׁלַּחְתָּ רֵיקָם;    וּזְרֹעוֹת יְתֹמִים יְדֻכָּא.    9 Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken.
22.10 י  עַל-כֵּן, סְבִיבוֹתֶיךָ פַחִים;    וִיבַהֶלְךָ, פַּחַד פִּתְאֹם.    10 Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden dread affrighted thee,
22.11 יא  אוֹ-חֹשֶׁךְ לֹא-תִרְאֶה;    וְשִׁפְעַת-מַיִם תְּכַסֶּךָּ.    11 Or darkness, that thou canst not see, and abundance of waters cover thee.
22.12 יב  הֲלֹא-אֱלוֹהַּ, גֹּבַהּ שָׁמָיִם;    וּרְאֵה רֹאשׁ כּוֹכָבִים כִּי-רָמּוּ.    12 Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold the topmost of the stars, how high they are!
22.13 יג  וְאָמַרְתָּ, מַה-יָּדַע אֵל;    הַבְעַד עֲרָפֶל יִשְׁפּוֹט.    13 And thou sayest: 'What doth God know? Can He judge through the dark cloud?
22.14 יד  עָבִים סֵתֶר-לוֹ, וְלֹא יִרְאֶה;    וְחוּג שָׁמַיִם, יִתְהַלָּךְ.    14 Thick clouds are a covering to Him, that He seeth not; and He walketh in the circuit of heaven.'
22.15 טו  הַאֹרַח עוֹלָם תִּשְׁמוֹר--    אֲשֶׁר דָּרְכוּ מְתֵי-אָוֶן.    15 Wilt thou keep the old way which wicked men have trodden?
22.16 טז  אֲשֶׁר-קֻמְּטוּ וְלֹא-עֵת;    נָהָר, יוּצַק יְסוֹדָם.    16 Who were snatched away before their time, whose foundation was poured out as a stream;
22.17 יז  הָאֹמְרִים לָאֵל, סוּר מִמֶּנּוּ;    וּמַה-יִּפְעַל שַׁדַּי לָמוֹ.    17 Who said unto God: 'Depart from us'; and what could the Almighty do unto them?
22.18 יח  וְהוּא מִלֵּא בָתֵּיהֶם טוֹב;    וַעֲצַת רְשָׁעִים, רָחֲקָה מֶנִּי.    18 Yet He filled their houses with good things--but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
22.19 יט  יִרְאוּ צַדִּיקִים וְיִשְׂמָחוּ;    וְנָקִי, יִלְעַג-לָמוֹ.    19 The righteous saw it, and were glad, and the innocent laugh them to scorn:
22.20 כ  אִם-לֹא נִכְחַד קִימָנוּ;    וְיִתְרָם, אָכְלָה אֵשׁ.    20 'Surely their substance is cut off, and their abundance the fire hath consumed.'
22.21 כא  הַסְכֶּן-נָא עִמּוֹ וּשְׁלָם;    בָּהֶם, תְּבוֹאַתְךָ טוֹבָה.    21 Acquaint now thyself with Him, and be at peace; thereby shall thine increase be good.
22.22 כב  קַח-נָא מִפִּיו תּוֹרָה;    וְשִׂים אֲמָרָיו, בִּלְבָבֶךָ.    22 Receive, I pray thee, instruction from His mouth, and lay up His words in thy heart.
22.23 כג  אִם-תָּשׁוּב עַד-שַׁדַּי, תִּבָּנֶה;    תַּרְחִיק עַוְלָה, מֵאָהֳלֶךָ.    23 If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up--if thou put away unrighteousness far from thy tents,
22.24 כד  וְשִׁית-עַל-עָפָר בָּצֶר;    וּכְצוּר נְחָלִים אוֹפִיר.    24 And lay thy treasure in the dust, and the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks;
22.25 כה  וְהָיָה שַׁדַּי בְּצָרֶיךָ;    וְכֶסֶף תּוֹעָפוֹת לָךְ.    25 And the Almighty be thy treasure, and precious silver unto thee;
22.26 כו  כִּי-אָז, עַל-שַׁדַּי תִּתְעַנָּג;    וְתִשָּׂא אֶל-אֱלוֹהַּ פָּנֶיךָ.    26 Then surely shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto God.
22.27 כז  תַּעְתִּיר אֵלָיו, וְיִשְׁמָעֶךָּ;    וּנְדָרֶיךָ תְשַׁלֵּם.    27 Thou shalt make thy prayer unto Him, and He will hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows;
22.28 כח  וְתִגְזַר-אֹמֶר, וְיָקָם לָךְ;    וְעַל-דְּרָכֶיךָ, נָגַהּ אוֹר.    28 Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee, and light shall shine upon thy ways.
22.29 כט  כִּי-הִשְׁפִּילוּ, וַתֹּאמֶר גֵּוָה;    וְשַׁח עֵינַיִם יוֹשִׁעַ.    29 When they cast thee down, thou shalt say: 'There is lifting up'; for the humble person He saveth.
22.30 ל  יְמַלֵּט אִי-נָקִי;    וְנִמְלַט, בְּבֹר כַּפֶּיךָ.    30 He delivereth him that is innocent, yea, thou shalt be delivered through the cleanness of thy hands.
23.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
23.2 ב  גַּם-הַיּוֹם, מְרִי שִׂחִי;    יָדִי, כָּבְדָה עַל-אַנְחָתִי.    2 Even to-day is my complaint bitter; my hand is become heavy because of my groaning.
23.3 ג  מִי-יִתֵּן יָדַעְתִּי, וְאֶמְצָאֵהוּ;    אָבוֹא, עַד-תְּכוּנָתוֹ.    3 Oh that I knew where I might find Him, that I might come even to His seat!
23.4 ד  אֶעֶרְכָה לְפָנָיו מִשְׁפָּט;    וּפִי, אֲמַלֵּא תוֹכָחוֹת.    4 I would order my cause before Him, and fill my mouth with arguments.
23.5 ה  אֵדְעָה, מִלִּים יַעֲנֵנִי;    וְאָבִינָה, מַה-יֹּאמַר לִי.    5 I would know the words which He would answer me, and understand what He would say unto me.
23.6 ו  הַבְּרָב-כֹּחַ, יָרִיב עִמָּדִי;    לֹא אַךְ-הוּא, יָשִׂם בִּי.    6 Would He contend with me in His great power? Nay; but He would give heed unto me.
23.7 ז  שָׁם--יָשָׁר, נוֹכָח עִמּוֹ;    וַאֲפַלְּטָה לָנֶצַח, מִשֹּׁפְטִי.    7 There the upright might reason with Him; so should I be delivered for ever from my Judge.
23.8 ח  הֵן קֶדֶם אֶהֱלֹךְ וְאֵינֶנּוּ;    וְאָחוֹר, וְלֹא-אָבִין לוֹ.    8 Behold, I go forward, but He is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive Him;
23.9 ט  שְׂמֹאול בַּעֲשֹׂתוֹ, וְלֹא-אָחַז;    יַעְטֹף יָמִין, וְלֹא אֶרְאֶה.    9 On the left hand, when He doth work, but I cannot behold Him, He turneth Himself to the right hand, but I cannot see Him.
23.10 י  כִּי-יָדַע, דֶּרֶךְ עִמָּדִי;    בְּחָנַנִי, כַּזָּהָב אֵצֵא.    10 For He knoweth the way that I take; when He hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
23.11 יא  בַּאֲשֻׁרוֹ, אָחֲזָה רַגְלִי;    דַּרְכּוֹ שָׁמַרְתִּי וְלֹא-אָט.    11 My foot hath held fast to His steps, His way have I kept, and turned not aside.
23.12 יב  מִצְוַת שְׂפָתָיו, וְלֹא אָמִישׁ;    מֵחֻקִּי, צָפַנְתִּי אִמְרֵי-פִיו.    12 I have not gone back from the commandment of His lips; I have treasured up the words of His mouth more than my necessary food.
23.13 יג  וְהוּא בְאֶחָד, וּמִי יְשִׁיבֶנּוּ;    וְנַפְשׁוֹ אִוְּתָה וַיָּעַשׂ.    13 But He is at one with Himself, and who can turn Him? And what His soul desireth, even that He doeth.
23.14 יד  כִּי, יַשְׁלִים חֻקִּי;    וְכָהֵנָּה רַבּוֹת עִמּוֹ.    14 For He will perform that which is appointed for me; and many such things are with Him.
23.15 טו  עַל-כֵּן, מִפָּנָיו אֶבָּהֵל;    אֶתְבּוֹנֵן, וְאֶפְחַד מִמֶּנּוּ.    15 Therefore am I affrighted at His presence; when I consider, I am afraid of Him.
23.16 טז  וְאֵל, הֵרַךְ לִבִּי;    וְשַׁדַּי, הִבְהִילָנִי.    16 Yea, God hath made my heart faint, and the Almighty hath affrighted me;
23.17 יז  כִּי-לֹא נִצְמַתִּי, מִפְּנֵי-חֹשֶׁךְ;    וּמִפָּנַי, כִּסָּה-אֹפֶל.    17 Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither did He cover the thick darkness from my face.
24.1 א  מַדּוּעַ--מִשַּׁדַּי, לֹא-נִצְפְּנוּ עִתִּים;    וְיֹדְעָו, לֹא-חָזוּ יָמָיו.    1 Why are times not laid up by the Almighty? And why do not they that know Him see His days?
24.2 ב  גְּבֻלוֹת יַשִּׂיגוּ;    עֵדֶר גָּזְלוּ, וַיִּרְעוּ.    2 There are that remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed them.
24.3 ג  חֲמוֹר יְתוֹמִים יִנְהָגוּ;    יַחְבְּלוּ, שׁוֹר אַלְמָנָה.    3 They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow's ox for a pledge.
24.4 ד  יַטּוּ אֶבְיֹנִים מִדָּרֶךְ;    יַחַד חֻבְּאוּ, עֲנִיֵּי-אָרֶץ.    4 They turn the needy out of the way; the poor of the earth hide themselves together.
24.5 ה  הֵן פְּרָאִים, בַּמִּדְבָּר--    יָצְאוּ בְּפָעֳלָם, מְשַׁחֲרֵי לַטָּרֶף; עֲרָבָה לוֹ לֶחֶם,    לַנְּעָרִים.    5 Behold, as wild asses in the wilderness they go forth to their work, seeking diligently for food; {N} the desert yieldeth them bread for their children.
24.6 ו  בַּשָּׂדֶה, בְּלִילוֹ יקצירו (יִקְצוֹרוּ);    וְכֶרֶם רָשָׁע יְלַקֵּשׁוּ.    6 They cut his provender in the field; and they despoil the vineyard of the wicked.
24.7 ז  עָרוֹם יָלִינוּ, מִבְּלִי לְבוּשׁ;    וְאֵין כְּסוּת, בַּקָּרָה.    7 They lie all night naked without clothing, and have no covering in the cold.
24.8 ח  מִזֶּרֶם הָרִים יִרְטָבוּ;    וּמִבְּלִי מַחְסֶה, חִבְּקוּ-צוּר.    8 They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
24.9 ט  יִגְזְלוּ, מִשֹּׁד יָתוֹם;    וְעַל-עָנִי יַחְבֹּלוּ.    9 There are that pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor;
24.10 י  עָרוֹם הִלְּכוּ, בְּלִי לְבוּשׁ;    וּרְעֵבִים, נָשְׂאוּ עֹמֶר.    10 So that they go about naked without clothing, and being hungry they carry the sheaves;
24.11 יא  בֵּין-שׁוּרֹתָם יַצְהִירוּ;    יְקָבִים דָּרְכוּ, וַיִּצְמָאוּ.    11 They make oil within the rows of these men; they tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst.
24.12 יב  מֵעִיר מְתִים, יִנְאָקוּ--    וְנֶפֶשׁ-חֲלָלִים תְּשַׁוֵּעַ: וֶאֱלוֹהַּ,    לֹא-יָשִׂים תִּפְלָה.    12 From out of the populous city men groan, and the soul of the wounded crieth out; {N} yet God imputeth it not for unseemliness.
24.13 יג  הֵמָּה, הָיוּ--בְּמֹרְדֵי-אוֹר:    לֹא-הִכִּירוּ דְרָכָיו; וְלֹא יָשְׁבוּ, בִּנְתִיבֹתָיו.    13 These are of them that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.
24.14 יד  לָאוֹר, יָקוּם רוֹצֵחַ--יִקְטָל-עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן;    וּבַלַּיְלָה, יְהִי כַגַּנָּב.    14 The murderer riseth with the light, to kill the poor and needy; and in the night he is as a thief.
24.15 טו  וְעֵין נֹאֵף, שָׁמְרָה נֶשֶׁף לֵאמֹר--    לֹא-תְשׁוּרֵנִי עָיִן; וְסֵתֶר פָּנִים    יָשִׂים.    15 The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying: 'No eye shall see me'; {N} and he putteth a covering on his face.
24.16 טז  חָתַר בַּחֹשֶׁךְ, בָּתִּים:    יוֹמָם חִתְּמוּ-לָמוֹ; לֹא-יָדְעוּ אוֹר.    16 In the dark they dig through houses; they shut themselves up in the day-time; they know not the light.
24.17 יז  כִּי יַחְדָּו, בֹּקֶר לָמוֹ צַלְמָוֶת;    כִּי-יַכִּיר, בַּלְהוֹת צַלְמָוֶת.    17 For the shadow of death is to all of them as the morning; for they know the terrors of the shadow of death.
24.18 יח  קַל-הוּא, עַל-פְּנֵי-מַיִם--    תְּקֻלַּל חֶלְקָתָם בָּאָרֶץ; לֹא-יִפְנֶה,    דֶּרֶךְ כְּרָמִים.    18 He is swift upon the face of the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth; {N} he turneth not by the way of the vineyards.
24.19 יט  צִיָּה גַם-חֹם, יִגְזְלוּ מֵימֵי-שֶׁלֶג;    שְׁאוֹל חָטָאוּ.    19 Drought and heat consume the snow waters; so doth the nether-world those that have sinned.
24.20 כ  יִשְׁכָּחֵהוּ רֶחֶם, מְתָקוֹ רִמָּה--    עוֹד לֹא-יִזָּכֵר; וַתִּשָּׁבֵר כָּעֵץ    עַוְלָה.    20 The womb forgetteth him; the worm feedeth sweetly on him; he shall be no more remembered; {N} and unrighteousness is broken as a tree.
24.21 כא  רֹעֶה עֲקָרָה, לֹא תֵלֵד;    וְאַלְמָנָה, לֹא יְיֵטִיב.    21 He devoureth the barren that beareth not; and doeth not good to the widow.
24.22 כב  וּמָשַׁךְ אַבִּירִים בְּכֹחוֹ;    יָקוּם, וְלֹא-יַאֲמִין בַּחַיִּין.    22 He draweth away the mighty also by his power; he riseth up, and he trusteth not his own life.
24.23 כג  יִתֶּן-לוֹ לָבֶטַח, וְיִשָּׁעֵן;    וְעֵינֵיהוּ, עַל-דַּרְכֵיהֶם.    23 Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth, yet His eyes are upon their ways.
24.24 כד  רוֹמּוּ מְּעַט, וְאֵינֶנּוּ,    וְהֻמְּכוּ, כַּכֹּל יִקָּפְצוּן; וּכְרֹאשׁ שִׁבֹּלֶת    יִמָּלוּ.    24 They are exalted for a little while, and they are gone; yea, they are brought low, they are gathered in as all others, {N} and wither as the tops of the ears of corn.
24.25 כה  וְאִם-לֹא אֵפוֹ, מִי יַכְזִיבֵנִי;    וְיָשֵׂם לְאַל, מִלָּתִי.    25 And if it be not so now, who will prove me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?
25.1 א                  וַיַּעַן, בִּלְדַּד הַשֻּׁחִי; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said:
25.2 ב  הַמְשֵׁל וָפַחַד עִמּוֹ;    עֹשֶׂה שָׁלוֹם, בִּמְרוֹמָיו.    2 Dominion and fear are with Him; He maketh peace in His high places.
25.3 ג  הֲיֵשׁ מִסְפָּר, לִגְדוּדָיו;    וְעַל-מִי, לֹא-יָקוּם אוֹרֵהוּ.    3 Is there any number of His armies? And upon whom doth not His light arise?
25.4 ד  וּמַה-יִּצְדַּק אֱנוֹשׁ עִם-אֵל;    וּמַה-יִּזְכֶּה, יְלוּד אִשָּׁה.    4 How then can man be just with God? Or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?
25.5 ה  הֵן עַד-יָרֵחַ, וְלֹא יַאֲהִיל;    וְכוֹכָבִים, לֹא-זַכּוּ בְעֵינָיו.    5 Behold, even the moon hath no brightness, and the stars are not pure in His sight;
25.6 ו  אַף, כִּי-אֱנוֹשׁ רִמָּה;    וּבֶן-אָדָם, תּוֹלֵעָה.    6 How much less man, that is a worm! and the son of man, that is a maggot!
26.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered and said:
26.2 ב  מֶה-עָזַרְתָּ, לְלֹא-כֹחַ;    הוֹשַׁעְתָּ, זְרוֹעַ לֹא-עֹז.    2 How hast thou helped him that is without power! How hast thou saved the arm that hath no strength!
26.3 ג  מַה-יָּעַצְתָּ, לְלֹא חָכְמָה;    וְתֻשִׁיָּה, לָרֹב הוֹדָעְתָּ.    3 How hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom, and plentifully declared sound knowledge!
26.4 ד  אֶת-מִי, הִגַּדְתָּ מִלִּין;    וְנִשְׁמַת-מִי, יָצְאָה מִמֶּךָּ.    4 With whose help hast thou uttered words? And whose spirit came forth from thee?
26.5 ה  הָרְפָאִים יְחוֹלָלוּ--    מִתַּחַת מַיִם, וְשֹׁכְנֵיהֶם.    5 The shades tremble beneath the waters and the inhabitants thereof.
26.6 ו  עָרוֹם שְׁאוֹל נֶגְדּוֹ;    וְאֵין כְּסוּת, לָאֲבַדּוֹן.    6 The nether-world is naked before Him, and Destruction hath no covering.
26.7 ז  נֹטֶה צָפוֹן עַל-תֹּהוּ;    תֹּלֶה אֶרֶץ, עַל-בְּלִי-מָה.    7 He stretcheth out the north over the empty space, and hangeth the earth over nothing.
26.8 ח  צֹרֵר-מַיִם בְּעָבָיו;    וְלֹא-נִבְקַע עָנָן תַּחְתָּם.    8 He bindeth up the waters in His thick clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them.
26.9 ט  מְאַחֵז פְּנֵי-כִסֵּה;    פַּרְשֵׁז עָלָיו עֲנָנוֹ.    9 He closeth in the face of His throne, and spreadeth His cloud upon it.
26.10 י  חֹק-חָג, עַל-פְּנֵי-מָיִם--    עַד-תַּכְלִית אוֹר עִם-חֹשֶׁךְ.    10 He hath described a boundary upon the face of the waters, unto the confines of light and darkness.
26.11 יא  עַמּוּדֵי שָׁמַיִם יְרוֹפָפוּ;    וְיִתְמְהוּ, מִגַּעֲרָתוֹ.    11 The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at His rebuke.
26.12 יב  בְּכֹחוֹ, רָגַע הַיָּם;    ובתובנתו (וּבִתְבוּנָתוֹ), מָחַץ רָהַב.    12 He stirreth up the sea with His power, and by His understanding He smiteth through Rahab.
26.13 יג  בְּרוּחוֹ, שָׁמַיִם שִׁפְרָה;    חֹלְלָה יָדוֹ, נָחָשׁ בָּרִחַ.    13 By His breath the heavens are serene; His hand hath pierced the slant serpent.
26.14 יד  הֶן-אֵלֶּה, קְצוֹת דְּרָכָו--    וּמַה-שֵּׁמֶץ דָּבָר, נִשְׁמַע-בּוֹ; וְרַעַם גְּבוּרֹתָו,    מִי יִתְבּוֹנָן.    14 Lo, these are but the outskirts of His ways; and how small a whisper is heard of Him! {N} But the thunder of His mighty deeds who can understand?
27.1 א                  וַיֹּסֶף אִיּוֹב, שְׂאֵת מְשָׁלוֹ; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} And Job again took up his parable, and said:
27.2 ב  חַי-אֵל, הֵסִיר מִשְׁפָּטִי;    וְשַׁדַּי, הֵמַר נַפְשִׁי.    2 As God liveth, who hath taken away my right; and the Almighty, who hath dealt bitterly with me;
27.3 ג  כִּי-כָל-עוֹד נִשְׁמָתִי בִי;    וְרוּחַ אֱלוֹהַּ בְּאַפִּי.    3 All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
27.4 ד  אִם-תְּדַבֵּרְנָה שְׂפָתַי עַוְלָה;    וּלְשׁוֹנִי, אִם-יֶהְגֶּה רְמִיָּה.    4 Surely my lips shall not speak unrighteousness, neither shall my tongue utter deceit;
27.5 ה  חָלִילָה לִּי,    אִם-אַצְדִּיק אֶתְכֶם: עַד-אֶגְוָע--    לֹא-אָסִיר תֻּמָּתִי מִמֶּנִּי.    5 Far be it from me that I should justify you; {N} till I die I will not put away mine integrity from me.
27.6 ו  בְּצִדְקָתִי הֶחֱזַקְתִּי, וְלֹא אַרְפֶּהָ;    לֹא-יֶחֱרַף לְבָבִי, מִיָּמָי.    6 My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
27.7 ז  יְהִי כְרָשָׁע, אֹיְבִי;    וּמִתְקוֹמְמִי כְעַוָּל.    7 Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and let him that riseth up against me be as the unrighteous.
27.8 ח  כִּי מַה-תִּקְוַת חָנֵף, כִּי יִבְצָע;    כִּי יֵשֶׁל אֱלוֹהַּ נַפְשׁוֹ.    8 For what is the hope of the godless, though he get him gain, when God taketh away his soul?
27.9 ט  הֲצַעֲקָתוֹ, יִשְׁמַע אֵל--    כִּי-תָבוֹא עָלָיו צָרָה.    9 Will God hear his cry, when trouble cometh upon him?
27.10 י  אִם-עַל-שַׁדַּי יִתְעַנָּג;    יִקְרָא אֱלוֹהַּ בְּכָל-עֵת.    10 Will he have his delight in the Almighty, and call upon God at all times?
27.11 יא  אוֹרֶה אֶתְכֶם בְּיַד-אֵל;    אֲשֶׁר עִם-שַׁדַּי, לֹא אֲכַחֵד.    11 I will teach you concerning the hand of God; that which is with the Almighty will I not conceal.
27.12 יב  הֵן-אַתֶּם כֻּלְּכֶם חֲזִיתֶם;    וְלָמָּה-זֶּה, הֶבֶל תֶּהְבָּלוּ.    12 Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye become altogether vain?
27.13 יג  זֶה, חֵלֶק-אָדָם רָשָׁע עִם-אֵל;    וְנַחֲלַת עָרִיצִים, מִשַּׁדַּי יִקָּחוּ.    13 This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the Almighty.
27.14 יד  אִם-יִרְבּוּ בָנָיו לְמוֹ-חָרֶב;    וְצֶאֱצָאָיו, לֹא יִשְׂבְּעוּ-לָחֶם.    14 If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword; and his offspring shall not have bread enough.
27.15 טו  שְׂרִידָו, בַּמָּוֶת יִקָּבֵרוּ;    וְאַלְמְנֹתָיו, לֹא תִבְכֶּינָה.    15 Those that remain of him shall be buried by pestilence, and his widows shall make no lamentation.
27.16 טז  אִם-יִצְבֹּר כֶּעָפָר כָּסֶף;    וְכַחֹמֶר, יָכִין מַלְבּוּשׁ.    16 Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;
27.17 יז  יָכִין, וְצַדִּיק יִלְבָּשׁ;    וְכֶסֶף, נָקִי יַחֲלֹק.    17 He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.
27.18 יח  בָּנָה כָעָשׁ בֵּיתוֹ;    וּכְסֻכָּה, עָשָׂה נֹצֵר.    18 He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth which the keeper maketh.
27.19 יט  עָשִׁיר יִשְׁכַּב, וְלֹא יֵאָסֵף;    עֵינָיו פָּקַח וְאֵינֶנּוּ.    19 He lieth down rich, but there shall be nought to gather; he openeth his eyes, and his wealth is not.
27.20 כ  תַּשִּׂיגֵהוּ כַמַּיִם, בַּלָּהוֹת;    לַיְלָה, גְּנָבַתּוּ סוּפָה.    20 Terrors overtake him like waters; a tempest stealeth him away in the night.
27.21 כא  יִשָּׂאֵהוּ קָדִים וְיֵלַךְ;    וִישָׂעֲרֵהוּ, מִמְּקֹמוֹ.    21 The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth; and it sweepeth him out of his place.
27.22 כב  וְיַשְׁלֵךְ עָלָיו, וְלֹא יַחְמֹל;    מִיָּדוֹ, בָּרוֹחַ יִבְרָח.    22 Yea, it hurleth at him, and spareth not; he would fain flee from its power.
27.23 כג  יִשְׂפֹּק עָלֵימוֹ כַפֵּימוֹ;    וְיִשְׁרֹק עָלָיו, מִמְּקֹמוֹ.    23 Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.
28.1 א  כִּי יֵשׁ לַכֶּסֶף מוֹצָא;    וּמָקוֹם, לַזָּהָב יָזֹקּוּ.    1 For there is a mine for silver, and a place for gold which they refine.
28.2 ב  בַּרְזֶל, מֵעָפָר יֻקָּח;    וְאֶבֶן, יָצוּק נְחוּשָׁה.    2 Iron is taken out of the dust, and brass is molten out of the stone.
28.3 ג  קֵץ, שָׂם לַחֹשֶׁךְ, וּלְכָל-תַּכְלִית, הוּא חוֹקֵר:    אֶבֶן אֹפֶל וְצַלְמָוֶת.    3 Man setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out to the furthest bound the stones of thick darkness and of the shadow of death.
28.4 ד  פָּרַץ נַחַל, מֵעִם-גָּר--הַנִּשְׁכָּחִים מִנִּי-רָגֶל;    דַּלּוּ מֵאֱנוֹשׁ נָעוּ.    4 He breaketh open a shaft away from where men sojourn; they are forgotten of the foot that passeth by; they hang afar from men, they swing to and fro.
28.5 ה  אֶרֶץ--מִמֶּנָּה יֵצֵא-לָחֶם;    וְתַחְתֶּיהָ, נֶהְפַּךְ כְּמוֹ-אֵשׁ.    5 As for the earth, out of it cometh bread, and underneath it is turned up as it were by fire.
28.6 ו  מְקוֹם-סַפִּיר אֲבָנֶיהָ;    וְעַפְרֹת זָהָב לוֹ.    6 The stones thereof are the place of sapphires, and it hath dust of gold.
28.7 ז  נָתִיב, לֹא-יְדָעוֹ עָיִט;    וְלֹא שְׁזָפַתּוּ, עֵין אַיָּה.    7 That path no bird of prey knoweth, neither hath the falcon's eye seen it;
28.8 ח  לֹא-הִדְרִיכוּהוּ בְנֵי-שָׁחַץ;    לֹא-עָדָה עָלָיו שָׁחַל.    8 The proud beasts have not trodden it, nor hath the lion passed thereby.
28.9 ט  בַּחַלָּמִישׁ, שָׁלַח יָדוֹ;    הָפַךְ מִשֹּׁרֶשׁ הָרִים.    9 He putteth forth his hand upon the flinty rock; He overturneth the mountains by the roots.
28.10 י  בַּצּוּרוֹת, יְאֹרִים בִּקֵּעַ;    וְכָל-יְקָר, רָאֲתָה עֵינוֹ.    10 He cutteth out channels among the rocks; and his eye seeth every precious thing.
28.11 יא  מִבְּכִי, נְהָרוֹת חִבֵּשׁ;    וְתַעֲלֻמָהּ, יֹצִא אוֹר.    11 He bindeth the streams that they trickle not; and the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light. {P}
28.12 יב  וְהַחָכְמָה, מֵאַיִן תִּמָּצֵא;    וְאֵי זֶה, מְקוֹם בִּינָה.    12 But wisdom, where shall it be found? And where is the place of understanding?
28.13 יג  לֹא-יָדַע אֱנוֹשׁ עֶרְכָּהּ;    וְלֹא תִמָּצֵא, בְּאֶרֶץ הַחַיִּים.    13 Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land of the living.
28.14 יד  תְּהוֹם אָמַר, לֹא בִי-הִיא;    וְיָם אָמַר, אֵין עִמָּדִי.    14 The deep saith: 'It is not in me'; and the sea saith: 'It is not with me.'
28.15 טו  לֹא-יֻתַּן סְגוֹר תַּחְתֶּיהָ;    וְלֹא יִשָּׁקֵל, כֶּסֶף מְחִירָהּ.    15 It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.
28.16 טז  לֹא-תְסֻלֶּה, בְּכֶתֶם אוֹפִיר;    בְּשֹׁהַם יָקָר וְסַפִּיר.    16 It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.
28.17 יז  לֹא-יַעַרְכֶנָּה זָהָב, וּזְכוֹכִית;    וּתְמוּרָתָהּ כְּלִי-פָז.    17 Gold and glass cannot equal it; neither shall the exchange thereof be vessels of fine gold.
28.18 יח  רָאמוֹת וְגָבִישׁ, לֹא יִזָּכֵר;    וּמֶשֶׁךְ חָכְמָה, מִפְּנִינִים.    18 No mention shall be made of coral or of crystal; yea, the price of wisdom is above rubies.
28.19 יט  לֹא-יַעַרְכֶנָּה, פִּטְדַת-כּוּשׁ;    בְּכֶתֶם טָהוֹר, לֹא תְסֻלֶּה.    19 The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold.
28.20 כ  וְהַחָכְמָה, מֵאַיִן תָּבוֹא;    וְאֵי זֶה, מְקוֹם בִּינָה.    20 Whence then cometh wisdom? And where is the place of understanding?
28.21 כא  וְנֶעֶלְמָה, מֵעֵינֵי כָל-חָי;    וּמֵעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם נִסְתָּרָה.    21 Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of the air.
28.22 כב  אֲבַדּוֹן וָמָוֶת, אָמְרוּ;    בְּאָזְנֵינוּ, שָׁמַעְנוּ שִׁמְעָהּ.    22 Destruction and Death say: 'We have heard a rumor thereof with our ears.'
28.23 כג  אֱלֹהִים, הֵבִין דַּרְכָּהּ;    וְהוּא, יָדַע אֶת-מְקוֹמָהּ.    23 God understandeth the way thereof, and He knoweth the place thereof.
28.24 כד  כִּי-הוּא, לִקְצוֹת-הָאָרֶץ יַבִּיט;    תַּחַת כָּל-הַשָּׁמַיִם יִרְאֶה.    24 For He looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole heaven;
28.25 כה  לַעֲשׂוֹת לָרוּחַ מִשְׁקָל;    וּמַיִם, תִּכֵּן בְּמִדָּה.    25 When He maketh a weight for the wind, and meteth out the waters by measure.
28.26 כו  בַּעֲשֹׂתוֹ לַמָּטָר חֹק;    וְדֶרֶךְ, לַחֲזִיז קֹלוֹת.    26 When He made a decree for the rain, and a way for the storm of thunders;
28.27 כז  אָז רָאָהּ, וַיְסַפְּרָהּ;    הֱכִינָהּ, וְגַם-חֲקָרָהּ.    27 Then did He see it, and declare it; He established it, yea, and searched it out.
28.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר, לָאָדָם--הֵן יִרְאַת אֲדֹנָי, הִיא חָכְמָה;    וְסוּר מֵרָע בִּינָה.    28 And unto man He said: 'Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.'
29.1 א                  וַיֹּסֶף אִיּוֹב, שְׂאֵת מְשָׁלוֹ; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} And Job again took up his parable, and said:
29.2 ב  מִי-יִתְּנֵנִי כְיַרְחֵי-קֶדֶם;    כִּימֵי, אֱלוֹהַּ יִשְׁמְרֵנִי.    2 Oh that I were as in the months of old, as in the days when God watched over me;
29.3 ג  בְּהִלּוֹ נֵרוֹ, עֲלֵי רֹאשִׁי;    לְאוֹרוֹ, אֵלֶךְ חֹשֶׁךְ.    3 When His lamp shined above my head, and by His light I walked through darkness;
29.4 ד  כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיִיתִי, בִּימֵי חָרְפִּי;    בְּסוֹד אֱלוֹהַּ, עֲלֵי אָהֳלִי.    4 As I was in the days of my youth, when the converse of God was upon my tent;
29.5 ה  בְּעוֹד שַׁדַּי, עִמָּדִי;    סְבִיבוֹתַי נְעָרָי.    5 When the Almighty was yet with me, and my children were about me;
29.6 ו  בִּרְחֹץ הֲלִיכַי בְּחֵמָה;    וְצוּר יָצוּק עִמָּדִי, פַּלְגֵי-שָׁמֶן.    6 When my steps were washed with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil!
29.7 ז  בְּצֵאתִי שַׁעַר עֲלֵי-קָרֶת;    בָּרְחוֹב, אָכִין מוֹשָׁבִי.    7 When I went forth to the gate unto the city, when I prepared my seat in the broad place,
29.8 ח  רָאוּנִי נְעָרִים וְנֶחְבָּאוּ;    וִישִׁישִׁים, קָמוּ עָמָדוּ.    8 The young men saw me and hid themselves, and the aged rose up and stood;
29.9 ט  שָׂרִים, עָצְרוּ בְמִלִּים;    וְכַף, יָשִׂימוּ לְפִיהֶם.    9 The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth;
29.10 י  קוֹל-נְגִידִים נֶחְבָּאוּ;    וּלְשׁוֹנָם, לְחִכָּם דָּבֵקָה.    10 The voice of the nobles was hushed, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.
29.11 יא  כִּי אֹזֶן שָׁמְעָה, וַתְּאַשְּׁרֵנִי;    וְעַיִן רָאֲתָה, וַתְּעִידֵנִי.    11 For when the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave witness unto me;
29.12 יב  כִּי-אֲמַלֵּט, עָנִי מְשַׁוֵּעַ;    וְיָתוֹם, וְלֹא-עֹזֵר לוֹ.    12 Because I delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless also, that had none to help him.
29.13 יג  בִּרְכַּת אֹבֵד, עָלַי תָּבֹא;    וְלֵב אַלְמָנָה אַרְנִן.    13 The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me; and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
29.14 יד  צֶדֶק לָבַשְׁתִּי, וַיִּלְבָּשֵׁנִי;    כִּמְעִיל וְצָנִיף, מִשְׁפָּטִי.    14 I put on righteousness, and it clothed itself with me; my justice was as a robe and a diadem.
29.15 טו  עֵינַיִם הָיִיתִי, לַעִוֵּר;    וְרַגְלַיִם לַפִּסֵּחַ אָנִי.    15 I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.
29.16 טז  אָב אָנֹכִי, לָאֶבְיוֹנִים;    וְרִב לֹא-יָדַעְתִּי אֶחְקְרֵהוּ.    16 I was a father to the needy; and the cause of him that I knew not I searched out.
29.17 יז  וָאֲשַׁבְּרָה, מְתַלְּעוֹת עַוָּל;    וּמִשִּׁנָּיו, אַשְׁלִיךְ טָרֶף.    17 And I broke the jaws of the unrighteous, and plucked the prey out of his teeth.
29.18 יח  וָאֹמַר, עִם-קִנִּי אֶגְוָע;    וְכַחוֹל, אַרְבֶּה יָמִים.    18 Then I said: 'I shall die with my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the phoenix;
29.19 יט  שָׁרְשִׁי פָתוּחַ אֱלֵי-מָיִם;    וְטַל, יָלִין בִּקְצִירִי.    19 My root shall be spread out to the waters, and the dew shall lie all night upon my branch;
29.20 כ  כְּבוֹדִי, חָדָשׁ עִמָּדִי;    וְקַשְׁתִּי, בְּיָדִי תַחֲלִיף.    20 My glory shall be fresh in me, and my bow shall be renewed in my hand.'
29.21 כא  לִי-שָׁמְעוּ וְיִחֵלּוּ;    וְיִדְּמוּ, לְמוֹ עֲצָתִי.    21 Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence for my counsel.
29.22 כב  אַחֲרֵי דְבָרִי, לֹא יִשְׁנוּ;    וְעָלֵימוֹ, תִּטֹּף מִלָּתִי.    22 After my words they spoke not again; and my speech dropped upon them.
29.23 כג  וְיִחֲלוּ כַמָּטָר לִי;    וּפִיהֶם, פָּעֲרוּ לְמַלְקוֹשׁ.    23 And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.
29.24 כד  אֶשְׂחַק אֲלֵהֶם, לֹא יַאֲמִינוּ;    וְאוֹר פָּנַי, לֹא יַפִּילוּן.    24 If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my countenance they cast not down.
29.25 כה  אֶבְחַר דַּרְכָּם,    וְאֵשֵׁב רֹאשׁ: וְאֶשְׁכּוֹן, כְּמֶלֶךְ בַּגְּדוּד;    כַּאֲשֶׁר אֲבֵלִים יְנַחֵם.    25 I chose out their way, and sat as chief, {N} and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comforteth the mourners.
30.1 א  וְעַתָּה, שָׂחֲקוּ עָלַי--    צְעִירִים מִמֶּנִּי, לְיָמִים: אֲשֶׁר-מָאַסְתִּי אֲבוֹתָם--    לָשִׁית, עִם-כַּלְבֵי צֹאנִי.    1 But now they that are younger than I have me in derision, {N} whose fathers I disdained to set with the dogs of my flock.
30.2 ב  גַּם-כֹּחַ יְדֵיהֶם, לָמָּה לִּי;    עָלֵימוֹ, אָבַד כָּלַח.    2 Yea, the strength of their hands, whereto should it profit me? men in whom ripe age is perished.
30.3 ג  בְּחֶסֶר וּבְכָפָן, גַּלְמוּד:    הַעֹרְקִים צִיָּה--אֶמֶשׁ, שׁוֹאָה וּמְשֹׁאָה.    3 They are gaunt with want and famine; they gnaw the dry ground, in the gloom of wasteness and desolation.
30.4 ד  הַקֹּטְפִים מַלּוּחַ עֲלֵי-שִׂיחַ;    וְשֹׁרֶשׁ רְתָמִים לַחְמָם.    4 They pluck salt-wort with wormwood; and the roots of the broom are their food.
30.5 ה  מִן-גֵּו יְגֹרָשׁוּ;    יָרִיעוּ עָלֵימוֹ, כַּגַּנָּב.    5 They are driven forth from the midst of men; they cry after them as after a thief.
30.6 ו  בַּעֲרוּץ נְחָלִים לִשְׁכֹּן;    חֹרֵי עָפָר וְכֵפִים.    6 In the clefts of the valleys must they dwell, in holes of the earth and of the rocks.
30.7 ז  בֵּין-שִׂיחִים יִנְהָקוּ;    תַּחַת חָרוּל יְסֻפָּחוּ.    7 Among the bushes they bray; under the nettles they are gathered together.
30.8 ח  בְּנֵי-נָבָל, גַּם-בְּנֵי בְלִי-שֵׁם--    נִכְּאוּ, מִן-הָאָרֶץ.    8 They are children of churls, yea, children of ignoble men; they were scourged out of the land.
30.9 ט  וְעַתָּה, נְגִינָתָם הָיִיתִי;    וָאֱהִי לָהֶם לְמִלָּה.    9 And now I am become their song, yea, I am a byword unto them.
30.10 י  תִּעֲבוּנִי, רָחֲקוּ מֶנִּי;    וּמִפָּנַי, לֹא-חָשְׂכוּ רֹק.    10 They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my face.
30.11 יא  כִּי-יתרו (יִתְרִי) פִתַּח, וַיְעַנֵּנִי;    וְרֶסֶן, מִפָּנַי שִׁלֵּחוּ.    11 For He hath loosed my cord, and afflicted me, and they have cast off the bridle before me.
30.12 יב  עַל-יָמִין, פִּרְחַח יָקוּמוּ:    רַגְלַי שִׁלֵּחוּ; וַיָּסֹלּוּ עָלַי, אָרְחוֹת אֵידָם.    12 Upon my right hand rise the brood; they entangle my feet, and they cast up against me their ways of destruction.
30.13 יג  נָתְסוּ, נְתִיבָתִי:    לְהַוָּתִי יֹעִילוּ; לֹא עֹזֵר לָמוֹ.    13 They break up my path, they further my calamity, even men that have no helper.
30.14 יד  כְּפֶרֶץ רָחָב יֶאֱתָיוּ;    תַּחַת שֹׁאָה, הִתְגַּלְגָּלוּ.    14 As through a wide breach they come; in the midst of the ruin they roll themselves upon me.
30.15 טו  הָהְפַּךְ עָלַי,    בַּלָּהוֹת: תִּרְדֹּף כָּרוּחַ, נְדִבָתִי;    וּכְעָב, עָבְרָה יְשֻׁעָתִי.    15 Terrors are turned upon me, {N} they chase mine honour as the wind; and my welfare is passed away as a cloud.
30.16 טז  וְעַתָּה--עָלַי, תִּשְׁתַּפֵּךְ נַפְשִׁי;    יֹאחֲזוּנִי יְמֵי-עֹנִי.    16 And now my soul is poured out within me; days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
30.17 יז  לַיְלָה--עֲצָמַי, נִקַּר מֵעָלָי;    וְעֹרְקַי, לֹא יִשְׁכָּבוּן.    17 In the night my bones are pierced, and fall from me, and my sinews take no rest.
30.18 יח  בְּרָב-כֹּחַ, יִתְחַפֵּשׂ לְבוּשִׁי;    כְּפִי כֻתָּנְתִּי יַאַזְרֵנִי.    18 By the great force [of my disease] is my garment disfigured; it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.
30.19 יט  הֹרָנִי לַחֹמֶר;    וָאֶתְמַשֵּׁל, כֶּעָפָר וָאֵפֶר.    19 He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.
30.20 כ  אֲשַׁוַּע אֵלֶיךָ, וְלֹא תַעֲנֵנִי;    עָמַדְתִּי, וַתִּתְבֹּנֶן בִּי.    20 I cry unto Thee, and Thou dost not answer me; I stand up, and Thou lookest at me.
30.21 כא  תֵּהָפֵךְ לְאַכְזָר לִי;    בְּעֹצֶם יָדְךָ תִשְׂטְמֵנִי.    21 Thou art turned to be cruel to me; with the might of Thy hand Thou hatest me.
30.22 כב  תִּשָּׂאֵנִי אֶל-רוּחַ, תַּרְכִּיבֵנִי;    וּתְמֹגְגֵנִי, תשוה (תֻּשִׁיָּה).    22 Thou liftest me up to the wind, Thou causest me to ride upon it; and Thou dissolvest my substance.
30.23 כג  כִּי-יָדַעְתִּי, מָוֶת תְּשִׁיבֵנִי;    וּבֵית מוֹעֵד לְכָל-חָי.    23 For I know that Thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living.
30.24 כד  אַךְ לֹא-בְעִי, יִשְׁלַח-יָד;    אִם-בְּפִידוֹ, לָהֶן שׁוּעַ.    24 Surely none shall put forth his hand to a ruinous heap, neither because of these things shall help come in one's calamity,
30.25 כה  אִם-לֹא בָכִיתִי, לִקְשֵׁה-יוֹם;    עָגְמָה נַפְשִׁי, לָאֶבְיוֹן.    25 If I have not wept for him that was in trouble, and if my soul grieved not for the needy.
30.26 כו  כִּי טוֹב קִוִּיתִי, וַיָּבֹא רָע;    וַאֲיַחֲלָה לְאוֹר, וַיָּבֹא אֹפֶל.    26 Yet, when I looked for good, there came evil; and when I waited for light, there came darkness.
30.27 כז  מֵעַי רֻתְּחוּ וְלֹא-דָמּוּ;    קִדְּמֻנִי יְמֵי-עֹנִי.    27 Mine inwards boil, and rest not; days of affliction are come upon me.
30.28 כח  קֹדֵר הִלַּכְתִּי, בְּלֹא חַמָּה;    קַמְתִּי בַקָּהָל אֲשַׁוֵּעַ.    28 I go mourning without the sun; I stand up in the assembly, and cry for help.
30.29 כט  אָח, הָיִיתִי לְתַנִּים;    וְרֵעַ, לִבְנוֹת יַעֲנָה.    29 I am become a brother to jackals, and a companion to ostriches.
30.30 ל  עוֹרִי, שָׁחַר מֵעָלָי;    וְעַצְמִי-חָרָה, מִנִּי-חֹרֶב.    30 My skin is black, and falleth from me, and my bones are burned with heat.
30.31 לא  וַיְהִי לְאֵבֶל, כִּנֹּרִי;    וְעֻגָבִי, לְקוֹל בֹּכִים.    31 Therefore is my harp turned to mourning, and my pipe into the voice of them that weep.
31.1 א  בְּרִית, כָּרַתִּי לְעֵינָי;    וּמָה אֶתְבּוֹנֵן, עַל-בְּתוּלָה.    1 I made a covenant with mine eyes; how then should I look upon a maid?
31.2 ב  וּמֶה, חֵלֶק אֱלוֹהַּ מִמָּעַל;    וְנַחֲלַת שַׁדַּי, מִמְּרֹמִים.    2 For what would be the portion of God from above, and the heritage of the Almighty from on high?
31.3 ג  הֲלֹא-אֵיד לְעַוָּל;    וְנֵכֶר, לְפֹעֲלֵי אָוֶן.    3 Is it not calamity to the unrighteous, and disaster to the workers of iniquity?
31.4 ד  הֲלֹא-הוּא, יִרְאֶה דְרָכָי;    וְכָל-צְעָדַי יִסְפּוֹר.    4 Doth not He see my ways, and count all my steps?
31.5 ה  אִם-הָלַכְתִּי עִם-שָׁוְא;    וַתַּחַשׁ עַל-מִרְמָה רַגְלִי.    5 If I have walked with vanity, and my foot hath hasted to deceit--
31.6 ו  יִשְׁקְלֵנִי בְמֹאזְנֵי-צֶדֶק;    וְיֵדַע אֱלוֹהַּ, תֻּמָּתִי.    6 Let me be weighed in a just balance, that God may know mine integrity--
31.7 ז  אִם תִּטֶּה אַשֻּׁרִי,    מִנִּי הַדָּרֶךְ: וְאַחַר עֵינַי, הָלַךְ לִבִּי;    וּבְכַפַּי, דָּבַק מאוּם.    7 If my step hath turned out of the way, {N} and my heart walked after mine eyes, and if any spot hath cleaved to my hands;
31.8 ח  אֶזְרְעָה, וְאַחֵר יֹאכֵל;    וְצֶאֱצָאַי יְשֹׁרָשׁוּ.    8 Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let the produce of my field be rooted out.
31.9 ט  אִם-נִפְתָּה לִבִּי, עַל-אִשָּׁה;    וְעַל-פֶּתַח רֵעִי אָרָבְתִּי.    9 If my heart have been enticed unto a woman, and I have lain in wait at my neighbour's door;
31.10 י  תִּטְחַן לְאַחֵר אִשְׁתִּי;    וְעָלֶיהָ, יִכְרְעוּן אֲחֵרִין.    10 Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her.
31.11 יא  כִּי-הוא (הִיא) זִמָּה;    והיא (וְהוּא), עָוֺן פְּלִילִים.    11 For that were a heinous crime; yea, it were an iniquity to be punished by the judges.
31.12 יב  כִּי אֵשׁ הִיא, עַד-אֲבַדּוֹן תֹּאכֵל;    וּבְכָל-תְּבוּאָתִי תְשָׁרֵשׁ.    12 For it is a fire that consumeth unto destruction, and would root out all mine increase.
31.13 יג  אִם-אֶמְאַס--מִשְׁפַּט עַבְדִּי, וַאֲמָתִי:    בְּרִבָם, עִמָּדִי.    13 If I did despise the cause of my man-servant, or of my maid-servant, when they contended with me--
31.14 יד  וּמָה אֶעֱשֶׂה, כִּי-יָקוּם אֵל;    וְכִי-יִפְקֹד, מָה אֲשִׁיבֶנּוּ.    14 What then shall I do when God riseth up? And when He remembereth, what shall I answer Him?
31.15 טו  הֲלֹא-בַבֶּטֶן, עֹשֵׂנִי עָשָׂהוּ;    וַיְכֻנֶנּוּ, בָּרֶחֶם אֶחָד.    15 Did not He that made me in the womb make him? And did not One fashion us in the womb?
31.16 טז  אִם-אֶמְנַע, מֵחֵפֶץ דַּלִּים;    וְעֵינֵי אַלְמָנָה אֲכַלֶּה.    16 If I have withheld aught that the poor desired, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail;
31.17 יז  וְאֹכַל פִּתִּי לְבַדִּי;    וְלֹא-אָכַל יָתוֹם מִמֶּנָּה.    17 Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten thereof--
31.18 יח  כִּי מִנְּעוּרַי, גְּדֵלַנִי כְאָב;    וּמִבֶּטֶן אִמִּי אַנְחֶנָּה.    18 Nay, from my youth he grew up with me as with a father, and I have been her guide from my mother's womb.
31.19 יט  אִם-אֶרְאֶה אוֹבֵד, מִבְּלִי לְבוּשׁ;    וְאֵין כְּסוּת, לָאֶבְיוֹן.    19 If I have seen any wanderer in want of clothing, or that the needy had no covering;
31.20 כ  אִם-לֹא בֵרְכוּנִי חֲלָצָו;    וּמִגֵּז כְּבָשַׂי, יִתְחַמָּם.    20 If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep;
31.21 כא  אִם-הֲנִיפוֹתִי עַל-יָתוֹם יָדִי:    כִּי-אֶרְאֶה בַשַּׁעַר, עֶזְרָתִי.    21 If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, because I saw my help in the gate;
31.22 כב  כְּתֵפִי, מִשִּׁכְמָה תִפּוֹל;    וְאֶזְרֹעִי, מִקָּנָה תִשָּׁבֵר.    22 Then let my shoulder fall from the shoulder-blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.
31.23 כג  כִּי פַחַד אֵלַי, אֵיד אֵל;    וּמִשְּׂאֵתוֹ, לֹא אוּכָל.    23 For calamity from God was a terror to me, and by reason of His majesty I could do nothing.
31.24 כד  אִם-שַׂמְתִּי זָהָב כִּסְלִי;    וְלַכֶּתֶם, אָמַרְתִּי מִבְטַחִי.    24 If I have made gold my hope, and have said to the fine gold: 'Thou art my confidence';
31.25 כה  אִם-אֶשְׂמַח, כִּי-רַב חֵילִי;    וְכִי-כַבִּיר, מָצְאָה יָדִי.    25 If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten much;
31.26 כו  אִם-אֶרְאֶה אוֹר, כִּי יָהֵל;    וְיָרֵחַ, יָקָר הֹלֵךְ.    26 If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness;
31.27 כז  וַיִּפְתְּ בַּסֵּתֶר לִבִּי;    וַתִּשַּׁק יָדִי לְפִי.    27 And my heart hath been secretly enticed, and my mouth hath kissed my hand;
31.28 כח  גַּם-הוּא, עָוֺן פְּלִילִי:    כִּי-כִחַשְׁתִּי לָאֵל מִמָּעַל.    28 This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judges; for I should have lied to God that is above.
31.29 כט  אִם-אֶשְׂמַח, בְּפִיד מְשַׂנְאִי;    וְהִתְעֹרַרְתִּי, כִּי-מְצָאוֹ רָע.    29 If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or exulted when evil found him--
31.30 ל  וְלֹא-נָתַתִּי לַחֲטֹא חִכִּי--    לִשְׁאֹל בְּאָלָה נַפְשׁוֹ.    30 Yea, I suffered not my mouth to sin by asking his life with a curse.
31.31 לא  אִם-לֹא אָמְרוּ, מְתֵי אָהֳלִי;    מִי-יִתֵּן מִבְּשָׂרוֹ, לֹא נִשְׂבָּע.    31 If the men of my tent said not: 'Who can find one that hath not been satisfied with his meat?'
31.32 לב  בַּחוּץ, לֹא-יָלִין גֵּר;    דְּלָתַי, לָאֹרַח אֶפְתָּח.    32 The stranger did not lodge in the street; my doors I opened to the roadside.
31.33 לג  אִם-כִּסִּיתִי כְאָדָם פְּשָׁעָי--    לִטְמוֹן בְּחֻבִּי עֲוֺנִי.    33 If after the manner of men I covered my transgressions, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom--
31.34 לד  כִּי אֶעֱרוֹץ, הָמוֹן רַבָּה--    וּבוּז-מִשְׁפָּחוֹת יְחִתֵּנִי; וָאֶדֹּם,    לֹא-אֵצֵא פָתַח.    34 Because I feared the great multitude, and the most contemptible among families terrified me, {N} so that I kept silence, and went not out of the door.
31.35 לה  מִי יִתֶּן-לִי, שֹׁמֵעַ לִי--    הֶן-תָּוִי, שַׁדַּי יַעֲנֵנִי; וְסֵפֶר כָּתַב,    אִישׁ רִיבִי.    35 Oh that I had one to hear me!--Lo, here is my signature, let the Almighty answer me-- {N} and that I had the indictment which mine adversary hath written!
31.36 לו  אִם-לֹא עַל-שִׁכְמִי, אֶשָּׂאֶנּוּ;    אֶעֶנְדֶנּוּ עֲטָרוֹת לִי.    36 Surely I would carry it upon my shoulder; I would bind it unto me as a crown.
31.37 לז  מִסְפַּר צְעָדַי, אַגִּידֶנּוּ;    כְּמוֹ-נָגִיד, אֲקָרְבֶנּוּ.    37 I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince would I go near unto him.
31.38 לח  אִם-עָלַי, אַדְמָתִי תִזְעָק;    וְיַחַד, תְּלָמֶיהָ יִבְכָּיוּן.    38 If my land cry out against me, and the furrows thereof weep together;
31.39 לט  אִם-כֹּחָהּ, אָכַלְתִּי בְלִי-כָסֶף;    וְנֶפֶשׁ בְּעָלֶיהָ הִפָּחְתִּי.    39 If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the tillers thereof to be disappointed--
31.40 מ  תַּחַת חִטָּה, יֵצֵא חוֹחַ--וְתַחַת-שְׂעֹרָה בָאְשָׁה:    תַּמּוּ, דִּבְרֵי אִיּוֹב.    40 Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and noisome weeds instead of barley. The words of Job are ended. {P}
32.1 א  וַיִּשְׁבְּתוּ, שְׁלֹשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה--    מֵעֲנוֹת אֶת-אִיּוֹב: כִּי הוּא צַדִּיק    בְּעֵינָיו.    1 So these three men ceased to answer Job, {N} because he was righteous in his own eyes. {P}
32.2 ב  וַיִּחַר אַף, אֱלִיהוּא בֶן-בַּרַכְאֵל הַבּוּזִי--    מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת-רָם: בְּאִיּוֹב, חָרָה אַפּוֹ--    עַל-צַדְּקוֹ נַפְשׁוֹ, מֵאֱלֹהִים.    2 Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram; {N} against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather than God.
32.3 ג  וּבִשְׁלֹשֶׁת רֵעָיו,    חָרָה אַפּוֹ: עַל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מָצְאוּ מַעֲנֶה--    וַיַּרְשִׁיעוּ, אֶת-אִיּוֹב.    3 Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, {N} because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
32.4 ד  וֶאֱלִיהוּ--חִכָּה אֶת-אִיּוֹב, בִּדְבָרִים:    כִּי זְקֵנִים-הֵמָּה מִמֶּנּוּ לְיָמִים.    4 Now Elihu had waited to speak unto Job, because they were older than he.
32.5 ה  וַיַּרְא אֱלִיהוּא--כִּי אֵין מַעֲנֶה, בְּפִי שְׁלֹשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים;    וַיִּחַר אַפּוֹ.    5 And when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, his wrath was kindled. {P}
32.6 ו  וַיַּעַן, אֱלִיהוּא בֶן-בַּרַכְאֵל הַבּוּזִי--    וַיֹּאמַר: צָעִיר אֲנִי לְיָמִים,    וְאַתֶּם יְשִׁישִׁים; עַל-כֵּן זָחַלְתִּי וָאִירָא,    מֵחַוֺּת דֵּעִי אֶתְכֶם.    6 And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said: {N} I am young, and ye are very old; {N} wherefore I held back, and durst not declare you mine opinion.
32.7 ז  אָמַרְתִּי, יָמִים יְדַבֵּרוּ;    וְרֹב שָׁנִים, יֹדִיעוּ חָכְמָה.    7 I said: 'Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.'
32.8 ח  אָכֵן, רוּחַ-הִיא בֶאֱנוֹשׁ;    וְנִשְׁמַת שַׁדַּי תְּבִינֵם.    8 But it is a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty, that giveth them understanding.
32.9 ט  לֹא-רַבִּים יֶחְכָּמוּ;    וּזְקֵנִים, יָבִינוּ מִשְׁפָּט.    9 It is not the great that are wise, nor the aged that discern judgment.
32.10 י  לָכֵן אָמַרְתִּי, שִׁמְעָה-לִּי;    אֲחַוֶּה דֵעִי אַף-אָנִי.    10 Therefore I say: 'Hearken to me; I also will declare mine opinion.'
32.11 יא  הֵן הוֹחַלְתִּי, לְדִבְרֵיכֶם--אָזִין, עַד-תְּבוּנֹתֵיכֶם:    עַד-תַּחְקְרוּן מִלִּין.    11 Behold, I waited for your words, I listened for your reasons, whilst ye searched out what to say.
32.12 יב  וְעָדֵיכֶם, אֶתְבּוֹנָן:    וְהִנֵּה אֵין לְאִיּוֹב מוֹכִיחַ--עוֹנֶה אֲמָרָיו מִכֶּם.    12 Yea, I attended unto you, and, behold, there was none that convinced Job, or that answered his words, among you.
32.13 יג  פֶּן-תֹּאמְרוּ, מָצָאנוּ חָכְמָה;    אֵל יִדְּפֶנּוּ לֹא-אִישׁ.    13 Beware lest ye say: 'We have found wisdom; God may vanquish him, not man!'
32.14 יד  וְלֹא-עָרַךְ אֵלַי מִלִּין;    וּבְאִמְרֵיכֶם, לֹא אֲשִׁיבֶנּוּ.    14 For he hath not directed his words against me; neither will I answer him with your speeches.
32.15 טו  חַתּוּ, לֹא-עָנוּ עוֹד;    הֶעְתִּיקוּ מֵהֶם מִלִּים.    15 They are amazed, they answer no more; words are departed from them.
32.16 טז  וְהוֹחַלְתִּי, כִּי-לֹא יְדַבֵּרוּ:    כִּי עָמְדוּ, לֹא-עָנוּ עוֹד.    16 And shall I wait, because they speak not, because they stand still, and answer no more?
32.17 יז  אַעֲנֶה אַף-אֲנִי חֶלְקִי;    אֲחַוֶּה דֵעִי אַף-אָנִי.    17 I also will answer my part, I also will declare mine opinion.
32.18 יח  כִּי, מָלֵתִי מִלִּים;    הֱצִיקַתְנִי, רוּחַ בִּטְנִי.    18 For I am full of words; the spirit within me constraineth me.
32.19 יט  הִנֵּה-בִטְנִי--כְּיַיִן לֹא-יִפָּתֵחַ;    כְּאֹבוֹת חֲדָשִׁים, יִבָּקֵעַ.    19 Behold, mine inwards are as wine which hath no vent; like new wine-skins which are ready to burst.
32.20 כ  אֲדַבְּרָה וְיִרְוַח-לִי;    אֶפְתַּח שְׂפָתַי וְאֶעֱנֶה.    20 I will speak, that I may find relief; I will open my lips and answer.
32.21 כא  אַל-נָא, אֶשָּׂא פְנֵי-אִישׁ;    וְאֶל-אָדָם, לֹא אֲכַנֶּה.    21 Let me not, I pray you, respect any man's person; neither will I give flattering titles unto any man.
32.22 כב  כִּי לֹא יָדַעְתִּי אֲכַנֶּה;    כִּמְעַט, יִשָּׂאֵנִי עֹשֵׂנִי.    22 For I know not to give flattering titles; else would my Maker soon take me away.
33.1 א  וְאוּלָם--שְׁמַע-נָא אִיּוֹב מִלָּי;    וְכָל-דְּבָרַי הַאֲזִינָה.    1 Howbeit, Job, I pray thee, hear my speech, and hearken to all my words.
33.2 ב  הִנֵּה-נָא, פָּתַחְתִּי פִי;    דִּבְּרָה לְשׁוֹנִי בְחִכִּי.    2 Behold now, I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my mouth.
33.3 ג  יֹשֶׁר-לִבִּי אֲמָרָי;    וְדַעַת שְׂפָתַי, בָּרוּר מִלֵּלוּ.    3 My words shall utter the uprightness of my heart; and that which my lips know they shall speak sincerely.
33.4 ד  רוּחַ-אֵל עָשָׂתְנִי;    וְנִשְׁמַת שַׁדַּי תְּחַיֵּנִי.    4 The spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty given me life.
33.5 ה  אִם-תּוּכַל הֲשִׁיבֵנִי;    עֶרְכָה לְפָנַי, הִתְיַצָּבָה.    5 If thou canst, answer thou me, set thy words in order before me, stand forth.
33.6 ו  הֵן-אֲנִי כְפִיךָ לָאֵל;    מֵחֹמֶר, קֹרַצְתִּי גַם-אָנִי.    6 Behold, I am toward God even as thou art; I also am formed out of the clay.
33.7 ז  הִנֵּה אֵמָתִי, לֹא תְבַעֲתֶךָּ;    וְאַכְפִּי, עָלֶיךָ לֹא-יִכְבָּד.    7 Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my pressure be heavy upon thee.
33.8 ח  אַךְ, אָמַרְתָּ בְאָזְנָי;    וְקוֹל מִלִּין אֶשְׁמָע.    8 Surely thou hast spoken in my hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words;
33.9 ט  זַךְ אֲנִי, בְּלִי-פָשַׁע:    חַף אָנֹכִי; וְלֹא עָוֺן לִי.    9 'I am clean, without transgression, I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me;
33.10 י  הֵן תְּנוּאוֹת, עָלַי יִמְצָא;    יַחְשְׁבֵנִי לְאוֹיֵב לוֹ.    10 Behold, He findeth occasions against me, He counteth me for His enemy;
33.11 יא  יָשֵׂם בַּסַּד רַגְלָי;    יִשְׁמֹר, כָּל-אָרְחֹתָי.    11 He putteth my feet in the stocks, He marketh all my paths.'
33.12 יב  הֶן-זֹאת לֹא-צָדַקְתָּ אֶעֱנֶךָּ:    כִּי-יִרְבֶּה אֱלוֹהַּ, מֵאֱנוֹשׁ.    12 Behold, I answer thee: In this thou art not right, that God is too great for man;
33.13 יג  מַדּוּעַ, אֵלָיו רִיבוֹתָ:    כִּי כָל-דְּבָרָיו, לֹא יַעֲנֶה.    13 Why hast thou striven against Him? seeing that He will not answer any of his words.
33.14 יד  כִּי-בְאַחַת יְדַבֶּר-אֵל;    וּבִשְׁתַּיִם, לֹא יְשׁוּרֶנָּה.    14 For God speaketh in one way, yea in two, though man perceiveth it not.
33.15 טו  בַּחֲלוֹם, חֶזְיוֹן לַיְלָה--בִּנְפֹל תַּרְדֵּמָה, עַל-אֲנָשִׁים;    בִּתְנוּמוֹת, עֲלֵי מִשְׁכָּב.    15 In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed;
33.16 טז  אָז יִגְלֶה, אֹזֶן אֲנָשִׁים;    וּבְמֹסָרָם יַחְתֹּם.    16 Then He openeth the ears of men, and by their chastisement sealeth the decree,
33.17 יז  לְהָסִיר, אָדָם מַעֲשֶׂה;    וְגֵוָה מִגֶּבֶר יְכַסֶּה.    17 That men may put away their purpose, and that He may hide pride from man;
33.18 יח  יַחְשֹׂךְ נַפְשׁוֹ, מִנִּי-שָׁחַת;    וְחַיָּתוֹ, מֵעֲבֹר בַּשָּׁלַח.    18 That He may keep back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.
33.19 יט  וְהוּכַח בְּמַכְאוֹב, עַל-מִשְׁכָּבוֹ;    וריב (וְרוֹב) עֲצָמָיו אֵתָן.    19 He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and all his bones grow stiff;
33.20 כ  וְזִהֲמַתּוּ חַיָּתוֹ לָחֶם;    וְנַפְשׁוֹ, מַאֲכַל תַּאֲוָה.    20 So that his life maketh him to abhor bread, and his soul dainty food.
33.21 כא  יִכֶל בְּשָׂרוֹ מֵרֹאִי;    ושפי (וְשֻׁפּוּ) עַצְמֹתָיו, לֹא רֻאּוּ.    21 His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his bones corrode to unsightliness.
33.22 כב  וַתִּקְרַב לַשַּׁחַת נַפְשׁוֹ;    וְחַיָּתוֹ, לַמְמִתִים.    22 Yea, his soul draweth near unto the pit, and his life to the destroyers.
33.23 כג  אִם-יֵשׁ עָלָיו, מַלְאָךְ--מֵלִיץ, אֶחָד מִנִּי-אָלֶף:    לְהַגִּיד לְאָדָם יָשְׁרוֹ.    23 If there be for him an angel, an intercessor, one among a thousand, to vouch for a man's uprightness;
33.24 כד  וַיְחֻנֶּנּוּ--וַיֹּאמֶר, פְּדָעֵהוּ מֵרֶדֶת שָׁחַת;    מָצָאתִי כֹפֶר.    24 Then He is gracious unto him, and saith: 'Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.'
33.25 כה  רֻטְפַשׁ בְּשָׂרוֹ מִנֹּעַר;    יָשׁוּב, לִימֵי עֲלוּמָיו.    25 His flesh is tenderer than a child's; he returneth to the days of his youth;
33.26 כו  יֶעְתַּר אֶל-אֱלוֹהַּ, וַיִּרְצֵהוּ,    וַיַּרְא פָּנָיו, בִּתְרוּעָה; וַיָּשֶׁב לֶאֱנוֹשׁ,    צִדְקָתוֹ.    26 He prayeth unto God, and He is favourable unto him; so that he seeth His face with joy; {N} and He restoreth unto man his righteousness.
33.27 כז  יָשֹׁר, עַל-אֲנָשִׁים, וַיֹּאמֶר, חָטָאתִי וְיָשָׁר הֶעֱוֵיתִי;    וְלֹא-שָׁוָה לִי.    27 He cometh before men, and saith: 'I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not.'
33.28 כח  פָּדָה נפשי (נַפְשׁוֹ), מֵעֲבֹר בַּשָּׁחַת;    וחיתי (וְחַיָּתוֹ), בָּאוֹר תִּרְאֶה.    28 So He redeemeth his soul from going into the pit, and his life beholdeth the light.
33.29 כט  הֶן-כָּל-אֵלֶּה, יִפְעַל-אֵל--    פַּעֲמַיִם שָׁלוֹשׁ עִם-גָּבֶר.    29 Lo, all these things doth God work, twice, yea thrice, with a man,
33.30 ל  לְהָשִׁיב נַפְשׁוֹ, מִנִּי-שָׁחַת--    לֵאוֹר, בְּאוֹר הַחַיִּים.    30 To bring back his soul from the pit, that he may be enlightened with the light of the living.
33.31 לא  הַקְשֵׁב אִיּוֹב שְׁמַע-לִי;    הַחֲרֵשׁ, וְאָנֹכִי אֲדַבֵּר.    31 Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me; hold thy peace, and I will speak.
33.32 לב  אִם-יֵשׁ-מִלִּין הֲשִׁיבֵנִי;    דַּבֵּר, כִּי-חָפַצְתִּי צַדְּקֶךָּ.    32 If thou hast any thing to say, answer me; speak, for I desire to justify thee.
33.33 לג  אִם-אַיִן, אַתָּה שְׁמַע-לִי;    הַחֲרֵשׁ, וַאֲאַלֶּפְךָ חָכְמָה.    33 If not, hearken thou unto me; hold thy peace, and I will teach thee wisdom.
34.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אֱלִיהוּא, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Moreover Elihu answered and said:
34.2 ב  שִׁמְעוּ חֲכָמִים מִלָּי;    וְיֹדְעִים, הַאֲזִינוּ לִי.    2 Hear my words, ye wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.
34.3 ג  כִּי-אֹזֶן, מִלִּין תִּבְחָן;    וְחֵךְ, יִטְעַם לֶאֱכֹל.    3 For the ear trieth words, as the palate tasteth food.
34.4 ד  מִשְׁפָּט נִבְחֲרָה-לָּנוּ;    נֵדְעָה בֵינֵינוּ מַה-טּוֹב.    4 Let us choose for us that which is right; let us know among ourselves what is good.
34.5 ה  כִּי-אָמַר אִיּוֹב צָדַקְתִּי;    וְאֵל, הֵסִיר מִשְׁפָּטִי.    5 For Job hath said: 'I am righteous, and God hath taken away my right;
34.6 ו  עַל-מִשְׁפָּטִי אֲכַזֵּב;    אָנוּשׁ חִצִּי בְלִי-פָשַׁע.    6 Notwithstanding my right I am accounted a liar; my wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.'
34.7 ז  מִי-גֶבֶר כְּאִיּוֹב;    יִשְׁתֶּה-לַּעַג כַּמָּיִם.    7 What man is like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water?
34.8 ח  וְאָרַח לְחֶבְרָה, עִם-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן;    וְלָלֶכֶת, עִם-אַנְשֵׁי-רֶשַׁע.    8 Who goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with wicked men.
34.9 ט  כִּי-אָמַר, לֹא יִסְכָּן-גָּבֶר--    בִּרְצֹתוֹ, עִם-אֱלֹהִים.    9 For he hath said: 'It profiteth a man nothing that he should be in accord with God.'
34.10 י  לָכֵן, אַנְשֵׁי לֵבָב--    שִׁמְעוּ-לִי: חָלִלָה לָאֵל מֵרֶשַׁע;    וְשַׁדַּי מֵעָוֶל.    10 Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: {N} Far be it from God, that He should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that He should commit iniquity.
34.11 יא  כִּי פֹעַל אָדָם, יְשַׁלֶּם-לוֹ;    וּכְאֹרַח אִישׁ, יַמְצִאֶנּוּ.    11 For the work of a man will He requite unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.
34.12 יב  אַף-אָמְנָם, אֵל לֹא-יַרְשִׁיעַ;    וְשַׁדַּי, לֹא-יְעַוֵּת מִשְׁפָּט.    12 Yea, of a surety, God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert justice.
34.13 יג  מִי-פָקַד עָלָיו אָרְצָה;    וּמִי שָׂם, תֵּבֵל כֻּלָּהּ.    13 Who gave Him a charge over the earth? Or who hath disposed the whole world?
34.14 יד  אִם-יָשִׂים אֵלָיו לִבּוֹ;    רוּחוֹ וְנִשְׁמָתוֹ, אֵלָיו יֶאֱסֹף.    14 If He set His heart upon man, if He gather unto Himself his spirit and his breath;
34.15 טו  יִגְוַע כָּל-בָּשָׂר יָחַד;    וְאָדָם, עַל-עָפָר יָשׁוּב.    15 All flesh shall perish together, and man shall return unto dust.
34.16 טז  וְאִם-בִּינָה, שִׁמְעָה-זֹּאת;    הַאֲזִינָה, לְקוֹל מִלָּי.    16 If now thou hast understanding, hear this; hearken to the voice of my words.
34.17 יז  הַאַף שׂוֹנֵא מִשְׁפָּט יַחֲבוֹשׁ;    וְאִם-צַדִּיק כַּבִּיר תַּרְשִׁיעַ.    17 Shall even one that hateth right govern? And wilt thou condemn Him that is just and mighty--
34.18 יח  הַאֲמֹר לְמֶלֶךְ בְּלִיָּעַל--    רָשָׁע, אֶל-נְדִיבִים.    18 Is it fit to say to a king: 'Thou art base'? Or to nobles: 'Ye are wicked'?--
34.19 יט  אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נָשָׂא, פְּנֵי שָׂרִים,    וְלֹא נִכַּר-שׁוֹעַ, לִפְנֵי-דָל: כִּי-מַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו    כֻּלָּם.    19 That respecteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? {N} For they all are the work of His hands.
34.20 כ  רֶגַע, יָמֻתוּ--    וַחֲצוֹת לָיְלָה: יְגֹעֲשׁוּ עָם וְיַעֲבֹרוּ;    וְיָסִירוּ אַבִּיר, לֹא בְיָד.    20 In a moment they die, even at midnight; {N} the people are shaken and pass away, and the mighty are taken away without hand.
34.21 כא  כִּי-עֵינָיו, עַל-דַּרְכֵי-אִישׁ;    וְכָל-צְעָדָיו יִרְאֶה.    21 For His eyes are upon the ways of a man, and He seeth all his goings.
34.22 כב  אֵין-חֹשֶׁךְ, וְאֵין צַלְמָוֶת--    לְהִסָּתֶר שָׁם, פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן.    22 There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
34.23 כג  כִּי לֹא עַל-אִישׁ, יָשִׂים עוֹד--    לַהֲלֹךְ אֶל-אֵל, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט.    23 For He doth not appoint a time unto any man, when he should go before God in judgment.
34.24 כד  יָרֹעַ כַּבִּירִים לֹא-חֵקֶר;    וַיַּעֲמֵד אֲחֵרִים תַּחְתָּם.    24 He breaketh in pieces mighty men without inquisition, and setteth others in their stead.
34.25 כה  לָכֵן--יַכִּיר, מַעְבָּדֵיהֶם;    וְהָפַךְ לַיְלָה, וְיִדַּכָּאוּ.    25 Therefore He taketh knowledge of their works; and He overturneth them in the night, so that they are crushed.
34.26 כו  תַּחַת-רְשָׁעִים סְפָקָם--    בִּמְקוֹם רֹאִים.    26 He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others;
34.27 כז  אֲשֶׁר עַל-כֵּן, סָרוּ מֵאַחֲרָיו;    וְכָל-דְּרָכָיו, לֹא הִשְׂכִּילוּ.    27 Because they turned aside from following Him, and would not have regard to any of His ways;
34.28 כח  לְהָבִיא עָלָיו, צַעֲקַת-דָּל;    וְצַעֲקַת עֲנִיִּים יִשְׁמָע.    28 So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto Him, and He heareth the cry of the afflicted.
34.29 כט  וְהוּא יַשְׁקִט, וּמִי יַרְשִׁעַ--    וְיַסְתֵּר פָּנִים, וּמִי יְשׁוּרֶנּוּ; וְעַל-גּוֹי וְעַל-אָדָם    יָחַד.    29 When He giveth quietness, who then can condemn? And when He hideth His face, who then can behold Him? {N} whether it be done unto a nation, or unto a man, alike;
34.30 ל  מִמְּלֹךְ, אָדָם חָנֵף--    מִמֹּקְשֵׁי עָם.    30 That the godless man reign not, that there be none to ensnare the people.
34.31 לא  כִּי-אֶל-אֵל, הֶאָמַר נָשָׂאתִי--    לֹא אֶחְבֹּל.    31 For hath any said unto God: 'I have borne chastisement, though I offend not;
34.32 לב  בִּלְעֲדֵי אֶחֱזֶה, אַתָּה הֹרֵנִי;    אִם-עָוֶל פָּעַלְתִּי, לֹא אֹסִיף.    32 That which I see not teach Thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do it no more'?
34.33 לג  הֲמֵעִמְּךָ יְשַׁלְּמֶנָּה, כִּי-מָאַסְתָּ--כִּי-אַתָּה תִבְחַר וְלֹא-אָנִי;    וּמַה-יָּדַעְתָּ דַבֵּר.    33 Shall His recompense be as thou wilt? For thou loathest it, so that thou must choose, and not I; therefore speak what thou knowest.
34.34 לד  אַנְשֵׁי לֵבָב, יֹאמְרוּ לִי;    וְגֶבֶר חָכָם, שֹׁמֵעַ לִי.    34 Men of understanding will say unto me, yea, every wise man that heareth me:
34.35 לה  אִיּוֹב, לֹא-בְדַעַת יְדַבֵּר;    וּדְבָרָיו, לֹא בְהַשְׂכֵּיל.    35 'Job speaketh without knowledge, and his words are without discernment.'
34.36 לו  אָבִי--יִבָּחֵן אִיּוֹב עַד-נֶצַח:    עַל-תְּשֻׁבֹת, בְּאַנְשֵׁי-אָוֶן.    36 Would that Job were tried unto the end, because of his answering like wicked men.
34.37 לז  כִּי יֹסִיף עַל-חַטָּאתוֹ פֶשַׁע, בֵּינֵינוּ יִשְׂפּוֹק;    וְיֶרֶב אֲמָרָיו לָאֵל.    37 For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands among us, and multiplieth his words against God.
35.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אֱלִיהוּ, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Moreover Elihu answered and said:
35.2 ב  הֲזֹאת, חָשַׁבְתָּ לְמִשְׁפָּט;    אָמַרְתָּ, צִדְקִי מֵאֵל.    2 Thinkest thou this to be thy right, or sayest thou: 'I am righteousness before God',
35.3 ג  כִּי-תֹאמַר, מַה-יִּסְכָּן-לָךְ;    מָה-אֹעִיל, מֵחַטָּאתִי.    3 That thou inquirest: 'What advantage will it be unto Thee?' And: 'What profit shall I have, more than if I had sinned?'
35.4 ד  אֲנִי, אֲשִׁיבְךָ מִלִּין--    וְאֶת-רֵעֶיךָ עִמָּךְ.    4 I will give thee answer, and thy companions with thee.
35.5 ה  הַבֵּט שָׁמַיִם וּרְאֵה;    וְשׁוּר שְׁחָקִים, גָּבְהוּ מִמֶּךָּ.    5 Look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the skies, which are higher than thou.
35.6 ו  אִם-חָטָאתָ, מַה-תִּפְעָל-בּוֹ;    וְרַבּוּ פְשָׁעֶיךָ, מַה-תַּעֲשֶׂה-לּוֹ.    6 If thou hast sinned, what doest thou against Him? And if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto Him?
35.7 ז  אִם-צָדַקְתָּ, מַה-תִּתֶּן-לוֹ;    אוֹ מַה-מִּיָּדְךָ יִקָּח.    7 If thou be righteous, what givest thou Him? Or what receiveth He of thy hand?
35.8 ח  לְאִישׁ-כָּמוֹךָ רִשְׁעֶךָ;    וּלְבֶן-אָדָם, צִדְקָתֶךָ.    8 Thy wickedness concerneth a man as thou art; and thy righteousness a son of man.
35.9 ט  מֵרֹב, עֲשׁוּקִים יַזְעִיקוּ;    יְשַׁוְּעוּ מִזְּרוֹעַ רַבִּים.    9 By reason of the multitude of oppressions they cry out; they cry for help by reason of the arm of the mighty.
35.10 י  וְלֹא-אָמַר--אַיֵּה, אֱלוֹהַּ עֹשָׂי:    נֹתֵן זְמִרוֹת בַּלָּיְלָה.    10 But none saith: 'Where is God my Maker, who giveth songs in the night;
35.11 יא  מַלְּפֵנוּ, מִבַּהֲמוֹת אָרֶץ;    וּמֵעוֹף הַשָּׁמַיִם יְחַכְּמֵנוּ.    11 Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?'
35.12 יב  שָׁם יִצְעֲקוּ, וְלֹא יַעֲנֶה--    מִפְּנֵי, גְּאוֹן רָעִים.    12 There they cry, but none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men.
35.13 יג  אַךְ-שָׁוְא, לֹא-יִשְׁמַע אֵל;    וְשַׁדַּי, לֹא יְשׁוּרֶנָּה.    13 Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.
35.14 יד  אַף כִּי-תֹאמַר, לֹא תְשׁוּרֶנּוּ;    דִּין לְפָנָיו, וּתְחוֹלֵל לוֹ.    14 Yea, when thou sayest thou canst not see Him--the cause is before Him; therefore wait thou for Him.
35.15 טו  וְעַתָּה--כִּי-אַיִן, פָּקַד אַפּוֹ;    וְלֹא-יָדַע בַּפַּשׁ מְאֹד.    15 And now, is it for nought that He punished in His anger? And hath He not full knowledge of arrogance?
35.16 טז  וְאִיּוֹב, הֶבֶל יִפְצֶה-פִּיהוּ;    בִּבְלִי-דַעַת, מִלִּין יַכְבִּר.    16 But Job doth open his mouth in vanity; he multiplieth words without knowledge.
36.1 א                  וַיֹּסֶף אֱלִיהוּא, וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Elihu also proceeded, and said:
36.2 ב  כַּתַּר-לִי זְעֵיר, וַאֲחַוֶּךָּ:    כִּי עוֹד לֶאֱלוֹהַּ מִלִּים.    2 Suffer me a little, and I will tell thee; for there are yet words on God's behalf.
36.3 ג  אֶשָּׂא דֵעִי, לְמֵרָחוֹק;    וּלְפֹעֲלִי, אֶתֵּן-צֶדֶק.    3 I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
36.4 ד  כִּי-אָמְנָם, לֹא-שֶׁקֶר מִלָּי;    תְּמִים דֵּעוֹת עִמָּךְ.    4 For truly my words are not false; one that is upright in mind is with thee.
36.5 ה  הֶן-אֵל כַּבִּיר, וְלֹא יִמְאָס:    כַּבִּיר, כֹּחַ לֵב.    5 Behold, God is mighty, yet He despiseth not any; He is mighty in strength of understanding.
36.6 ו  לֹא-יְחַיֶּה רָשָׁע;    וּמִשְׁפַּט עֲנִיִּים יִתֵּן.    6 He preserveth not the life of the wicked; but giveth to the poor their right.
36.7 ז  לֹא-יִגְרַע מִצַּדִּיק,    עֵינָיו: וְאֶת-מְלָכִים לַכִּסֵּא;    וַיֹּשִׁיבֵם לָנֶצַח, וַיִּגְבָּהוּ.    7 He withdraweth not His eyes from the righteous; {N} but with kings upon the throne He setteth them for ever, and they are exalted.
36.8 ח  וְאִם-אֲסוּרִים בַּזִּקִּים;    יִלָּכְדוּן, בְּחַבְלֵי-עֹנִי.    8 And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction;
36.9 ט  וַיַּגֵּד לָהֶם פָּעֳלָם;    וּפִשְׁעֵיהֶם, כִּי יִתְגַּבָּרוּ.    9 Then He declareth unto them their work, and their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly.
36.10 י  וַיִּגֶל אָזְנָם, לַמּוּסָר;    וַיֹּאמֶר, כִּי-יְשׁוּבוּן מֵאָוֶן.    10 He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.
36.11 יא  אִם-יִשְׁמְעוּ, וְיַעֲבֹדוּ:    יְכַלּוּ יְמֵיהֶם בַּטּוֹב; וּשְׁנֵיהֶם, בַּנְּעִימִים.    11 If they hearken and serve Him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.
36.12 יב  וְאִם-לֹא יִשְׁמְעוּ, בְּשֶׁלַח יַעֲבֹרוּ;    וְיִגְוְעוּ, בִּבְלִי-דָעַת.    12 But if they hearken not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.
36.13 יג  וְחַנְפֵי-לֵב, יָשִׂימוּ אָף;    לֹא יְשַׁוְּעוּ, כִּי אֲסָרָם.    13 But they that are godless in heart lay up anger; they cry not for help when He bindeth them.
36.14 יד  תָּמֹת בַּנֹּעַר נַפְשָׁם;    וְחַיָּתָם, בַּקְּדֵשִׁים.    14 Their soul perisheth in youth, and their life as that of the depraved.
36.15 טו  יְחַלֵּץ עָנִי בְעָנְיוֹ;    וְיִגֶל בַּלַּחַץ אָזְנָם.    15 He delivereth the afflicted by His affliction, and openeth their ear by tribulation.
36.16 טז  וְאַף הֲסִיתְךָ, מִפִּי-צָר--    רַחַב, לֹא-מוּצָק תַּחְתֶּיהָ; וְנַחַת שֻׁלְחָנְךָ,    מָלֵא דָשֶׁן.    16 Yea, He hath allured thee out of distress into a broad place, where there is no straitness; {N} and that which is set on thy table is full of fatness;
36.17 יז  וְדִין-רָשָׁע מָלֵאתָ;    דִּין וּמִשְׁפָּט יִתְמֹכוּ.    17 And thou art full of the judgment of the wicked; judgment and justice take hold on them.
36.18 יח  כִּי-חֵמָה, פֶּן-יְסִיתְךָ בְסָפֶק;    וְרָב-כֹּפֶר, אַל-יַטֶּךָּ.    18 For beware of wrath, lest thou be led away by thy sufficiency; neither let the greatness of the ransom turn thee aside.
36.19 יט  הֲיַעֲרֹךְ שׁוּעֲךָ, לֹא בְצָר;    וְכֹל, מַאֲמַצֵּי-כֹחַ.    19 Will thy riches avail, that are without stint, or all the forces of thy strength?
36.20 כ  אַל-תִּשְׁאַף הַלָּיְלָה--    לַעֲלוֹת עַמִּים תַּחְתָּם.    20 Desire not the night, when peoples are cut off in their place.
36.21 כא  הִשָּׁמֶר, אַל-תֵּפֶן אֶל-אָוֶן:    כִּי-עַל-זֶה, בָּחַרְתָּ מֵעֹנִי.    21 Take heed, regard not iniquity; for this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.
36.22 כב  הֶן-אֵל, יַשְׂגִּיב בְּכֹחוֹ;    מִי כָמֹהוּ מוֹרֶה.    22 Behold, God doeth loftily in His power; who is a teacher like Him?
36.23 כג  מִי-פָקַד עָלָיו דַּרְכּוֹ;    וּמִי-אָמַר, פָּעַלְתָּ עַוְלָה.    23 Who hath enjoined Him His way? Or who hath said: 'Thou hast wrought unrighteousness'?
36.24 כד  זְכֹר, כִּי-תַשְׂגִּיא פָעֳלוֹ--    אֲשֶׁר שֹׁרְרוּ אֲנָשִׁים.    24 Remember that thou magnify His work, whereof men have sung.
36.25 כה  כָּל-אָדָם חָזוּ-בוֹ;    אֱנוֹשׁ, יַבִּיט מֵרָחוֹק.    25 All men have looked thereon; man beholdeth it afar off.
36.26 כו  הֶן-אֵל שַׂגִּיא, וְלֹא נֵדָע;    מִסְפַּר שָׁנָיו וְלֹא-חֵקֶר.    26 Behold, God is great, beyond our knowledge; the number of His years is unsearchable.
36.27 כז  כִּי, יְגָרַע נִטְפֵי-מָיִם;    יָזֹקּוּ מָטָר לְאֵדוֹ.    27 For He draweth away the drops of water, which distil rain from His vapour;
36.28 כח  אֲשֶׁר-יִזְּלוּ שְׁחָקִים;    יִרְעֲפוּ, עֲלֵי אָדָם רָב.    28 Which the skies pour down and drop upon the multitudes of men.
36.29 כט  אַף אִם-יָבִין, מִפְרְשֵׂי-עָב;    תְּשֻׁאוֹת, סֻכָּתוֹ.    29 Yea, can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, the crashings of His pavilion?
36.30 ל  הֵן-פָּרַשׂ עָלָיו אוֹרוֹ;    וְשָׁרְשֵׁי הַיָּם כִּסָּה.    30 Behold, He spreadeth His light upon it; and He covereth the depths of the sea.
36.31 לא  כִּי-בָם, יָדִין עַמִּים;    יִתֶּן-אֹכֶל לְמַכְבִּיר.    31 For by these He judgeth the peoples; He giveth food in abundance.
36.32 לב  עַל-כַּפַּיִם כִּסָּה-אוֹר;    וַיְצַו עָלֶיהָ בְמַפְגִּיעַ.    32 He covereth His hands with the lightning, and giveth it a charge that it strike the mark.
36.33 לג  יַגִּיד עָלָיו רֵעוֹ;    מִקְנֶה, אַף עַל-עוֹלֶה.    33 The noise thereof telleth concerning it, the cattle also concerning the storm that cometh up.
37.1 א  אַף-לְזֹאת, יֶחֱרַד לִבִּי;    וְיִתַּר, מִמְּקוֹמוֹ.    1 At this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of its place.
37.2 ב  שִׁמְעוּ שָׁמוֹעַ בְּרֹגֶז קֹלוֹ;    וְהֶגֶה, מִפִּיו יֵצֵא.    2 Hear attentively the noise of His voice, and the sound that goeth out of His mouth.
37.3 ג  תַּחַת-כָּל-הַשָּׁמַיִם יִשְׁרֵהוּ;    וְאוֹרוֹ, עַל-כַּנְפוֹת הָאָרֶץ.    3 He sendeth it forth under the whole heaven, and His lightning unto the ends of the earth.
37.4 ד  אַחֲרָיו, יִשְׁאַג-קוֹל--    יַרְעֵם, בְּקוֹל גְּאוֹנוֹ; וְלֹא יְעַקְּבֵם,    כִּי-יִשָּׁמַע קוֹלוֹ.    4 After it a voice roareth; He thundereth with the voice of His majesty; {N} and He stayeth them not when His voice is heard.
37.5 ה  יַרְעֵם אֵל בְּקוֹלוֹ, נִפְלָאוֹת;    עֹשֶׂה גְדֹלוֹת, וְלֹא נֵדָע.    5 God thundereth marvellously with His voice; great things doeth He, which we cannot comprehend.
37.6 ו  כִּי לַשֶּׁלֶג, יֹאמַר--    הֱוֵא-אָרֶץ: וְגֶשֶׁם מָטָר;    וְגֶשֶׁם, מִטְרוֹת עֻזּוֹ.    6 For He saith to the snow: 'Fall thou on the earth'; {N} likewise to the shower of rain, and to the showers of His mighty rain.
37.7 ז  בְּיַד-כָּל-אָדָם יַחְתּוֹם--    לָדַעַת, כָּל-אַנְשֵׁי מַעֲשֵׂהוּ.    7 He sealeth up the hand of every man, that all men whom He hath made may know it.
37.8 ח  וַתָּבוֹא חַיָּה בְמוֹ-אָרֶב;    וּבִמְעוֹנֹתֶיהָ תִשְׁכֹּן.    8 Then the beasts go into coverts, and remain in their dens.
37.9 ט  מִן-הַחֶדֶר, תָּבוֹא סוּפָה;    וּמִמְּזָרִים קָרָה.    9 Out of the Chamber cometh the storm; and cold out of the north.
37.10 י  מִנִּשְׁמַת-אֵל יִתֶּן-קָרַח;    וְרֹחַב מַיִם בְּמוּצָק.    10 By the breath of God ice is given, and the breadth of the waters is straitened.
37.11 יא  אַף-בְּרִי, יַטְרִיחַ עָב;    יָפִיץ, עֲנַן אוֹרוֹ.    11 Yea, He ladeth the thick cloud with moisture, He spreadeth abroad the cloud of His lightning;
37.12 יב  וְהוּא מְסִבּוֹת, מִתְהַפֵּךְ בְּתַחְבּוּלֹתָו    לְפָעֳלָם: כֹּל אֲשֶׁר יְצַוֵּם,    עַל-פְּנֵי תֵבֵל אָרְצָה.    12 And they are turned round about by His guidance, that they may do {N} whatsoever He commandeth them upon the face of the habitable world:
37.13 יג  אִם-לְשֵׁבֶט אִם-לְאַרְצוֹ--    אִם-לְחֶסֶד, יַמְצִאֵהוּ.    13 Whether it be for correction, or for His earth, or for mercy, that He cause it to come.
37.14 יד  הַאֲזִינָה זֹּאת אִיּוֹב;    עֲמֹד, וְהִתְבּוֹנֵן נִפְלְאוֹת אֵל.    14 Hearken unto this, O Job; stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
37.15 טו  הֲתֵדַע, בְּשׂוּם-אֱלוֹהַּ עֲלֵיהֶם;    וְהֹפִיעַ, אוֹר עֲנָנוֹ.    15 Dost thou know how God enjoineth them, and causeth the lightning of His cloud to shine?
37.16 טז  הֲתֵדַע, עַל-מִפְלְשֵׂי-עָב;    מִפְלְאוֹת, תְּמִים דֵּעִים.    16 Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of Him who is perfect in knowledge?
37.17 יז  אֲשֶׁר-בְּגָדֶיךָ חַמִּים--    בְּהַשְׁקִט אֶרֶץ, מִדָּרוֹם.    17 Thou whose garments are warm, when the earth is still by reason of the south wind;
37.18 יח  תַּרְקִיעַ עִמּוֹ, לִשְׁחָקִים;    חֲזָקִים, כִּרְאִי מוּצָק.    18 Canst thou with Him spread out the sky, which is strong as a molten mirror?
37.19 יט  הוֹדִיעֵנוּ, מַה-נֹּאמַר לוֹ;    לֹא-נַעֲרֹךְ, מִפְּנֵי-חֹשֶׁךְ.    19 Teach us what we shall say unto Him; for we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.
37.20 כ  הַיְסֻפַּר-לוֹ, כִּי אֲדַבֵּר;    אִם-אָמַר אִישׁ, כִּי יְבֻלָּע.    20 Shall it be told Him that I would speak? Or should a man wish that he were swallowed up?
37.21 כא  וְעַתָּה, לֹא רָאוּ אוֹר--    בָּהִיר הוּא, בַּשְּׁחָקִים; וְרוּחַ עָבְרָה,    וַתְּטַהֲרֵם.    21 And now men see not the light which is bright in the skies; {N} but the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.
37.22 כב  מִצָּפוֹן, זָהָב יֶאֱתֶה;    עַל-אֱלוֹהַּ, נוֹרָא הוֹד.    22 Out of the north cometh golden splendour, about God is terrible majesty.
37.23 כג  שַׁדַּי לֹא-מְצָאנֻהוּ, שַׂגִּיא-כֹחַ;    וּמִשְׁפָּט וְרֹב-צְדָקָה, לֹא יְעַנֶּה.    23 The Almighty, whom we cannot find out, is excellent in power, yet to judgment and plenteous justice He doeth no violence.
37.24 כד  לָכֵן, יְרֵאוּהוּ אֲנָשִׁים;    לֹא-יִרְאֶה, כָּל-חַכְמֵי-לֵב.    24 Men do therefore fear Him; He regardeth not any that are wise of heart. {P}
38.1 א  וַיַּעַן-יְהוָה אֶת-אִיּוֹב, מנהסערה (מִן הַסְּעָרָה);    וַיֹּאמַר.    1 Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said:
38.2 ב  מִי זֶה, מַחְשִׁיךְ עֵצָה בְמִלִּין--    בְּלִי-דָעַת.    2 Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
38.3 ג  אֱזָר-נָא כְגֶבֶר חֲלָצֶיךָ;    וְאֶשְׁאָלְךָ, וְהוֹדִיעֵנִי.    3 Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto Me.
38.4 ד  אֵיפֹה הָיִיתָ, בְּיָסְדִי-אָרֶץ;    הַגֵּד, אִם-יָדַעְתָּ בִינָה.    4 Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou hast the understanding.
38.5 ה  מִי-שָׂם מְמַדֶּיהָ, כִּי תֵדָע;    אוֹ מִי-נָטָה עָלֶיהָ קָּו.    5 Who determined the measures thereof, if thou knowest? Or who stretched the line upon it?
38.6 ו  עַל-מָה, אֲדָנֶיהָ הָטְבָּעוּ;    אוֹ מִי-יָרָה, אֶבֶן פִּנָּתָהּ.    6 Whereupon were the foundations thereof fastened? Or who laid the corner-stone thereof,
38.7 ז  בְּרָן-יַחַד, כּוֹכְבֵי בֹקֶר;    וַיָּרִיעוּ, כָּל-בְּנֵי אֱלֹהִים.    7 When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
38.8 ח  וַיָּסֶךְ בִּדְלָתַיִם יָם;    בְּגִיחוֹ, מֵרֶחֶם יֵצֵא.    8 Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it broke forth, and issued out of the womb;
38.9 ט  בְּשׂוּמִי עָנָן לְבֻשׁוֹ;    וַעֲרָפֶל, חֲתֻלָּתוֹ.    9 When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it,
38.10 י  וָאֶשְׁבֹּר עָלָיו חֻקִּי;    וָאָשִׂים, בְּרִיחַ וּדְלָתָיִם.    10 And prescribed for it My decree, and set bars and doors,
38.11 יא  וָאֹמַר--עַד-פֹּה תָבוֹא, וְלֹא תֹסִיף;    וּפֹא-יָשִׁית, בִּגְאוֹן גַּלֶּיךָ.    11 And said: 'Thus far shalt thou come, but no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed'?
38.12 יב  הֲמִיָּמֶיךָ, צִוִּיתָ בֹּקֶר;    ידעתה שחר (יִדַּעְתָּ הַשַּׁחַר) מְקֹמוֹ.    12 Hast thou commanded the morning since thy days began, and caused the dayspring to know its place;
38.13 יג  לֶאֱחֹז, בְּכַנְפוֹת הָאָרֶץ;    וְיִנָּעֲרוּ רְשָׁעִים מִמֶּנָּה.    13 That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, and the wicked be shaken out of it?
38.14 יד  תִּתְהַפֵּךְ, כְּחֹמֶר חוֹתָם;    וְיִתְיַצְּבוּ, כְּמוֹ לְבוּשׁ.    14 It is changed as clay under the seal; and they stand as a garment.
38.15 טו  וְיִמָּנַע מֵרְשָׁעִים אוֹרָם;    וּזְרוֹעַ רָמָה, תִּשָּׁבֵר.    15 But from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm is broken.
38.16 טז  הֲבָאתָ, עַד-נִבְכֵי-יָם;    וּבְחֵקֶר תְּהוֹם, הִתְהַלָּכְתָּ.    16 Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? Or hast thou walked in the recesses of the deep?
38.17 יז  הֲנִגְלוּ לְךָ, שַׁעֲרֵי-מָוֶת;    וְשַׁעֲרֵי צַלְמָוֶת תִּרְאֶה.    17 Have the gates of death been revealed unto thee? Or hast thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?
38.18 יח  הִתְבֹּנַנְתָּ, עַד-רַחֲבֵי-אָרֶץ;    הַגֵּד, אִם-יָדַעְתָּ כֻלָּהּ.    18 Hast thou surveyed unto the breadths of the earth? Declare, if thou knowest it all.
38.19 יט  אֵי-זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ, יִשְׁכָּן-אוֹר;    וְחֹשֶׁךְ, אֵי-זֶה מְקֹמוֹ.    19 Where is the way to the dwelling of light, and as for darkness, where is the place thereof;
38.20 כ  כִּי תִקָּחֶנּוּ אֶל-גְּבוּלוֹ;    וְכִי-תָבִין, נְתִיבוֹת בֵּיתוֹ.    20 That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?
38.21 כא  יָדַעְתָּ, כִּי-אָז תִּוָּלֵד;    וּמִסְפַּר יָמֶיךָ רַבִּים.    21 Thou knowest it, for thou wast then born, and the number of thy days is great!
38.22 כב  הֲבָאתָ, אֶל-אֹצְרוֹת שָׁלֶג;    וְאוֹצְרוֹת בָּרָד תִּרְאֶה.    22 Hast thou entered the treasuries of the snow, or hast thou seen the treasuries of the hail,
38.23 כג  אֲשֶׁר-חָשַׂכְתִּי לְעֶת-צָר;    לְיוֹם קְרָב, וּמִלְחָמָה.    23 Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
38.24 כד  אֵי-זֶה הַדֶּרֶךְ, יֵחָלֶק אוֹר;    יָפֵץ קָדִים עֲלֵי-אָרֶץ.    24 By what way is the light parted, or the east wind scattered upon the earth?
38.25 כה  מִי-פִלַּג לַשֶּׁטֶף תְּעָלָה;    וְדֶרֶךְ, לַחֲזִיז קֹלוֹת.    25 Who hath cleft a channel for the waterflood, or a way for the lightning of the thunder;
38.26 כו  לְהַמְטִיר, עַל-אֶרֶץ לֹא-אִישׁ--    מִדְבָּר, לֹא-אָדָם בּוֹ.    26 To cause it to rain on a land where no man is, on the wilderness, wherein there is no man;
38.27 כז  לְהַשְׂבִּיעַ שֹׁאָה, וּמְשֹׁאָה;    וּלְהַצְמִיחַ, מֹצָא דֶשֶׁא.    27 To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth?
38.28 כח  הֲיֵשׁ-לַמָּטָר אָב;    אוֹ מִי-הוֹלִיד, אֶגְלֵי-טָל.    28 Hath the rain a father? Or who hath begotten the drops of dew?
38.29 כט  מִבֶּטֶן מִי, יָצָא הַקָּרַח;    וּכְפֹר שָׁמַיִם, מִי יְלָדוֹ.    29 Out of whose womb came the ice? And the hoar-frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?
38.30 ל  כָּאֶבֶן, מַיִם יִתְחַבָּאוּ;    וּפְנֵי תְהוֹם, יִתְלַכָּדוּ.    30 The waters are congealed like stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.
38.31 לא  הַתְקַשֵּׁר, מַעֲדַנּוֹת כִּימָה;    אוֹ-מֹשְׁכוֹת כְּסִיל תְּפַתֵּחַ.    31 Canst thou bind the chains of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
38.32 לב  הֲתֹצִיא מַזָּרוֹת בְּעִתּוֹ;    וְעַיִשׁ, עַל-בָּנֶיהָ תַנְחֵם.    32 Canst thou lead forth the Mazzaroth in their season? Or canst thou guide the Bear with her sons?
38.33 לג  הֲיָדַעְתָּ, חֻקּוֹת שָׁמָיִם;    אִם-תָּשִׂים מִשְׁטָרוֹ בָאָרֶץ.    33 Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens? Canst thou establish the dominion thereof in the earth?
38.34 לד  הֲתָרִים לָעָב קוֹלֶךָ;    וְשִׁפְעַת-מַיִם תְּכַסֶּךָּ.    34 Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?
38.35 לה  הַתְשַׁלַּח בְּרָקִים וְיֵלֵכוּ;    וְיֹאמְרוּ לְךָ הִנֵּנוּ.    35 Canst thou send forth lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee: 'Here we are'?
38.36 לו  מִי-שָׁת, בַּטֻּחוֹת חָכְמָה;    אוֹ מִי-נָתַן לַשֶּׂכְוִי בִינָה.    36 Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who hath given understanding to the mind?
38.37 לז  מִי-יְסַפֵּר שְׁחָקִים בְּחָכְמָה;    וְנִבְלֵי שָׁמַיִם, מִי יַשְׁכִּיב.    37 Who can number the clouds by wisdom? Or who can pour out the bottles of heaven,
38.38 לח  בְּצֶקֶת עָפָר, לַמּוּצָק;    וּרְגָבִים יְדֻבָּקוּ.    38 When the dust runneth into a mass, and the clods cleave fast together?
38.39 לט  הֲתָצוּד לְלָבִיא טָרֶף;    וְחַיַּת כְּפִירִים תְּמַלֵּא.    39 Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lioness? Or satisfy the appetite of the young lions,
38.40 מ  כִּי-יָשֹׁחוּ בַמְּעוֹנוֹת;    יֵשְׁבוּ בַסֻּכָּה לְמוֹ-אָרֶב.    40 When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?
38.41 מא  מִי יָכִין לָעֹרֵב,    צֵידוֹ: כִּי-יְלָדָו, אֶל-אֵל יְשַׁוֵּעוּ;    יִתְעוּ, לִבְלִי-אֹכֶל.    41 Who provideth for the raven his prey, {N} when his young ones cry unto God, and wander for lack of food?
39.1 א  הֲיָדַעְתָּ--עֵת, לֶדֶת יַעֲלֵי-סָלַע;    חֹלֵל אַיָּלוֹת תִּשְׁמֹר.    1 Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? Or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?
39.2 ב  תִּסְפֹּר יְרָחִים תְּמַלֶּאנָה;    וְיָדַעְתָּ, עֵת לִדְתָּנָה.    2 Canst thou number the months that they fulfil? Or knowest thou the time when they bring forth?
39.3 ג  תִּכְרַעְנָה, יַלְדֵיהֶן תְּפַלַּחְנָה;    חֶבְלֵיהֶם תְּשַׁלַּחְנָה.    3 They bow themselves, they bring forth their young, they cast out their fruit.
39.4 ד  יַחְלְמוּ בְנֵיהֶם, יִרְבּוּ בַבָּר;    יָצְאוּ, וְלֹא-שָׁבוּ לָמוֹ.    4 Their young ones wax strong, they grow up in the open field; they go forth, and return not again.
39.5 ה  מִי-שִׁלַּח פֶּרֶא חָפְשִׁי;    וּמֹסְרוֹת עָרוֹד, מִי פִתֵּחַ.    5 Who hath sent out the wild ass free? Or who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?
39.6 ו  אֲשֶׁר-שַׂמְתִּי עֲרָבָה בֵיתוֹ;    וּמִשְׁכְּנוֹתָיו מְלֵחָה.    6 Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the salt land his dwelling-place.
39.7 ז  יִשְׂחַק, לַהֲמוֹן קִרְיָה;    תְּשֻׁאוֹת נֹגֵשׂ, לֹא יִשְׁמָע.    7 He scorneth the tumult of the city, neither heareth he the shoutings of the driver.
39.8 ח  יְתוּר הָרִים מִרְעֵהוּ;    וְאַחַר כָּל-יָרוֹק יִדְרוֹשׁ.    8 The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing.
39.9 ט  הֲיֹאבֶה רֵּים עָבְדֶךָ;    אִם-יָלִין, עַל-אֲבוּסֶךָ.    9 Will the wild-ox be willing to serve thee? Or will he abide by thy crib?
39.10 י  הֲתִקְשָׁר-רֵים, בְּתֶלֶם עֲבֹתוֹ;    אִם-יְשַׂדֵּד עֲמָקִים אַחֲרֶיךָ.    10 Canst thou bind the wild-ox with his band in the furrow? Or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
39.11 יא  הֲתִבְטַח-בּוֹ, כִּי-רַב כֹּחוֹ;    וְתַעֲזֹב אֵלָיו יְגִיעֶךָ.    11 Wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great? Or wilt thou leave thy labour to him?
39.12 יב  הֲתַאֲמִין בּוֹ, כִּי-ישוב (יָשִׁיב) זַרְעֶךָ;    וְגָרְנְךָ יֶאֱסֹף.    12 Wilt thou rely on him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather the corn of thy threshing-floor?
39.13 יג  כְּנַף-רְנָנִים נֶעֱלָסָה;    אִם-אֶבְרָה, חֲסִידָה וְנֹצָה.    13 The wing of the ostrich beateth joyously; but are her pinions and feathers the kindly stork's?
39.14 יד  כִּי-תַעֲזֹב לָאָרֶץ בֵּצֶיהָ;    וְעַל-עָפָר תְּחַמֵּם.    14 For she leaveth her eggs on the earth, and warmeth them in dust,
39.15 טו  וַתִּשְׁכַּח, כִּי-רֶגֶל תְּזוּרֶהָ;    וְחַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה תְדוּשֶׁהָ.    15 And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may trample them.
39.16 טז  הִקְשִׁיחַ בָּנֶיהָ לְּלֹא-לָהּ;    לְרִיק יְגִיעָהּ בְּלִי-פָחַד.    16 She is hardened against her young ones, as if they were not hers; though her labour be in vain, she is without fear;
39.17 יז  כִּי-הִשָּׁהּ אֱלוֹהַּ חָכְמָה;    וְלֹא-חָלַק לָהּ, בַּבִּינָה.    17 Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath He imparted to her understanding.
39.18 יח  כָּעֵת, בַּמָּרוֹם תַּמְרִיא;    תִּשְׂחַק לַסּוּס, וּלְרֹכְבוֹ.    18 When the time cometh, she raiseth her wings on high, and scorneth the horse and his rider. {P}
39.19 יט  הֲתִתֵּן לַסּוּס גְּבוּרָה;    הֲתַלְבִּישׁ צַוָּארוֹ רַעְמָה.    19 Hast thou given the horse his strength? Hast thou clothed his neck with fierceness?
39.20 כ  הֲתַרְעִישֶׁנּוּ, כָּאַרְבֶּה;    הוֹד נַחְרוֹ אֵימָה.    20 Hast thou made him to leap as a locust? The glory of his snorting is terrible.
39.21 כא  יַחְפְּרוּ בָעֵמֶק, וְיָשִׂישׂ בְּכֹחַ;    יֵצֵא, לִקְרַאת-נָשֶׁק.    21 He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength; he goeth out to meet the clash of arms.
39.22 כב  יִשְׂחַק לְפַחַד, וְלֹא יֵחָת;    וְלֹא-יָשׁוּב, מִפְּנֵי-חָרֶב.    22 He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword.
39.23 כג  עָלָיו, תִּרְנֶה אַשְׁפָּה;    לַהַב חֲנִית וְכִידוֹן.    23 The quiver rattleth upon him, the glittering spear and the javelin.
39.24 כד  בְּרַעַשׁ וְרֹגֶז, יְגַמֶּא-אָרֶץ;    וְלֹא-יַאֲמִין, כִּי-קוֹל שׁוֹפָר.    24 He swalloweth the ground with storm and rage; neither believeth he that it is the voice of the horn.
39.25 כה  בְּדֵי שֹׁפָר, יֹאמַר הֶאָח--    וּמֵרָחוֹק, יָרִיחַ מִלְחָמָה; רַעַם שָׂרִים,    וּתְרוּעָה.    25 As oft as he heareth the horn he saith: 'Ha, ha!' and he smelleth the battle afar off, {N} the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
39.26 כו  הֲמִבִּינָתְךָ, יַאֲבֶר-נֵץ;    יִפְרֹשׂ כְּנָפָו לְתֵימָן.    26 Doth the hawk soar by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south?
39.27 כז  אִם-עַל-פִּיךָ, יַגְבִּיהַּ נָשֶׁר;    וְכִי, יָרִים קִנּוֹ.    27 Doth the vulture mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?
39.28 כח  סֶלַע יִשְׁכֹּן, וְיִתְלֹנָן--    עַל שֶׁן-סֶלַע, וּמְצוּדָה.    28 She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the stronghold.
39.29 כט  מִשָּׁם חָפַר-אֹכֶל;    לְמֵרָחוֹק, עֵינָיו יַבִּיטוּ.    29 From thence she spieth out the prey; her eyes behold it afar off.
39.30 ל  וְאֶפְרֹחָו יְעַלְעוּ-דָם;    וּבַאֲשֶׁר חֲלָלִים, שָׁם הוּא.    30 Her young ones also suck up blood; and where the slain are, there is she.
40.1 א                  וַיַּעַן יְהוָה אֶת-אִיּוֹב; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Moreover the LORD answered Job, and said:
40.2 ב  הֲרֹב, עִם-שַׁדַּי יִסּוֹר;    מוֹכִיחַ אֱלוֹהַּ יַעֲנֶנָּה.    2 Shall he that reproveth contend with the Almighty? He that argueth with God, let him answer it. {P}
40.3 ג                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמַר.    3 {S} Then Job answered the LORD, and said:
40.4 ד  הֵן קַלֹּתִי, מָה אֲשִׁיבֶךָּ;    יָדִי, שַׂמְתִּי לְמוֹ-פִי.    4 Behold, I am of small account; what shall I answer Thee? I lay my hand upon my mouth.
40.5 ה  אַחַת דִּבַּרְתִּי, וְלֹא אֶעֱנֶה;    וּשְׁתַּיִם, וְלֹא אוֹסִיף.    5 Once have I spoken, but I will not answer again; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further. {P}
40.6 ו  וַיַּעַן-יְהוָה אֶת-אִיּוֹב, מנסערה (מִן סְעָרָה);    וַיֹּאמַר.    6 Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said:
40.7 ז  אֱזָר-נָא כְגֶבֶר חֲלָצֶיךָ;    אֶשְׁאָלְךָ, וְהוֹדִיעֵנִי.    7 Gird up thy loins now like a man; I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto Me.
40.8 ח  הַאַף, תָּפֵר מִשְׁפָּטִי;    תַּרְשִׁיעֵנִי, לְמַעַן תִּצְדָּק.    8 Wilt thou even make void My judgment? Wilt thou condemn Me, that thou mayest be justified?
40.9 ט  וְאִם-זְרוֹעַ כָּאֵל לָךְ;    וּבְקוֹל, כָּמֹהוּ תַרְעֵם.    9 Or hast thou an arm like God? And canst thou thunder with a voice like Him?
40.10 י  עֲדֵה נָא גָאוֹן וָגֹבַהּ;    וְהוֹד וְהָדָר תִּלְבָּשׁ.    10 Deck thyself now with majesty and excellency, and array thyself with glory and beauty.
40.11 יא  הָפֵץ, עֶבְרוֹת אַפֶּךָ;    וּרְאֵה כָל-גֵּאֶה, וְהַשְׁפִּילֵהוּ.    11 Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath; and look upon every one that is proud, and abase him.
40.12 יב  רְאֵה כָל-גֵּאֶה, הַכְנִיעֵהוּ;    וַהֲדֹךְ רְשָׁעִים תַּחְתָּם.    12 Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place.
40.13 יג  טָמְנֵם בֶּעָפָר יָחַד;    פְּנֵיהֶם, חֲבֹשׁ בַּטָּמוּן.    13 Hide them in the dust together; bind their faces in the hidden place.
40.14 יד  וְגַם-אֲנִי אוֹדֶךָּ:    כִּי-תוֹשִׁעַ לְךָ יְמִינֶךָ.    14 Then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can save thee.
40.15 טו  הִנֵּה-נָא בְהֵמוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי עִמָּךְ;    חָצִיר, כַּבָּקָר יֹאכֵל.    15 Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox.
40.16 טז  הִנֵּה-נָא כֹחוֹ בְמָתְנָיו;    וְאוֹנוֹ, בִּשְׁרִירֵי בִטְנוֹ.    16 Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the stays of his body.
40.17 יז  יַחְפֹּץ זְנָבוֹ כְמוֹ-אָרֶז;    גִּידֵי פַחֲדָו יְשֹׂרָגוּ.    17 He straineth his tail like a cedar; the sinews of his thighs are knit together.
40.18 יח  עֲצָמָיו, אֲפִיקֵי נְחֻשָׁה;    גְּרָמָיו, כִּמְטִיל בַּרְזֶל.    18 His bones are as pipes of brass; his gristles are like bars of iron.
40.19 יט  הוּא, רֵאשִׁית דַּרְכֵי-אֵל;    הָעֹשׂוֹ, יַגֵּשׁ חַרְבּוֹ.    19 He is the beginning of the ways of God; He only that made him can make His sword to approach unto him.
40.20 כ  כִּי-בוּל, הָרִים יִשְׂאוּ-לוֹ;    וְכָל-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, יְשַׂחֲקוּ-שָׁם.    20 Surely the mountains bring him forth food, and all the beasts of the field play there.
40.21 כא  תַּחַת-צֶאֱלִים יִשְׁכָּב--    בְּסֵתֶר קָנֶה וּבִצָּה.    21 He lieth under the lotus-trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.
40.22 כב  יְסֻכֻּהוּ צֶאֱלִים צִלְלוֹ;    יְסֻבּוּהוּ, עַרְבֵי-נָחַל.    22 The lotus-trees cover him with their shadow; the willows of the brook compass him about.
40.23 כג  הֵן יַעֲשֹׁק נָהָר, לֹא יַחְפּוֹז;    יִבְטַח, כִּי-יָגִיחַ יַרְדֵּן אֶל-פִּיהוּ.    23 Behold, if a river overflow, he trembleth not; he is confident, though the Jordan rush forth to his mouth.
40.24 כד  בְּעֵינָיו יִקָּחֶנּוּ;    בְּמוֹקְשִׁים, יִנְקָב-אָף.    24 Shall any take him by his eyes, or pierce through his nose with a snare?
41.25 כה  תִּמְשֹׁךְ לִוְיָתָן בְּחַכָּה;    וּבְחֶבֶל, תַּשְׁקִיעַ לְשֹׁנוֹ.    25 Canst thou draw out leviathan with a fish-hook? or press down his tongue with a cord?
41.26 כו  הֲתָשִׂים אַגְמֹן בְּאַפּוֹ;    וּבְחוֹחַ, תִּקֹּב לֶחֱיוֹ.    26 Canst thou put a ring into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a hook?
41.27 כז  הֲיַרְבֶּה אֵלֶיךָ, תַּחֲנוּנִים;    אִם-יְדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ רַכּוֹת.    27 Will he make many supplications unto thee? or will he speak soft words unto thee?
41.28 כח  הֲיִכְרֹת בְּרִית עִמָּךְ;    תִּקָּחֶנּוּ, לְעֶבֶד עוֹלָם.    28 Will he make a covenant with thee, that thou shouldest take him for a servant for ever?
41.29 כט  הַתְשַׂחֶק-בּוֹ, כַּצִּפּוֹר;    וְתִקְשְׁרֶנּוּ, לְנַעֲרוֹתֶיךָ.    29 Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? Or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?
41.30 ל  יִכְרוּ עָלָיו, חַבָּרִים;    יֶחֱצוּהוּ, בֵּין כְּנַעֲנִים.    30 Will the bands of fishermen make a banquet of him? Will they part him among the merchants?
41.31 לא  הַתְמַלֵּא בְשֻׂכּוֹת עוֹרוֹ;    וּבְצִלְצַל דָּגִים רֹאשׁוֹ.    31 Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears?
41.32 לב  שִׂים-עָלָיו כַּפֶּךָ;    זְכֹר מִלְחָמָה, אַל-תּוֹסַף.    32 Lay thy hand upon him; think upon the battle, thou wilt do so no more.
41.1 א  הֵן-תֹּחַלְתּוֹ נִכְזָבָה;    הֲגַם אֶל-מַרְאָיו יֻטָל.    1 Behold, the hope of him is in vain; shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him?
41.2 ב  לֹא-אַכְזָר, כִּי יְעוּרֶנּוּ;    וּמִי הוּא, לְפָנַי יִתְיַצָּב.    2 None is so fierce that dare stir him up; who then is able to stand before Me?
41.3 ג  מִי הִקְדִּימַנִי, וַאֲשַׁלֵּם;    תַּחַת כָּל-הַשָּׁמַיִם לִי-הוּא.    3 Who hath given Me anything beforehand, that I should repay him? Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is Mine.
41.4 ד  לא- (לוֹ-) אַחֲרִישׁ בַּדָּיו;    וּדְבַר-גְּבוּרוֹת, וְחִין עֶרְכּוֹ.    4 Would I keep silence concerning his boastings, or his proud talk, or his fair array of words?
41.5 ה  מִי-גִלָּה, פְּנֵי לְבוּשׁוֹ;    בְּכֶפֶל רִסְנוֹ, מִי יָבוֹא.    5 Who can uncover the face of his garment? Who shall come within his double bridle?
41.6 ו  דַּלְתֵי פָנָיו, מִי פִתֵּחַ;    סְבִיבוֹת שִׁנָּיו אֵימָה.    6 Who can open the doors of his face? Round about his teeth is terror.
41.7 ז  גַּאֲוָה, אֲפִיקֵי מָגִנִּים;    סָגוּר, חוֹתָם צָר.    7 His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.
41.8 ח  אֶחָד בְּאֶחָד יִגַּשׁוּ;    וְרוּחַ, לֹא-יָבֹא בֵינֵיהֶם.    8 One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.
41.9 ט  אִישׁ-בְּאָחִיהוּ יְדֻבָּקוּ;    יִתְלַכְּדוּ, וְלֹא יִתְפָּרָדוּ.    9 They are joined one to another; they stick together, that they cannot be sundered.
41.10 י  עֲטִישֹׁתָיו, תָּהֶל אוֹר;    וְעֵינָיו, כְּעַפְעַפֵּי-שָׁחַר.    10 His sneezings flash forth light, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
41.11 יא  מִפִּיו, לַפִּידִים יַהֲלֹכוּ;    כִּידוֹדֵי אֵשׁ, יִתְמַלָּטוּ.    11 Out of his mouth go burning torches, and sparks of fire leap forth.
41.12 יב  מִנְּחִירָיו, יֵצֵא עָשָׁן--    כְּדוּד נָפוּחַ וְאַגְמֹן.    12 Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot and burning rushes.
41.13 יג  נַפְשׁוֹ, גֶּחָלִים תְּלַהֵט;    וְלַהַב, מִפִּיו יֵצֵא.    13 His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.
41.14 יד  בְּצַוָּארוֹ, יָלִין עֹז;    וּלְפָנָיו, תָּדוּץ דְּאָבָה.    14 In his neck abideth strength, and dismay danceth before him.
41.15 טו  מַפְּלֵי בְשָׂרוֹ דָבֵקוּ;    יָצוּק עָלָיו, בַּל-יִמּוֹט.    15 The flakes of his flesh are joined together; they are firm upon him; they cannot be moved.
41.16 טז  לִבּוֹ, יָצוּק כְּמוֹ-אָבֶן;    וְיָצוּק, כְּפֶלַח תַּחְתִּית.    16 His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, firm as the nether millstone.
41.17 יז  מִשֵּׂתוֹ, יָגוּרוּ אֵלִים;    מִשְּׁבָרִים, יִתְחַטָּאוּ.    17 When he raiseth himself up, the mighty are afraid; by reason of despair they are beside themselves.
41.18 יח  מַשִּׂיגֵהוּ חֶרֶב, בְּלִי תָקוּם;    חֲנִית מַסָּע וְשִׁרְיָה.    18 If one lay at him with the sword, it will not hold; nor the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft.
41.19 יט  יַחְשֹׁב לְתֶבֶן בַּרְזֶל;    לְעֵץ רִקָּבוֹן נְחוּשָׁה.    19 He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.
41.20 כ  לֹא-יַבְרִיחֶנּוּ בֶן-קָשֶׁת;    לְקַשׁ, נֶהְפְּכוּ-לוֹ אַבְנֵי-קָלַע.    20 The arrow cannot make him flee; slingstones are turned with him into stubble.
41.21 כא  כְּקַשׁ, נֶחְשְׁבוּ תוֹתָח;    וְיִשְׂחַק, לְרַעַשׁ כִּידוֹן.    21 Clubs are accounted as stubble; he laugheth at the rattling of the javelin.
41.22 כב  תַּחְתָּיו, חַדּוּדֵי חָרֶשׂ;    יִרְפַּד חָרוּץ עֲלֵי-טִיט.    22 Sharpest potsherds are under him; he spreadeth a threshing-sledge upon the mire.
41.23 כג  יַרְתִּיחַ כַּסִּיר מְצוּלָה;    יָם, יָשִׂים כַּמֶּרְקָחָה.    23 He maketh the deep to boil like a pot; he maketh the sea like a seething mixture.
41.24 כד  אַחֲרָיו, יָאִיר נָתִיב;    יַחְשֹׁב תְּהוֹם לְשֵׂיבָה.    24 He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be hoary.
41.25 כה  אֵין-עַל-עָפָר מָשְׁלוֹ;    הֶעָשׂוּ, לִבְלִי-חָת.    25 Upon earth there is not his like, who is made to be fearless.
41.26 כו  אֵת-כָּל-גָּבֹהַּ יִרְאֶה;    הוּא, מֶלֶךְ עַל-כָּל-בְּנֵי-שָׁחַץ.    26 He looketh at all high things; he is king over all the proud beasts. {P}
42.1 א                  וַיַּעַן אִיּוֹב אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמַר.    1 {S} Then Job answered the LORD, and said:
42.2 ב  ידעת (יָדַעְתִּי), כִּי-כֹל תּוּכָל;    וְלֹא-יִבָּצֵר מִמְּךָ מְזִמָּה.    2 I know that Thou canst do every thing, and that no purpose can be withholden from Thee.
42.3 ג  מִי זֶה, מַעְלִים עֵצָה--    בְּלִי-דָעַת: לָכֵן הִגַּדְתִּי, וְלֹא אָבִין;    נִפְלָאוֹת מִמֶּנִּי, וְלֹא אֵדָע.    3 Who is this that hideth counsel without knowledge? {N} Therefore have I uttered that which I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
42.4 ד  שְׁמַע-נָא, וְאָנֹכִי אֲדַבֵּר;    אֶשְׁאָלְךָ, וְהוֹדִיעֵנִי.    4 Hear, I beseech Thee, and I will speak; I will demand of Thee, and declare Thou unto me.
42.5 ה  לְשֵׁמַע-אֹזֶן שְׁמַעְתִּיךָ;    וְעַתָּה, עֵינִי רָאָתְךָ.    5 I had heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye seeth Thee;
42.6 ו  עַל-כֵּן, אֶמְאַס וְנִחַמְתִּי--    עַל-עָפָר וָאֵפֶר.    6 Wherefore I abhor my words, and repent, seeing I am dust and ashes. {P}
42.7 ז  וַיְהִי, אַחַר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה--אֶל-אִיּוֹב; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-אֱלִיפַז הַתֵּימָנִי, חָרָה אַפִּי בְךָ וּבִשְׁנֵי רֵעֶיךָ--כִּי לֹא דִבַּרְתֶּם אֵלַי נְכוֹנָה, כְּעַבְדִּי אִיּוֹב.  {ס}    7 And it was so, that after the LORD had spoken these words unto Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite: 'My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends; for ye have not spoken of Me the thing that is right, as My servant Job hath. {S}
42.8 ח  וְעַתָּה קְחוּ-לָכֶם שִׁבְעָה-פָרִים וְשִׁבְעָה אֵילִים וּלְכוּ אֶל-עַבְדִּי אִיּוֹב, וְהַעֲלִיתֶם עוֹלָה בַּעַדְכֶם, וְאִיּוֹב עַבְדִּי, יִתְפַּלֵּל עֲלֵיכֶם:  כִּי אִם-פָּנָיו אֶשָּׂא, לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת עִמָּכֶם נְבָלָה--כִּי לֹא דִבַּרְתֶּם אֵלַי נְכוֹנָה, כְּעַבְדִּי אִיּוֹב.    8 Now therefore, take unto you seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to My servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt-offering; and My servant Job shall pray for you; for him will I accept, that I do not unto you aught unseemly; for ye have not spoken of Me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath.'
42.9 ט  וַיֵּלְכוּ אֱלִיפַז הַתֵּימָנִי וּבִלְדַּד הַשּׁוּחִי, צֹפַר הַנַּעֲמָתִי, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֲלֵיהֶם יְהוָה; וַיִּשָּׂא יְהוָה, אֶת-פְּנֵי אִיּוֹב.    9 So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according as the LORD commanded them; and the LORD accepted Job.
42.10 י  וַיהוָה, שָׁב אֶת-שבית (שְׁבוּת) אִיּוֹב, בְּהִתְפַּלְלוֹ, בְּעַד רֵעֵהוּ; וַיֹּסֶף יְהוָה אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לְאִיּוֹב, לְמִשְׁנֶה.    10 And the LORD changed the fortune of Job, when he prayed for his friends; and the LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before.
42.11 יא  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֵלָיו כָּל-אֶחָיו וְכָל-אַחְיֹתָיו וְכָל-יֹדְעָיו לְפָנִים, וַיֹּאכְלוּ עִמּוֹ לֶחֶם בְּבֵיתוֹ, וַיָּנֻדוּ לוֹ וַיְנַחֲמוּ אֹתוֹ, עַל כָּל-הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר-הֵבִיא יְהוָה עָלָיו; וַיִּתְּנוּ-לוֹ, אִישׁ קְשִׂיטָה אֶחָת, וְאִישׁ, נֶזֶם זָהָב אֶחָד.    11 Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house; and they bemoaned him, and comforted him concerning all the evil that the LORD had brought upon him; every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one a ring of gold.
42.12 יב  וַיהוָה, בֵּרַךְ אֶת-אַחֲרִית אִיּוֹב--מֵרֵאשִׁתוֹ; וַיְהִי-לוֹ אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר אֶלֶף צֹאן, וְשֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים גְּמַלִּים, וְאֶלֶף-צֶמֶד בָּקָר, וְאֶלֶף אֲתוֹנוֹת.    12 So the LORD blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning; and he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-asses.
42.13 יג  וַיְהִי-לוֹ שִׁבְעָנָה בָנִים, וְשָׁלוֹשׁ בָּנוֹת.    13 He had also seven sons and three daughters.
42.14 יד  וַיִּקְרָא שֵׁם-הָאַחַת יְמִימָה, וְשֵׁם הַשֵּׁנִית קְצִיעָה; וְשֵׁם הַשְּׁלִישִׁית, קֶרֶן הַפּוּךְ.    14 And he called the name of the first, Jemimah; and the name of the second, Keziah; and the name of the third, Keren-happuch.
42.15 טו  וְלֹא נִמְצָא נָשִׁים יָפוֹת, כִּבְנוֹת אִיּוֹב--בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ; וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם אֲבִיהֶם נַחֲלָה, בְּתוֹךְ אֲחֵיהֶם.    15 And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job; and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.
42.16 טז  וַיְחִי אִיּוֹב אַחֲרֵי-זֹאת, מֵאָה וְאַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה; וירא (וַיִּרְאֶה), אֶת-בָּנָיו וְאֶת-בְּנֵי בָנָיו--אַרְבָּעָה, דֹּרוֹת.    16 And after this Job lived a hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.
42.17 יז  וַיָּמָת אִיּוֹב, זָקֵן וּשְׂבַע יָמִים.  {ש}    17 So Job died, being old and full of days. {P}
