1.1 א  דְּבַר-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר הָיָה, אֶל-יוֹאֵל בֶּן-פְּתוּאֵל.    1 The word of the LORD that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
1.2 ב  שִׁמְעוּ-זֹאת, הַזְּקֵנִים, וְהַאֲזִינוּ, כֹּל יוֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ; הֶהָיְתָה זֹּאת בִּימֵיכֶם, וְאִם בִּימֵי אֲבֹתֵיכֶם.    2 Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or in the days of your fathers?
1.3 ג  עָלֶיהָ, לִבְנֵיכֶם סַפֵּרוּ; וּבְנֵיכֶם, לִבְנֵיהֶם, וּבְנֵיהֶם, לְדוֹר אַחֵר.    3 Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children another generation.
1.4 ד  יֶתֶר הַגָּזָם אָכַל הָאַרְבֶּה, וְיֶתֶר הָאַרְבֶּה אָכַל הַיָּלֶק; וְיֶתֶר הַיֶּלֶק, אָכַל הֶחָסִיל.    4 That which the palmer-worm hath left hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the canker-worm eaten; and that which the canker-worm hath left hath the caterpiller eaten.
1.5 ה  הָקִיצוּ שִׁכּוֹרִים וּבְכוּ, וְהֵילִלוּ כָּל-שֹׁתֵי יָיִן; עַל-עָסִיס, כִּי נִכְרַת מִפִּיכֶם.    5 Awake, ye drunkards, and weep, and wail, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the sweet wine, for it is cut off from your mouth.
1.6 ו  כִּי-גוֹי עָלָה עַל-אַרְצִי, עָצוּם וְאֵין מִסְפָּר; שִׁנָּיו שִׁנֵּי אַרְיֵה, וּמְתַלְּעוֹת לָבִיא לוֹ.    6 For a people is come up upon my land, mighty, and without number; his teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the jaw-teeth of a lioness.
1.7 ז  שָׂם גַּפְנִי לְשַׁמָּה, וּתְאֵנָתִי לִקְצָפָה; חָשֹׂף חֲשָׂפָהּ וְהִשְׁלִיךְ, הִלְבִּינוּ שָׂרִיגֶיהָ.    7 He hath laid my vine waste, and blasted my fig-tree; he hath made it clean bare, and cast it down, the branches thereof are made white.
1.8 ח  אֱלִי, כִּבְתוּלָה חֲגֻרַת-שַׂק עַל-בַּעַל נְעוּרֶיהָ.    8 Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
1.9 ט  הָכְרַת מִנְחָה וָנֶסֶךְ, מִבֵּית יְהוָה; אָבְלוּ, הַכֹּהֲנִים, מְשָׁרְתֵי, יְהוָה.    9 The meal-offering and the drink-offering is cut off from the house of the LORD; the priests mourn, even the LORD'S ministers.
1.10 י  שֻׁדַּד שָׂדֶה, אָבְלָה אֲדָמָה:  כִּי שֻׁדַּד דָּגָן, הוֹבִישׁ תִּירוֹשׁ אֻמְלַל יִצְהָר.    10 The field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted, the new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.
1.11 יא  הֹבִישׁוּ אִכָּרִים, הֵילִילוּ כֹּרְמִים, עַל-חִטָּה, וְעַל-שְׂעֹרָה:  כִּי אָבַד, קְצִיר שָׂדֶה.    11 Be ashamed, O ye husbandmen, wail, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished.
1.12 יב  הַגֶּפֶן הוֹבִישָׁה, וְהַתְּאֵנָה אֻמְלָלָה; רִמּוֹן גַּם-תָּמָר וְתַפּוּחַ, כָּל-עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה יָבֵשׁוּ--כִּי-הֹבִישׁ שָׂשׂוֹן, מִן-בְּנֵי אָדָם.  {ס}    12 The vine is withered, and the fig-tree languisheth; the pomegranate-tree, the palm-tree also, and the apple-tree, even all the trees of the field, are withered; for joy is withered away from the sons of men. {S}
1.13 יג  חִגְרוּ וְסִפְדוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, הֵילִילוּ מְשָׁרְתֵי מִזְבֵּחַ--בֹּאוּ לִינוּ בַשַּׂקִּים, מְשָׁרְתֵי אֱלֹהָי:  כִּי נִמְנַע מִבֵּית אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, מִנְחָה וָנָסֶךְ.    13 Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests, wail, ye ministers of the altar; come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God; for the meal-offering and the drink-offering is withholden from the house of your God.
1.14 יד  קַדְּשׁוּ-צוֹם, קִרְאוּ עֲצָרָה--אִסְפוּ זְקֵנִים כֹּל יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, בֵּית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם; וְזַעֲקוּ, אֶל-יְהוָה.    14 Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land unto the house of the LORD your God, and cry unto the LORD.
1.15 טו  אֲהָהּ, לַיּוֹם:  כִּי קָרוֹב יוֹם יְהוָה, וּכְשֹׁד מִשַּׁדַּי יָבוֹא.    15 Alas for the day! for the day of the LORD is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.
1.16 טז  הֲלוֹא נֶגֶד עֵינֵינוּ, אֹכֶל נִכְרָת; מִבֵּית אֱלֹהֵינוּ, שִׂמְחָה וָגִיל.    16 Is not the food cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
1.17 יז  עָבְשׁוּ פְרֻדוֹת, תַּחַת מֶגְרְפֹתֵיהֶם--נָשַׁמּוּ אֹצָרוֹת, נֶהֶרְסוּ מַמְּגֻרוֹת:  כִּי הֹבִישׁ, דָּגָן.    17 The grains shrivel under their hoes; the garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn is withered.
1.18 יח  מַה-נֶּאֶנְחָה בְהֵמָה, נָבֹכוּ עֶדְרֵי בָקָר--כִּי אֵין מִרְעֶה, לָהֶם; גַּם-עֶדְרֵי הַצֹּאן, נֶאְשָׁמוּ.    18 How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.
1.19 יט  אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה, אֶקְרָא:  כִּי אֵשׁ, אָכְלָה נְאוֹת מִדְבָּר, וְלֶהָבָה, לִהֲטָה כָּל-עֲצֵי הַשָּׂדֶה.    19 Unto Thee, O LORD, do I cry; for the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath set ablaze all the trees of the field.
1.20 כ  גַּם-בַּהֲמוֹת שָׂדֶה, תַּעֲרוֹג אֵלֶיךָ:  כִּי יָבְשׁוּ, אֲפִיקֵי מָיִם, וְאֵשׁ, אָכְלָה נְאוֹת הַמִּדְבָּר.  {ס}    20 Yea, the beasts of the field pant unto Thee; for the water brooks are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness. {S}
2.1 א  תִּקְעוּ שׁוֹפָר בְּצִיּוֹן, וְהָרִיעוּ בְּהַר קָדְשִׁי--יִרְגְּזוּ, כֹּל יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי-בָא יוֹם-יְהוָה, כִּי קָרוֹב.    1 Blow ye the horn in Zion, and sound an alarm in My holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; for the day of the LORD cometh, for it is at hand;
2.2 ב  יוֹם חֹשֶׁךְ וַאֲפֵלָה, יוֹם עָנָן וַעֲרָפֶל, כְּשַׁחַר, פָּרֻשׂ עַל-הֶהָרִים; עַם, רַב וְעָצוּם--כָּמֹהוּ לֹא נִהְיָה מִן-הָעוֹלָם, וְאַחֲרָיו לֹא יוֹסֵף עַד-שְׁנֵי דּוֹר וָדוֹר.    2 A day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as blackness spread upon the mountains; a great people and a mighty, there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after them, even to the years of many generations.
2.3 ג  לְפָנָיו אָכְלָה אֵשׁ, וְאַחֲרָיו תְּלַהֵט לֶהָבָה; כְּגַן-עֵדֶן הָאָרֶץ לְפָנָיו, וְאַחֲרָיו מִדְבַּר שְׁמָמָה, וְגַם-פְּלֵיטָה, לֹא-הָיְתָה לּוֹ.    3 A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame blazeth; the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing escapeth them.
2.4 ד  כְּמַרְאֵה סוּסִים, מַרְאֵהוּ; וּכְפָרָשִׁים, כֵּן יְרוּצוּן.    4 The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so do they run.
2.5 ה  כְּקוֹל מַרְכָּבוֹת, עַל-רָאשֵׁי הֶהָרִים יְרַקֵּדוּן--כְּקוֹל לַהַב אֵשׁ, אֹכְלָה קָשׁ; כְּעַם עָצוּם, עֱרוּךְ מִלְחָמָה.    5 Like the noise of chariots, on the tops of the mountains do they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a mighty people set in battle array.
2.6 ו  מִפָּנָיו, יָחִילוּ עַמִּים; כָּל-פָּנִים, קִבְּצוּ פָארוּר.    6 At their presence the peoples are in anguish; all faces have gathered blackness.
2.7 ז  כְּגִבּוֹרִים יְרֻצוּן, כְּאַנְשֵׁי מִלְחָמָה יַעֲלוּ חוֹמָה; וְאִישׁ בִּדְרָכָיו יֵלֵכוּן, וְלֹא יְעַבְּטוּן אֹרְחוֹתָם.    7 They run like mighty men, they climb the wall like men of war; and they move on every one in his ways, and they entangle not their paths.
2.8 ח  וְאִישׁ אָחִיו לֹא יִדְחָקוּן, גֶּבֶר בִּמְסִלָּתוֹ יֵלֵכוּן; וּבְעַד הַשֶּׁלַח יִפֹּלוּ, לֹא יִבְצָעוּ.    8 Neither doth one thrust another, they march every one in his highway; and they break through the weapons, and suffer no harm.
2.9 ט  בָּעִיר יָשֹׁקּוּ, בַּחוֹמָה יְרֻצוּן--בַּבָּתִּים, יַעֲלוּ; בְּעַד הַחַלּוֹנִים יָבֹאוּ, כַּגַּנָּב.    9 They leap upon the city, they run upon the wall, they climb up into the houses; they enter in at the windows like a thief.
2.10 י  לְפָנָיו רָגְזָה אֶרֶץ, רָעֲשׁוּ שָׁמָיִם; שֶׁמֶשׁ וְיָרֵחַ קָדָרוּ, וְכוֹכָבִים אָסְפוּ נָגְהָם.    10 Before them the earth quaketh, the heavens tremble; the sun and the moon are become black, and the stars withdraw their shining.
2.11 יא  וַיהוָה, נָתַן קוֹלוֹ לִפְנֵי חֵילוֹ--כִּי רַב מְאֹד מַחֲנֵהוּ, כִּי עָצוּם עֹשֵׂה דְבָרוֹ:  כִּי-גָדוֹל יוֹם-יְהוָה וְנוֹרָא מְאֹד, וּמִי יְכִילֶנּוּ.    11 And the LORD uttereth His voice before His army; for His camp is very great, for he is mighty that executeth His word; for great is the day of the LORD and very terrible; and who can abide it?
2.12 יב  וְגַם-עַתָּה, נְאֻם-יְהוָה, שֻׁבוּ עָדַי, בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם; וּבְצוֹם וּבִבְכִי, וּבְמִסְפֵּד.    12 Yet even now, saith the LORD, turn ye unto Me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with lamentation;
2.13 יג  וְקִרְעוּ לְבַבְכֶם וְאַל-בִּגְדֵיכֶם, וְשׁוּבוּ אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם:  כִּי-חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם, הוּא--אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם וְרַב-חֶסֶד, וְנִחָם עַל-הָרָעָה.    13 And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God; for He is gracious and compassionate, long-suffering, and abundant in mercy, and repenteth Him of the evil.
2.14 יד  מִי יוֹדֵעַ, יָשׁוּב וְנִחָם; וְהִשְׁאִיר אַחֲרָיו, בְּרָכָה--מִנְחָה וָנֶסֶךְ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.  {פ}    14 Who knoweth whether He will not turn and repent, and leave a blessing behind Him, even a meal-offering and a drink-offering unto the LORD your God? {P}
2.15 טו  תִּקְעוּ שׁוֹפָר, בְּצִיּוֹן; קַדְּשׁוּ-צוֹם, קִרְאוּ עֲצָרָה.    15 Blow the horn in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly;
2.16 טז  אִסְפוּ-עָם קַדְּשׁוּ קָהָל, קִבְצוּ זְקֵנִים--אִסְפוּ עוֹלָלִים, וְיֹנְקֵי שָׁדָיִם:  יֵצֵא חָתָן מֵחֶדְרוֹ, וְכַלָּה מֵחֻפָּתָהּ.    16 Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the breasts; let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the bride out of her pavilion.
2.17 יז  בֵּין הָאוּלָם, וְלַמִּזְבֵּחַ, יִבְכּוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, מְשָׁרְתֵי יְהוָה; וְיֹאמְרוּ חוּסָה יְהוָה עַל-עַמֶּךָ, וְאַל-תִּתֵּן נַחֲלָתְךָ לְחֶרְפָּה לִמְשָׁל-בָּם גּוֹיִם--לָמָּה יֹאמְרוּ בָעַמִּים, אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.    17 Let the priests, the ministers of the LORD, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say: 'Spare thy people, O LORD, and give not Thy heritage to reproach, that the nations should make them a byword: wherefore should they say among the peoples: Where is their God?'
2.18 יח  וַיְקַנֵּא יְהוָה, לְאַרְצוֹ; וַיַּחְמֹל, עַל-עַמּוֹ.    18 Then was the LORD jealous for His land, and had pity on His people.
2.19 יט  וַיַּעַן יְהוָה וַיֹּאמֶר לְעַמּוֹ, הִנְנִי שֹׁלֵחַ לָכֶם אֶת-הַדָּגָן וְהַתִּירוֹשׁ וְהַיִּצְהָר, וּשְׂבַעְתֶּם, אֹתוֹ; וְלֹא-אֶתֵּן אֶתְכֶם עוֹד חֶרְפָּה, בַּגּוֹיִם.    19 And the LORD answered and said unto His people: 'Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith; and I will no more make you a reproach among the nations;
2.20 כ  וְאֶת-הַצְּפוֹנִי אַרְחִיק מֵעֲלֵיכֶם, וְהִדַּחְתִּיו אֶל-אֶרֶץ צִיָּה וּשְׁמָמָה--אֶת-פָּנָיו אֶל-הַיָּם הַקַּדְמֹנִי, וְסֹפוֹ אֶל-הַיָּם הָאַחֲרוֹן; וְעָלָה בָאְשׁוֹ, וְתַעַל צַחֲנָתוֹ--כִּי הִגְדִּיל, לַעֲשׂוֹת.    20 But I will remove far off from you the northern one, and will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the eastern sea, and his hinder part toward the western sea; that his foulness may come up, and his ill savour may come up, because he hath done great things.'
2.21 כא  אַל-תִּירְאִי, אֲדָמָה; גִּילִי וּשְׂמָחִי, כִּי-הִגְדִּיל יְהוָה לַעֲשׂוֹת.    21 Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice; for the LORD hath done great things.
2.22 כב  אַל-תִּירְאוּ בַּהֲמוֹת שָׂדַי, כִּי דָשְׁאוּ נְאוֹת מִדְבָּר:  כִּי-עֵץ נָשָׂא פִרְיוֹ, תְּאֵנָה וָגֶפֶן נָתְנוּ חֵילָם.    22 Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field; for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth its fruit, the fig-tree and the vine do yield their strength.
2.23 כג  וּבְנֵי צִיּוֹן, גִּילוּ וְשִׂמְחוּ בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, כִּי-נָתַן לָכֶם אֶת-הַמּוֹרֶה, לִצְדָקָה; וַיּוֹרֶד לָכֶם, גֶּשֶׁם מוֹרֶה וּמַלְקוֹשׁ--בָּרִאשׁוֹן.    23 Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the LORD your God; for He giveth you the former rain in just measure, and He causeth to come down for you the rain, the former rain and the latter rain, at the first.
2.24 כד  וּמָלְאוּ הַגֳּרָנוֹת, בָּר; וְהֵשִׁיקוּ הַיְקָבִים, תִּירוֹשׁ וְיִצְהָר.    24 And the floors shall be full of corn, and the vats shall overflow with wine and oil.
2.25 כה  וְשִׁלַּמְתִּי לָכֶם, אֶת-הַשָּׁנִים, אֲשֶׁר אָכַל הָאַרְבֶּה, הַיֶּלֶק וְהֶחָסִיל וְהַגָּזָם:  חֵילִי, הַגָּדוֹל, אֲשֶׁר שִׁלַּחְתִּי, בָּכֶם.    25 And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten, the canker-worm, and the caterpiller, and the palmer-worm, My great army which I sent among you.
2.26 כו  וַאֲכַלְתֶּם אָכוֹל, וְשָׂבוֹעַ, וְהִלַּלְתֶּם אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה עִמָּכֶם לְהַפְלִיא; וְלֹא-יֵבֹשׁוּ עַמִּי, לְעוֹלָם.    26 And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied, and shall praise the name of the LORD your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you; and My people shall never be ashamed.
2.27 כז  וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי בְקֶרֶב יִשְׂרָאֵל אָנִי, וַאֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְאֵין עוֹד; וְלֹא-יֵבֹשׁוּ עַמִּי, לְעוֹלָם.  {פ}    27 And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the LORD your God, and there is none else; and My people shall never be ashamed. {P}
2.1 א  וְהָיָה אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, אֶשְׁפּוֹךְ אֶת-רוּחִי עַל-כָּל-בָּשָׂר, וְנִבְּאוּ, בְּנֵיכֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיכֶם; זִקְנֵיכֶם, חֲלֹמוֹת יַחֲלֹמוּן--בַּחוּרֵיכֶם, חֶזְיֹנוֹת יִרְאוּ.    1 And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out My spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions;
2.2 ב  וְגַם עַל-הָעֲבָדִים, וְעַל-הַשְּׁפָחוֹת, בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה, אֶשְׁפּוֹךְ אֶת-רוּחִי.    2 And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out My spirit.
2.3 ג  וְנָתַתִּי, מוֹפְתִים, בַּשָּׁמַיִם, וּבָאָרֶץ:  דָּם וָאֵשׁ, וְתִימְרוֹת עָשָׁן.    3 And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.
2.4 ד  הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ יֵהָפֵךְ לְחֹשֶׁךְ, וְהַיָּרֵחַ לְדָם--לִפְנֵי, בּוֹא יוֹם יְהוָה, הַגָּדוֹל, וְהַנּוֹרָא.    4 The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the LORD come.
2.5 ה  וְהָיָה, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרָא בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה--יִמָּלֵט:  כִּי בְּהַר-צִיּוֹן וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם תִּהְיֶה פְלֵיטָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה, וּבַשְּׂרִידִים, אֲשֶׁר יְהוָה קֹרֵא.    5 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the LORD shall be delivered; for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those that escape, as the LORD hath said, and among the remnant those whom the LORD shall call.
3.1 א  כִּי, הִנֵּה בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה--וּבָעֵת הַהִיא:  אֲשֶׁר אשוב (אָשִׁיב) אֶת-שְׁבוּת יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִָם.    1 For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring back the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
3.2 ב  וְקִבַּצְתִּי, אֶת-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם, וְהוֹרַדְתִּים, אֶל-עֵמֶק יְהוֹשָׁפָט; וְנִשְׁפַּטְתִּי עִמָּם שָׁם, עַל-עַמִּי וְנַחֲלָתִי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר פִּזְּרוּ בַגּוֹיִם, וְאֶת-אַרְצִי, חִלֵּקוּ.    2 I will gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat; and I will enter into judgment with them there for My people and for My heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and divided My land.
3.3 ג  וְאֶל-עַמִּי, יַדּוּ גוֹרָל; וַיִּתְּנוּ הַיֶּלֶד בַּזּוֹנָה, וְהַיַּלְדָּה מָכְרוּ בַיַּיִן וַיִּשְׁתּוּ.    3 And they have cast lots for My people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, and have drunk.
3.4 ד  וְגַם מָה-אַתֶּם לִי, צֹר וְצִידוֹן, וְכֹל, גְּלִילוֹת פְּלָשֶׁת; הַגְּמוּל, אַתֶּם מְשַׁלְּמִים עָלָי, וְאִם-גֹּמְלִים אַתֶּם עָלַי, קַל מְהֵרָה אָשִׁיב גְּמֻלְכֶם בְּרֹאשְׁכֶם.    4 And also what are ye to Me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and all the regions of Philistia? will ye render retribution on My behalf? and if ye render retribution on My behalf, swiftly, speedily will I return your retribution upon your own head.
3.5 ה  אֲשֶׁר-כַּסְפִּי וּזְהָבִי, לְקַחְתֶּם; וּמַחֲמַדַּי, הַטֹּבִים, הֲבֵאתֶם, לְהֵיכְלֵיכֶם.    5 Forasmuch as ye have taken My silver and My gold, and have carried into your temples My goodly treasures;
3.6 ו  וּבְנֵי יְהוּדָה וּבְנֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מְכַרְתֶּם לִבְנֵי הַיְּוָנִים, לְמַעַן הַרְחִיקָם, מֵעַל גְּבוּלָם.    6 the children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the sons of Jevanim, that ye might remove them far from their border;
3.7 ז  הִנְנִי מְעִירָם--מִן-הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר-מְכַרְתֶּם אֹתָם שָׁמָּה; וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי גְמֻלְכֶם, בְּרֹאשְׁכֶם.    7 behold, I will stir them up out of the place whither ye have sold them, and will return your retribution upon your own head;
3.8 ח  וּמָכַרְתִּי אֶת-בְּנֵיכֶם וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּיַד בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, וּמְכָרוּם לִשְׁבָאיִם, אֶל-גּוֹי רָחוֹק:  כִּי יְהוָה, דִּבֵּר.  {פ}    8 and I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the men of Sheba, to a nation far off; for the LORD hath spoken. {P}
3.9 ט  קִרְאוּ-זֹאת, בַּגּוֹיִם, קַדְּשׁוּ, מִלְחָמָה; הָעִירוּ, הַגִּבּוֹרִים--יִגְּשׁוּ יַעֲלוּ, כֹּל אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה.    9 Proclaim ye this among the nations, prepare war; stir up the mighty men; let all the men of war draw near, let them come up.
3.10 י  כֹּתּוּ אִתֵּיכֶם לַחֲרָבוֹת, וּמַזְמְרֹתֵיכֶם לִרְמָחִים; הַחַלָּשׁ, יֹאמַר גִּבּוֹר אָנִי.    10 Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruning-hooks into spears; let the weak say: 'I am strong.'
3.11 יא  עוּשׁוּ וָבֹאוּ כָל-הַגּוֹיִם מִסָּבִיב, וְנִקְבָּצוּ; שָׁמָּה, הַנְחַת יְהוָה גִּבּוֹרֶיךָ.    11 Haste ye, and come, all ye nations round about, and gather yourselves together; thither cause Thy mighty ones to come down, O LORD!
3.12 יב  יֵעוֹרוּ וְיַעֲלוּ הַגּוֹיִם, אֶל-עֵמֶק יְהוֹשָׁפָט:  כִּי שָׁם, אֵשֵׁב לִשְׁפֹּט אֶת-כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם--מִסָּבִיב.    12 Let the nations be stirred up, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all the nations round about.
3.13 יג  שִׁלְחוּ מַגָּל, כִּי בָשַׁל קָצִיר; בֹּאוּ רְדוּ, כִּי-מָלְאָה גַּת--הֵשִׁיקוּ הַיְקָבִים, כִּי רַבָּה רָעָתָם.    13 Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, tread ye, for the winepress is full, the vats overflow; for their wickedness is great.
3.14 יד  הֲמוֹנִים הֲמוֹנִים, בְּעֵמֶק הֶחָרוּץ:  כִּי קָרוֹב יוֹם יְהוָה, בְּעֵמֶק הֶחָרוּץ.    14 Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision! For the day of the LORD is near in the valley of decision.
3.15 טו  שֶׁמֶשׁ וְיָרֵחַ, קָדָרוּ; וְכוֹכָבִים, אָסְפוּ נָגְהָם.    15 The sun and the moon are become black, and the stars withdraw their shining.
3.16 טז  וַיהוָה מִצִּיּוֹן יִשְׁאָג, וּמִירוּשָׁלִַם יִתֵּן קוֹלוֹ, וְרָעֲשׁוּ, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ; וַיהוָה מַחֲסֶה לְעַמּוֹ, וּמָעוֹז לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    16 And the LORD shall roar from Zion, and utter His voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall shake; but the LORD will be a refuge unto His people, and a stronghold to the children of Israel.
3.17 יז  וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, שֹׁכֵן, בְּצִיּוֹן הַר-קָדְשִׁי; וְהָיְתָה יְרוּשָׁלִַם קֹדֶשׁ, וְזָרִים לֹא-יַעַבְרוּ-בָהּ עוֹד.  {ס}    17 So shall ye know that I am the LORD your God, dwelling in Zion My holy mountain; then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any more. {S}
3.18 יח  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם הַהוּא יִטְּפוּ הֶהָרִים עָסִיס, וְהַגְּבָעוֹת תֵּלַכְנָה חָלָב, וְכָל-אֲפִיקֵי יְהוּדָה, יֵלְכוּ מָיִם; וּמַעְיָן, מִבֵּית יְהוָה יֵצֵא, וְהִשְׁקָה, אֶת-נַחַל הַשִּׁטִּים.    18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down sweet wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the brooks of Judah shall flow with waters; and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the LORD, and shall water the valley of Shittim.
3.19 יט  מִצְרַיִם, לִשְׁמָמָה תִהְיֶה, וֶאֱדוֹם, לְמִדְבַּר שְׁמָמָה תִּהְיֶה; מֵחֲמַס בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁפְכוּ דָם-נָקִיא בְּאַרְצָם.    19 Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
3.20 כ  וִיהוּדָה, לְעוֹלָם תֵּשֵׁב; וִירוּשָׁלִַם, לְדוֹר וָדוֹר.    20 But Judah shall be inhabited for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.
3.21 כא  וְנִקֵּיתִי, דָּמָם לֹא-נִקֵּיתִי; וַיהוָה, שֹׁכֵן בְּצִיּוֹן.  {ש}    21 And I will hold as innocent their blood that I have not held as innocent; and the LORD dwelleth in Zion. {P}
