1.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת מֹשֶׁה--עֶבֶד יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, מְשָׁרֵת מֹשֶׁה לֵאמֹר.	1 Now it came to pass after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD, that the LORD spoke unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying:
1.2 ב  מֹשֶׁה עַבְדִּי, מֵת; וְעַתָּה קוּם עֲבֹר אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן הַזֶּה, אַתָּה וְכָל-הָעָם הַזֶּה, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי נֹתֵן לָהֶם לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 'Moses My servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel.
1.3 ג  כָּל-מָקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר תִּדְרֹךְ כַּף-רַגְלְכֶם בּוֹ--לָכֶם נְתַתִּיו:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתִּי, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה.	3 Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, to you have I given it, as I spoke unto Moses.
1.4 ד  מֵהַמִּדְבָּר וְהַלְּבָנוֹן הַזֶּה וְעַד-הַנָּהָר הַגָּדוֹל נְהַר-פְּרָת, כֹּל אֶרֶץ הַחִתִּים, וְעַד-הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל, מְבוֹא הַשָּׁמֶשׁ--יִהְיֶה, גְּבוּלְכֶם.	4 From the wilderness, and this Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the Great Sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your border.
1.5 ה  לֹא-יִתְיַצֵּב אִישׁ לְפָנֶיךָ, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיִיתִי עִם-מֹשֶׁה אֶהְיֶה עִמָּךְ, לֹא אַרְפְּךָ וְלֹא אֶעֶזְבֶךָּ.	5 There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
1.6 ו  חֲזַק, וֶאֱמָץ:  כִּי אַתָּה, תַּנְחִיל אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי לַאֲבוֹתָם לָתֵת לָהֶם.	6 Be strong and of good courage; for thou shalt cause this people to inherit the land which I swore unto their fathers to give them.
1.7 ז  רַק חֲזַק וֶאֱמַץ מְאֹד, לִשְׁמֹר לַעֲשׂוֹת כְּכָל-הַתּוֹרָה--אֲשֶׁר צִוְּךָ מֹשֶׁה עַבְדִּי, אַל-תָּסוּר מִמֶּנּוּ יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול:  לְמַעַן תַּשְׂכִּיל, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר תֵּלֵךְ.	7 Only be strong and very courageous, to observe to do according to all the law, which Moses My servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest have good success whithersoever thou goest.
1.8 ח  לֹא-יָמוּשׁ סֵפֶר הַתּוֹרָה הַזֶּה מִפִּיךָ, וְהָגִיתָ בּוֹ יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, לְמַעַן תִּשְׁמֹר לַעֲשׂוֹת, כְּכָל-הַכָּתוּב בּוֹ:  כִּי-אָז תַּצְלִיחַ אֶת-דְּרָכֶךָ, וְאָז תַּשְׂכִּיל.	8 This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy ways prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.
1.9 ט  הֲלוֹא צִוִּיתִיךָ חֲזַק וֶאֱמָץ, אַל-תַּעֲרֹץ וְאַל-תֵּחָת:  כִּי עִמְּךָ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר תֵּלֵךְ.  {פ}	9 Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of good courage; be not affrighted, neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.' {P}
1.10 י  וַיְצַו יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶת-שֹׁטְרֵי הָעָם לֵאמֹר.	10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying:
1.11 יא  עִבְרוּ בְּקֶרֶב הַמַּחֲנֶה, וְצַוּוּ אֶת-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, הָכִינוּ לָכֶם, צֵידָה:  כִּי בְּעוֹד שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, אַתֶּם עֹבְרִים אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן הַזֶּה, לָבוֹא לָרֶשֶׁת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם נֹתֵן לָכֶם לְרִשְׁתָּהּ.  {פ}	11 'Pass through the midst of the camp, and command the people, saying: Prepare you victuals; for within three days ye are to pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to possess it.' {P}
1.12 יב  וְלָראוּבֵנִי, וְלַגָּדִי, וְלַחֲצִי, שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה--אָמַר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, לֵאמֹר.	12 And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, spoke Joshua, saying:
1.13 יג  זָכוֹר, אֶת-הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה אֶתְכֶם מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה, לֵאמֹר:  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם מֵנִיחַ לָכֶם, וְנָתַן לָכֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת.	13 'Remember the word which Moses the servant of the LORD commanded, you, saying: The LORD your God giveth you rest, and will give you this land.
1.14 יד  נְשֵׁיכֶם טַפְּכֶם, וּמִקְנֵיכֶם, יֵשְׁבוּ, בָּאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם מֹשֶׁה בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן; וְאַתֶּם תַּעַבְרוּ חֲמֻשִׁים לִפְנֵי אֲחֵיכֶם, כֹּל גִּבּוֹרֵי הַחַיִל, וַעֲזַרְתֶּם, אוֹתָם.	14 Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall abide in the land which Moses gave you beyond the Jordan; but ye shall pass over before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and shall help them;
1.15 טו  עַד אֲשֶׁר-יָנִיחַ יְהוָה לַאֲחֵיכֶם, כָּכֶם, וְיָרְשׁוּ גַם-הֵמָּה, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם נֹתֵן לָהֶם; וְשַׁבְתֶּם לְאֶרֶץ יְרֻשַּׁתְכֶם, וִירִשְׁתֶּם אוֹתָהּ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן מִזְרַח הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.	15 until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as unto you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your God giveth them; then ye shall return unto the land of your possession, and possess it, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan toward the sunrising.'
1.16 טז  וַיַּעֲנוּ, אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתָנוּ נַעֲשֶׂה, וְאֶל-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁלָחֵנוּ נֵלֵךְ.	16 And they answered Joshua, saying: 'All that thou hast commanded us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go.
1.17 יז  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-שָׁמַעְנוּ אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן נִשְׁמַע אֵלֶיךָ:  רַק יִהְיֶה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, עִמָּךְ, כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיָה, עִם-מֹשֶׁה.	17 According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee; only the LORD thy God be with thee, as He was with Moses.
1.18 יח  כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יַמְרֶה אֶת-פִּיךָ, וְלֹא-יִשְׁמַע אֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תְּצַוֶּנּוּ--יוּמָת:  רַק, חֲזַק וֶאֱמָץ.  {פ}	18 Whosoever he be that shall rebel against thy commandment, and shall not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death; only be strong and of good courage.' {P}
2.1 א  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ-בִּן-נוּן מִן-הַשִּׁטִּים שְׁנַיִם-אֲנָשִׁים מְרַגְּלִים, חֶרֶשׁ לֵאמֹר, לְכוּ רְאוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְאֶת-יְרִיחוֹ; וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיָּבֹאוּ בֵּית-אִשָּׁה זוֹנָה, וּשְׁמָהּ רָחָב--וַיִּשְׁכְּבוּ-שָׁמָּה.	1 And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two spies secretly, saying: 'Go view the land, and Jericho.' And they went, and came into the house of a harlot whose name was Rahab, and lay there.
2.2 ב  וַיֵּאָמַר, לְמֶלֶךְ יְרִיחוֹ לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה אֲנָשִׁים בָּאוּ הֵנָּה הַלַּיְלָה, מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לַחְפֹּר אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	2 And it was told the king of Jericho, saying: 'Behold, there came men in hither to-night of the children of Israel to search out the land.'
2.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֶלֶךְ יְרִיחוֹ, אֶל-רָחָב לֵאמֹר:  הוֹצִיאִי הָאֲנָשִׁים הַבָּאִים אֵלַיִךְ, אֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ לְבֵיתֵךְ--כִּי לַחְפֹּר אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, בָּאוּ.	3 And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying: 'Bring forth the men that are come to thee, that are entered into thy house; for they are come to search out all the land.'
2.4 ד  וַתִּקַּח הָאִשָּׁה אֶת-שְׁנֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַתִּצְפְּנוֹ; וַתֹּאמֶר כֵּן, בָּאוּ אֵלַי הָאֲנָשִׁים, וְלֹא יָדַעְתִּי, מֵאַיִן הֵמָּה.	4 And the woman took the two men, and hid them; and she said: 'Yea, the men came unto me, but I knew not whence they were;
2.5 ה  וַיְהִי הַשַּׁעַר לִסְגּוֹר, בַּחֹשֶׁךְ וְהָאֲנָשִׁים יָצָאוּ--לֹא יָדַעְתִּי, אָנָה הָלְכוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים; רִדְפוּ מַהֵר אַחֲרֵיהֶם, כִּי תַשִּׂיגוּם.	5 and it came to pass about the time of the shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out; whither the men went I know not; pursue after them quickly; for ye shall overtake them.'
2.6 ו  וְהִיא, הֶעֱלָתַם הַגָּגָה; וַתִּטְמְנֵם בְּפִשְׁתֵּי הָעֵץ, הָעֲרֻכוֹת לָהּ עַל-הַגָּג.	6 But she had brought them up to the roof, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had spread out upon the roof.
2.7 ז  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים, רָדְפוּ אַחֲרֵיהֶם דֶּרֶךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן, עַל, הַמַּעְבְּרוֹת; וְהַשַּׁעַר סָגָרוּ--אַחֲרֵי, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָצְאוּ הָרֹדְפִים אַחֲרֵיהֶם.	7 And the men pursued after them the way to the Jordan unto the fords; and as soon as they that pursued after them were gone out, the gate was shut.
2.8 ח  וְהֵמָּה, טֶרֶם יִשְׁכָּבוּן; וְהִיא עָלְתָה עֲלֵיהֶם, עַל-הַגָּג.	8 And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;
2.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-הָאֲנָשִׁים--יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-נָתַן יְהוָה לָכֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וְכִי-נָפְלָה אֵימַתְכֶם עָלֵינוּ, וְכִי נָמֹגוּ כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ מִפְּנֵיכֶם.	9 and she said unto the men: 'I know that the LORD hath given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land melt away before you.
2.10 י  כִּי שָׁמַעְנוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הוֹבִישׁ יְהוָה אֶת-מֵי יַם-סוּף מִפְּנֵיכֶם, בְּצֵאתְכֶם, מִמִּצְרָיִם; וַאֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם לִשְׁנֵי מַלְכֵי הָאֱמֹרִי אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן, לְסִיחֹן וּלְעוֹג--אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱרַמְתֶּם, אוֹתָם.	10 For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red Sea before you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond the Jordan, unto Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
2.11 יא  וַנִּשְׁמַע וַיִּמַּס לְבָבֵנוּ, וְלֹא-קָמָה עוֹד רוּחַ בְּאִישׁ מִפְּנֵיכֶם:  כִּי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--הוּא אֱלֹהִים בַּשָּׁמַיִם מִמַּעַל, וְעַל-הָאָרֶץ מִתָּחַת.	11 And as soon as we had heard it, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more spirit in any man, because of you; for the LORD your God, He is God in heaven above, and on earth beneath.
2.12 יב  וְעַתָּה, הִשָּׁבְעוּ-נָא לִי בַּיהוָה, כִּי-עָשִׂיתִי עִמָּכֶם, חָסֶד; וַעֲשִׂיתֶם גַּם-אַתֶּם עִם-בֵּית אָבִי, חֶסֶד, וּנְתַתֶּם לִי, אוֹת אֱמֶת.	12 Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the LORD, since I have dealt kindly with you, that ye also will deal kindly with my father's house--and give me a true token--
2.13 יג  וְהַחֲיִתֶם אֶת-אָבִי וְאֶת-אִמִּי, וְאֶת-אַחַי וְאֶת-אחותי (אַחְיוֹתַי), וְאֵת, כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לָהֶם; וְהִצַּלְתֶּם אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵינוּ, מִמָּוֶת.	13 and save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.'
2.14 יד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָהּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, נַפְשֵׁנוּ תַחְתֵּיכֶם לָמוּת, אִם לֹא תַגִּידוּ, אֶת-דְּבָרֵנוּ זֶה; וְהָיָה, בְּתֵת-יְהוָה לָנוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְעָשִׂינוּ עִמָּךְ, חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת.	14 And the men said unto her: 'Our life for yours, if ye tell not this our business; and it shall be, when the LORD giveth us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.'
2.15 טו  וַתּוֹרִדֵם בַּחֶבֶל, בְּעַד הַחַלּוֹן:  כִּי בֵיתָהּ בְּקִיר הַחוֹמָה, וּבַחוֹמָה הִיא יוֹשָׁבֶת.	15 Then she let them down by a cord through the window; for her house was upon the side of the wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.
2.16 טז  וַתֹּאמֶר לָהֶם הָהָרָה לֵּכוּ, פֶּן-יִפְגְּעוּ בָכֶם הָרֹדְפִים; וְנַחְבֵּתֶם שָׁמָּה שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, עַד שׁוֹב הָרֹדְפִים, וְאַחַר, תֵּלְכוּ לְדַרְכְּכֶם.	16 And she said unto them: 'Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers light upon you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned; and afterward may ye go your way.'
2.17 יז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלֶיהָ, הָאֲנָשִׁים:  נְקִיִּם אֲנַחְנוּ, מִשְּׁבֻעָתֵךְ הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁבַּעְתָּנוּ.	17 And the men said unto her: 'We will be guiltless of this thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.
2.18 יח  הִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ בָאִים, בָּאָרֶץ; אֶת-תִּקְוַת חוּט הַשָּׁנִי הַזֶּה תִּקְשְׁרִי, בַּחַלּוֹן אֲשֶׁר הוֹרַדְתֵּנוּ בוֹ, וְאֶת-אָבִיךְ וְאֶת-אִמֵּךְ וְאֶת-אַחַיִךְ וְאֵת כָּל-בֵּית אָבִיךְ, תַּאַסְפִי אֵלַיִךְ הַבָּיְתָה.	18 Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by; and thou shalt gather unto thee into the house thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy father's household.
2.19 יט  וְהָיָה כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא מִדַּלְתֵי בֵיתֵךְ הַחוּצָה, דָּמוֹ בְרֹאשׁוֹ--וַאֲנַחְנוּ נְקִיִּם; וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה אִתָּךְ, בַּבַּיִת--דָּמוֹ בְרֹאשֵׁנוּ, אִם-יָד תִּהְיֶה-בּוֹ.	19 And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless; and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.
2.20 כ  וְאִם-תַּגִּידִי, אֶת-דְּבָרֵנוּ זֶה--וְהָיִינוּ נְקִיִּם, מִשְּׁבֻעָתֵךְ אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁבַּעְתָּנוּ.	20 But if thou utter this our business, then we will be guiltless of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.'
2.21 כא  וַתֹּאמֶר כְּדִבְרֵיכֶם כֶּן-הוּא, וַתְּשַׁלְּחֵם וַיֵּלֵכוּ; וַתִּקְשֹׁר אֶת-תִּקְוַת הַשָּׁנִי, בַּחַלּוֹן.	21 And she said: 'According unto your words, so be it.' And she sent them away, and they departed; and she bound the scarlet line in the window.
2.22 כב  וַיֵּלְכוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ הָהָרָה, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׁם שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, עַד-שָׁבוּ הָרֹדְפִים; וַיְבַקְשׁוּ הָרֹדְפִים בְּכָל-הַדֶּרֶךְ, וְלֹא מָצָאוּ.	22 And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three days, until the pursuers were returned; and the pursuers sought them throughout all the way, but found them not.
2.23 כג  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ שְׁנֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיֵּרְדוּ מֵהָהָר, וַיַּעַבְרוּ וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן; וַיְסַפְּרוּ-לוֹ--אֵת כָּל-הַמֹּצְאוֹת, אוֹתָם.	23 Then the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun; and they told him all that had befallen them.
2.24 כד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, כִּי-נָתַן יְהוָה בְּיָדֵנוּ, אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וְגַם-נָמֹגוּ כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, מִפָּנֵינוּ.  {ס}	24 And they said unto Joshua: 'Truly the LORD hath delivered into our hands all the land; and moreover all the inhabitants of the land do melt away before us.' {S}
3.1 א  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּבֹּקֶר וַיִּסְעוּ מֵהַשִּׁטִּים, וַיָּבֹאוּ עַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן--הוּא, וְכָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּלִנוּ שָׁם, טֶרֶם יַעֲבֹרוּ.	1 And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and they removed from Shittim, and came to the Jordan, he and all the children of Israel; and they lodged there before they passed over.
3.2 ב  וַיְהִי, מִקְצֵה שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים; וַיַּעַבְרוּ הַשֹּׁטְרִים, בְּקֶרֶב הַמַּחֲנֶה.	2 And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the midst of the camp;
3.3 ג  וַיְצַוּוּ, אֶת-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, כִּרְאֹתְכֶם אֵת אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם נֹשְׂאִים אֹתוֹ--וְאַתֶּם, תִּסְעוּ מִמְּקוֹמְכֶם, וַהֲלַכְתֶּם, אַחֲרָיו.	3 and they commanded the people, saying: 'When ye see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.
3.4 ד  אַךְ רָחוֹק יִהְיֶה, בֵּינֵיכֶם וּבֵנָיו, כְּאַלְפַּיִם אַמָּה, בַּמִּדָּה:  אַל-תִּקְרְבוּ אֵלָיו, לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר-תֵּדְעוּ אֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר תֵּלְכוּ-בָהּ--כִּי לֹא עֲבַרְתֶּם בַּדֶּרֶךְ, מִתְּמוֹל שִׁלְשׁוֹם.  {פ}	4 Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure; come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go; for ye have not passed this way heretofore.' {P}
3.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הָעָם, הִתְקַדָּשׁוּ:  כִּי מָחָר, יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה בְּקִרְבְּכֶם--נִפְלָאוֹת.	5 And Joshua said unto the people: 'Sanctify yourselves; for to-morrow the LORD will do wonders among you.'
3.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים לֵאמֹר, שְׂאוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הַבְּרִית, וְעִבְרוּ לִפְנֵי הָעָם; וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הַבְּרִית, וַיֵּלְכוּ לִפְנֵי הָעָם.  {ס}	6 And Joshua spoke unto the priests, saying: 'Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass on before the people.' And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people. {S}
3.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה אָחֵל גַּדֶּלְךָ, בְּעֵינֵי כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲשֶׁר, יֵדְעוּן, כִּי כַּאֲשֶׁר הָיִיתִי עִם-מֹשֶׁה, אֶהְיֶה עִמָּךְ.	7 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.
3.8 ח  וְאַתָּה, תְּצַוֶּה אֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים, נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן-הַבְּרִית, לֵאמֹר:  כְּבֹאֲכֶם, עַד-קְצֵה מֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן, בַּיַּרְדֵּן, תַּעֲמֹדוּ.  {פ}	8 And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying: When ye are come to the brink of the waters of the Jordan, ye shall stand still in the Jordan.' {P}
3.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  גֹּשׁוּ הֵנָּה--וְשִׁמְעוּ, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	9 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel: 'Come hither, and hear the words of the LORD your God.'
3.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ--בְּזֹאת תֵּדְעוּן, כִּי אֵל חַי בְּקִרְבְּכֶם; וְהוֹרֵשׁ יוֹרִישׁ מִפְּנֵיכֶם אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְאֶת-הַחִתִּי וְאֶת-הַחִוִּי, וְאֶת-הַפְּרִזִּי וְאֶת-הַגִּרְגָּשִׁי, וְהָאֱמֹרִי, וְהַיְבוּסִי.	10 And Joshua said: 'Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that He will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Jebusite.
3.11 יא  הִנֵּה אֲרוֹן הַבְּרִית, אֲדוֹן כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, עֹבֵר לִפְנֵיכֶם, בַּיַּרְדֵּן.	11 Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth on before you over the Jordan.
3.12 יב  וְעַתָּה, קְחוּ לָכֶם שְׁנֵי עָשָׂר אִישׁ, מִשִּׁבְטֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל--אִישׁ-אֶחָד אִישׁ-אֶחָד, לַשָּׁבֶט.	12 Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, for every tribe a man.
3.13 יג  וְהָיָה כְּנוֹחַ כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה אֲדוֹן כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, בְּמֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן, מֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן יִכָּרֵתוּן, הַמַּיִם הַיֹּרְדִים מִלְמָעְלָה; וְיַעַמְדוּ, נֵד אֶחָד.	13 And it shall come to pass, when the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, that the waters of the Jordan shall be cut off, even the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand in one heap.'
3.14 יד  וַיְהִי, בִּנְסֹעַ הָעָם מֵאָהֳלֵיהֶם, לַעֲבֹר, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, נֹשְׂאֵי הָאָרוֹן הַבְּרִית--לִפְנֵי הָעָם.	14 And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over the Jordan, the priests that bore the ark of the covenant being before the people;
3.15 טו  וּכְבוֹא נֹשְׂאֵי הָאָרוֹן, עַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וְרַגְלֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאֵי הָאָרוֹן, נִטְבְּלוּ בִּקְצֵה הַמָּיִם; וְהַיַּרְדֵּן, מָלֵא עַל-כָּל-גְּדוֹתָיו, כֹּל, יְמֵי קָצִיר.	15 and when they that bore the ark were come unto the Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bore the ark were dipped in the brink of the water--for the Jordan overfloweth all its banks all the time of harvest--
3.16 טז  וַיַּעַמְדוּ הַמַּיִם הַיֹּרְדִים מִלְמַעְלָה קָמוּ נֵד-אֶחָד, הַרְחֵק מְאֹד באדם (מֵאָדָם) הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר מִצַּד צָרְתָן, וְהַיֹּרְדִים עַל יָם הָעֲרָבָה יָם-הַמֶּלַח, תַּמּוּ נִכְרָתוּ; וְהָעָם עָבְרוּ, נֶגֶד יְרִיחוֹ.	16 that the waters which came down from above stood, and rose up in one heap, a great way off from Adam, the city that is beside Zarethan; and those that went down toward the sea of the Arabah, even the Salt Sea, were wholly cut off; and the people passed over right against Jericho.
3.17 יז  וַיַּעַמְדוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאֵי הָאָרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה בֶּחָרָבָה, בְּתוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן--הָכֵן; וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֹבְרִים בֶּחָרָבָה, עַד אֲשֶׁר-תַּמּוּ כָּל-הַגּוֹי, לַעֲבֹר אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן.	17 And the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan, while all Israel passed over on dry ground, until all the nation were passed clean over the Jordan.
4.1 א  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר-תַּמּוּ כָל-הַגּוֹי, לַעֲבוֹר אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר.	1 And it came to pass, when all the nation were clean passed over the Jordan, {P} that the LORD spoke unto Joshua, saying:
4.2 ב  קְחוּ לָכֶם מִן-הָעָם, שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר אֲנָשִׁים--אִישׁ-אֶחָד אִישׁ-אֶחָד, מִשָּׁבֶט.	2 'Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,
4.3 ג  וְצַוּוּ אוֹתָם, לֵאמֹר, שְׂאוּ-לָכֶם מִזֶּה מִתּוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן מִמַּצַּב רַגְלֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, הָכִין שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה אֲבָנִים; וְהַעֲבַרְתֶּם אוֹתָם, עִמָּכֶם, וְהִנַּחְתֶּם אוֹתָם, בַּמָּלוֹן אֲשֶׁר-תָּלִינוּ בוֹ הַלָּיְלָה.  {ס}	3 and command ye them, saying: Take you hence out of the midst of the Jordan, out of the place where the priests' feet stood, twelve stones made ready, and carry them over with you, and lay them down in the lodging-place, where ye shall lodge this night.' {S}
4.4 ד  וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶל-שְׁנֵים הֶעָשָׂר אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר הֵכִין, מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אִישׁ-אֶחָד אִישׁ-אֶחָד, מִשָּׁבֶט.	4 Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man;
4.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, עִבְרוּ לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֶל-תּוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן; וְהָרִימוּ לָכֶם אִישׁ אֶבֶן אַחַת, עַל-שִׁכְמוֹ, לְמִסְפַּר, שִׁבְטֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 and Joshua said unto them: 'Pass on before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of the Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel;
4.6 ו  לְמַעַן, תִּהְיֶה זֹאת אוֹת--בְּקִרְבְּכֶם:  כִּי-יִשְׁאָלוּן בְּנֵיכֶם מָחָר לֵאמֹר, מָה הָאֲבָנִים הָאֵלֶּה לָכֶם.	6 that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask in time to come, saying: What mean ye by these stones?
4.7 ז  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם לָהֶם, אֲשֶׁר נִכְרְתוּ מֵימֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן מִפְּנֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה--בְּעָבְרוֹ בַּיַּרְדֵּן, נִכְרְתוּ מֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן; וְהָיוּ הָאֲבָנִים הָאֵלֶּה לְזִכָּרוֹן, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--עַד-עוֹלָם.	7 then ye shall say unto them: Because the waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it passed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off; and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.'
4.8 ח  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיִּשְׂאוּ שְׁתֵּי-עֶשְׂרֵה אֲבָנִים מִתּוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, לְמִסְפַּר שִׁבְטֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּעֲבִרוּם עִמָּם אֶל-הַמָּלוֹן, וַיַּנִּחוּם שָׁם.	8 And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan, as the LORD spoke unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel; and they carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down there.
4.9 ט  וּשְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה אֲבָנִים, הֵקִים יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בְּתוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן--תַּחַת מַצַּב רַגְלֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן הַבְּרִית; וַיִּהְיוּ שָׁם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	9 Joshua also set up twelve stones in the midst of the Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests that bore the ark of the covenant stood; and they are there unto this day.
4.10 י  וְהַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאֵי הָאָרוֹן, עֹמְדִים בְּתוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן, עַד תֹּם כָּל-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לְדַבֵּר אֶל-הָעָם, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וַיְמַהֲרוּ הָעָם, וַיַּעֲבֹרוּ.	10 And the priests that bore the ark stood in the midst of the Jordan, until every thing was finished that the LORD commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua; and the people hastened and passed over.
4.11 יא  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר-תַּם כָּל-הָעָם, לַעֲבוֹר; וַיַּעֲבֹר אֲרוֹן-יְהוָה וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, לִפְנֵי הָעָם.	11 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the LORD passed on, and the priests, before the people.
4.12 יב  וַיַּעַבְרוּ בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה, חֲמֻשִׁים, לִפְנֵי, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֲלֵיהֶם, מֹשֶׁה.	12 And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, passed on armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spoke unto them;
4.13 יג  כְּאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, חֲלוּצֵי הַצָּבָא--עָבְרוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לַמִּלְחָמָה, אֶל, עַרְבוֹת יְרִיחוֹ.  {ס}	13 about forty thousand ready armed for war passed on in the presence of the LORD unto battle, to the plains of Jericho. {S}
4.14 יד  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, גִּדַּל יְהוָה אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, בְּעֵינֵי, כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּרְאוּ אֹתוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָרְאוּ אֶת-מֹשֶׁה כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּיו.  {פ}	14 On that day the LORD magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life. {P}
4.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר.	15 And the LORD spoke unto Joshua, saying:
4.16 טז  צַוֵּה, אֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים, נֹשְׂאֵי, אֲרוֹן הָעֵדוּת; וְיַעֲלוּ, מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן.	16 'Command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of the Jordan.'
4.17 יז  וַיְצַו יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים לֵאמֹר:  עֲלוּ, מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן.	17 Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying: 'Come ye up out of the Jordan.'
4.18 יח  וַיְהִי בעלות (כַּעֲלוֹת) הַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, מִתּוֹךְ הַיַּרְדֵּן, נִתְּקוּ כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶל הֶחָרָבָה; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ מֵי-הַיַּרְדֵּן לִמְקוֹמָם, וַיֵּלְכוּ כִתְמוֹל-שִׁלְשׁוֹם עַל-כָּל-גְּדוֹתָיו.	18 And it came to pass, as the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD came up out of the midst of the Jordan, as soon as the soles of the priests' feet were drawn up unto the dry ground, that the waters of the Jordan returned unto their place, and went over all its banks, as aforetime.
4.19 יט  וְהָעָם, עָלוּ מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן, בֶּעָשׂוֹר, לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בַּגִּלְגָּל, בִּקְצֵה, מִזְרַח יְרִיחוֹ.	19 And the people came up out of the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, on the east border of Jericho.
4.20 כ  וְאֵת שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה הָאֲבָנִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר לָקְחוּ מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן--הֵקִים יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, בַּגִּלְגָּל.	20 And those twelve stones, which they took out of the Jordan, did Joshua set up in Gilgal.
4.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁאָלוּן בְּנֵיכֶם מָחָר אֶת-אֲבוֹתָם לֵאמֹר, מָה הָאֲבָנִים הָאֵלֶּה.	21 And he spoke unto the children of Israel, saying: 'When your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying: What mean these stones?
4.22 כב  וְהוֹדַעְתֶּם, אֶת-בְּנֵיכֶם לֵאמֹר:  בַּיַּבָּשָׁה עָבַר יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן הַזֶּה.	22 then ye shall let your children know, saying: Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.
4.23 כג  אֲשֶׁר-הוֹבִישׁ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם אֶת-מֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן, מִפְּנֵיכֶם--עַד-עָבְרְכֶם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם לְיַם-סוּף אֲשֶׁר-הוֹבִישׁ מִפָּנֵינוּ, עַד-עָבְרֵנוּ.	23 For the LORD your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red Sea, which He dried up from before us, until we were passed over,
4.24 כד  לְמַעַן דַּעַת כָּל-עַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-יַד יְהוָה, כִּי חֲזָקָה, הִיא--לְמַעַן יְרָאתֶם אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, כָּל-הַיָּמִים.  {פ}	24 that all the peoples of the earth may know the hand of the LORD, that it is mighty; that ye may fear the LORD your God for ever.' {P}
5.1 א  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ כָּל-מַלְכֵי הָאֱמֹרִי אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן יָמָּה, וְכָל-מַלְכֵי הַכְּנַעֲנִי אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַיָּם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-הוֹבִישׁ יְהוָה אֶת-מֵי הַיַּרְדֵּן מִפְּנֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד-עברנו (עָבְרָם); וַיִּמַּס לְבָבָם, וְלֹא-הָיָה בָם עוֹד רוּחַ, מִפְּנֵי, בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	1 And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, that were beyond the Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, that were by the sea, heard how that the LORD had dried up the waters of the Jordan from before the children of Israel, until they were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel. {P}
5.2 ב  בָּעֵת הַהִיא, אָמַר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, עֲשֵׂה לְךָ, חַרְבוֹת צֻרִים; וְשׁוּב מֹל אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שֵׁנִית.	2 At that time the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Make thee knives of flint, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.'
5.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ-לוֹ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, חַרְבוֹת צֻרִים; וַיָּמָל אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-גִּבְעַת הָעֲרָלוֹת.	3 And Joshua made him knives of flint, and circumcised the children of Israel at Gibeath-ha-araloth.
5.4 ד  וְזֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-מָל יְהוֹשֻׁעַ:  כָּל-הָעָם הַיֹּצֵא מִמִּצְרַיִם הַזְּכָרִים כֹּל אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, מֵתוּ בַמִּדְבָּר בַּדֶּרֶךְ, בְּצֵאתָם, מִמִּצְרָיִם.	4 And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: all the people that came forth out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after they came forth out of Egypt.
5.5 ה  כִּי-מֻלִים הָיוּ, כָּל-הָעָם הַיֹּצְאִים; וְכָל-הָעָם הַיִּלֹּדִים בַּמִּדְבָּר בַּדֶּרֶךְ, בְּצֵאתָם מִמִּצְרַיִם--לֹא-מָלוּ.	5 For all the people that came out were circumcised; but all the people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, had not been circumcised.
5.6 ו  כִּי אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, הָלְכוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּמִּדְבָּר, עַד-תֹּם כָּל-הַגּוֹי אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה הַיֹּצְאִים מִמִּצְרַיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁמְעוּ בְּקוֹל יְהוָה:  אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה, לָהֶם, לְבִלְתִּי הַרְאוֹתָם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה לַאֲבוֹתָם לָתֶת לָנוּ, אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבָשׁ.	6 For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the nation, even the men of war that came forth out of Egypt, were consumed, because they hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD; unto whom the LORD swore that He would not let them see the land which the LORD swore unto their fathers that He would give us, a land flowing with milk and honey.
5.7 ז  וְאֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם הֵקִים תַּחְתָּם, אֹתָם מָל יְהוֹשֻׁעַ:  כִּי-עֲרֵלִים הָיוּ, כִּי לֹא-מָלוּ אוֹתָם בַּדָּרֶךְ.	7 And He raised up their children in their stead; them did Joshua circumcise; for they were uncircumcised, because they had not been circumcised by the way.
5.8 ח  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר-תַּמּוּ כָל-הַגּוֹי, לְהִמּוֹל; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ תַחְתָּם בַּמַּחֲנֶה, עַד חֲיוֹתָם.  {פ}	8 And it came to pass, when all the nation were circumcised, every one of them, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole. {P}
5.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, הַיּוֹם גַּלּוֹתִי אֶת-חֶרְפַּת מִצְרַיִם, מֵעֲלֵיכֶם; וַיִּקְרָא שֵׁם הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, גִּלְגָּל, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	9 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you.' Wherefore the name of that place was called Gilgal, unto this day.
5.10 י  וַיַּחֲנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּגִּלְגָּל; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-הַפֶּסַח בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ, בָּעֶרֶב--בְּעַרְבוֹת יְרִיחוֹ.	10 And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal; and they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho.
5.11 יא  וַיֹּאכְלוּ מֵעֲבוּר הָאָרֶץ, מִמָּחֳרַת הַפֶּסַח--מַצּוֹת וְקָלוּי:  בְּעֶצֶם, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	11 And they did eat of the produce of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes and parched corn, in the selfsame day.
5.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁבֹּת הַמָּן מִמָּחֳרָת, בְּאָכְלָם מֵעֲבוּר הָאָרֶץ, וְלֹא-הָיָה עוֹד לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מָן; וַיֹּאכְלוּ, מִתְּבוּאַת אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, בַּשָּׁנָה, הַהִיא.  {ס}	12 And the manna ceased on the morrow, after they had eaten of the produce of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year. {S}
5.13 יג  וַיְהִי, בִּהְיוֹת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּירִיחוֹ, וַיִּשָּׂא עֵינָיו וַיַּרְא, וְהִנֵּה-אִישׁ עֹמֵד לְנֶגְדּוֹ וְחַרְבּוֹ שְׁלוּפָה בְּיָדוֹ; וַיֵּלֶךְ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֵלָיו וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, הֲלָנוּ אַתָּה אִם-לְצָרֵינוּ.	13 And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him: 'Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?'
5.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא, כִּי אֲנִי שַׂר-צְבָא-יְהוָה--עַתָּה בָאתִי; וַיִּפֹּל יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-פָּנָיו אַרְצָה, וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, מָה אֲדֹנִי מְדַבֵּר אֶל-עַבְדּוֹ.	14 And he said: 'Nay, but I am captain of the host of the LORD; I am now come.' And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and bowed down, and said unto him: 'What saith my lord unto his servant?'
5.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר שַׂר-צְבָא יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, שַׁל-נַעַלְךָ מֵעַל רַגְלֶךָ, כִּי הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה עֹמֵד עָלָיו, קֹדֶשׁ הוּא; וַיַּעַשׂ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, כֵּן.	15 And the captain of the LORD'S host said unto Joshua: 'Put off thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy.' And Joshua did so.
6.1 א  וִירִיחוֹ סֹגֶרֶת וּמְסֻגֶּרֶת, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֵין יוֹצֵא, וְאֵין בָּא.  {ס}	1 Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.-- {S}
6.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, רְאֵה נָתַתִּי בְיָדְךָ, אֶת-יְרִיחוֹ וְאֶת-מַלְכָּהּ--גִּבּוֹרֵי, הֶחָיִל.	2 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'See, I have given into thy hand Jericho, and the king thereof, even the mighty men of valour.
6.3 ג  וְסַבֹּתֶם אֶת-הָעִיר, כֹּל אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה--הַקֵּיף אֶת-הָעִיר, פַּעַם אֶחָת; כֹּה תַעֲשֶׂה, שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים.	3 And ye shall compass the city, all the men of war, going about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.
6.4 ד  וְשִׁבְעָה כֹהֲנִים יִשְׂאוּ שִׁבְעָה שׁוֹפְרוֹת הַיּוֹבְלִים, לִפְנֵי הָאָרוֹן, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, תָּסֹבּוּ אֶת-הָעִיר שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, יִתְקְעוּ בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת.	4 And seven priests shall bear seven rams' horns before the ark; and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the horns.
6.5 ה  וְהָיָה בִּמְשֹׁךְ בְּקֶרֶן הַיּוֹבֵל, בשמעכם (כְּשָׁמְעֲכֶם) אֶת-קוֹל הַשּׁוֹפָר, יָרִיעוּ כָל-הָעָם, תְּרוּעָה גְדוֹלָה; וְנָפְלָה חוֹמַת הָעִיר, תַּחְתֶּיהָ, וְעָלוּ הָעָם, אִישׁ נֶגְדּוֹ.	5 And it shall be, that when they make a long blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the horn, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall go up every man straight before him.'
6.6 ו  וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, שְׂאוּ אֶת-אֲרוֹן הַבְּרִית; וְשִׁבְעָה כֹהֲנִים, יִשְׂאוּ שִׁבְעָה שׁוֹפְרוֹת יוֹבְלִים, לִפְנֵי, אֲרוֹן יְהוָה.	6 And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them: 'Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven rams' horns before the ark of the LORD.'
6.7 ז  ויאמרו (וַיֹּאמֶר), אֶל-הָעָם, עִבְרוּ, וְסֹבּוּ אֶת-הָעִיר; וְהֶחָלוּץ--יַעֲבֹר, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה.	7 And he said unto the people: 'Pass on, and compass the city, and let the armed body pass on before the ark of the LORD.'
6.8 ח  וַיְהִי, כֶּאֱמֹר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הָעָם, וְשִׁבְעָה הַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאִים שִׁבְעָה שׁוֹפְרוֹת הַיּוֹבְלִים לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, עָבְרוּ וְתָקְעוּ בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת; וַאֲרוֹן בְּרִית יְהוָה, הֹלֵךְ אַחֲרֵיהֶם.	8 And it was so, that when Joshua had spoken unto the people, the seven priests bearing the seven rams' horns before the LORD passed on, and blew with the horns; and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them.
6.9 ט  וְהֶחָלוּץ הֹלֵךְ--לִפְנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, תקעו (תֹּקְעֵי) הַשּׁוֹפָרוֹת; וְהַמְאַסֵּף, הֹלֵךְ אַחֲרֵי הָאָרוֹן, הָלוֹךְ, וְתָקוֹעַ בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת.	9 And the armed men went before the priests that blew the horns, and the rearward went after the ark, [the priests] blowing with the horns continually.
6.10 י  וְאֶת-הָעָם צִוָּה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר, לֹא תָרִיעוּ וְלֹא-תַשְׁמִיעוּ אֶת-קוֹלְכֶם, וְלֹא-יֵצֵא מִפִּיכֶם, דָּבָר:  עַד יוֹם אָמְרִי אֲלֵיכֶם, הָרִיעוּ--וַהֲרִיעֹתֶם.	10 And Joshua commanded the people, saying: 'Ye shall not shout, nor let your voice be heard, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.'
6.11 יא  וַיַּסֵּב אֲרוֹן-יְהוָה אֶת-הָעִיר, הַקֵּף פַּעַם אֶחָת; וַיָּבֹאוּ, הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיָּלִינוּ, בַּמַּחֲנֶה.  {פ}	11 So he caused the ark of the LORD to compass the city, going about it once; and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp. {P}
6.12 יב  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, בַּבֹּקֶר; וַיִּשְׂאוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶת-אֲרוֹן יְהוָה.	12 And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the LORD.
6.13 יג  וְשִׁבְעָה הַכֹּהֲנִים נֹשְׂאִים שִׁבְעָה שׁוֹפְרוֹת הַיֹּבְלִים, לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, הֹלְכִים הָלוֹךְ, וְתָקְעוּ בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת; וְהֶחָלוּץ, הֹלֵךְ לִפְנֵיהֶם, וְהַמְאַסֵּף הֹלֵךְ אַחֲרֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה, הולך (הָלוֹךְ) וְתָקוֹעַ בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת.	13 And the seven priests bearing the seven rams' horns before the ark of the LORD went on continually, and blew with the horns; and the armed men went before them; and the rearward came after the ark of the LORD, [the priests] blowing with the horns continually.
6.14 יד  וַיָּסֹבּוּ אֶת-הָעִיר בַּיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי, פַּעַם אַחַת, וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, הַמַּחֲנֶה; כֹּה עָשׂוּ, שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים.	14 And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the camp; so they did six days.
6.15 טו  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וַיַּשְׁכִּמוּ כַּעֲלוֹת הַשַּׁחַר, וַיָּסֹבּוּ אֶת-הָעִיר כַּמִּשְׁפָּט הַזֶּה, שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים:  רַק בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, סָבְבוּ אֶת-הָעִיר שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים.	15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early at the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times; only on that day they compassed the city seven times.
6.16 טז  וַיְהִי בַּפַּעַם הַשְּׁבִיעִית, תָּקְעוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הָעָם הָרִיעוּ, כִּי-נָתַן יְהוָה לָכֶם אֶת-הָעִיר.	16 And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the horns, that Joshua said unto the people: 'Shout; for the LORD hath given you the city.
6.17 יז  וְהָיְתָה הָעִיר חֵרֶם הִיא וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ, לַיהוָה:  רַק רָחָב הַזּוֹנָה תִּחְיֶה, הִיא וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר אִתָּהּ בַּבַּיִת--כִּי הֶחְבְּאַתָה, אֶת-הַמַּלְאָכִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁלָחְנוּ.	17 And the city shall be devoted, even it and all that is therein, to the LORD; only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.
6.18 יח  וְרַק-אַתֶּם שִׁמְרוּ מִן-הַחֵרֶם, פֶּן-תַּחֲרִימוּ וּלְקַחְתֶּם מִן-הַחֵרֶם; וְשַׂמְתֶּם אֶת-מַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְחֵרֶם, וַעֲכַרְתֶּם, אוֹתוֹ.	18 And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the devoted thing, lest ye make yourselves accursed by taking of the devoted thing, so should ye make the camp of Israel accursed, and trouble it.
6.19 יט  וְכֹל כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, וּכְלֵי נְחֹשֶׁת וּבַרְזֶל--קֹדֶשׁ הוּא, לַיהוָה:  אוֹצַר יְהוָה, יָבוֹא.	19 But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are holy unto the LORD; they shall come into the treasury of the LORD.'
6.20 כ  וַיָּרַע הָעָם, וַיִּתְקְעוּ בַּשֹּׁפָרוֹת; וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ הָעָם אֶת-קוֹל הַשּׁוֹפָר, וַיָּרִיעוּ הָעָם תְּרוּעָה גְדוֹלָה, וַתִּפֹּל הַחוֹמָה תַּחְתֶּיהָ וַיַּעַל הָעָם הָעִירָה אִישׁ נֶגְדּוֹ, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אֶת-הָעִיר.	20 So the people shouted, and [the priests] blew with the horns. And it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the horn, that the people shouted with a great shout, and the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.
6.21 כא  וַיַּחֲרִימוּ, אֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בָּעִיר, מֵאִישׁ וְעַד-אִשָּׁה, מִנַּעַר וְעַד-זָקֵן; וְעַד שׁוֹר וָשֶׂה וַחֲמוֹר, לְפִי-חָרֶב.	21 And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, both young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.
6.22 כב  וְלִשְׁנַיִם הָאֲנָשִׁים הַמְרַגְּלִים אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אָמַר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, בֹּאוּ, בֵּית-הָאִשָּׁה הַזּוֹנָה; וְהוֹצִיאוּ מִשָּׁם אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לָהּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתֶּם לָהּ.	22 And Joshua said unto the two men that had spied out the land: 'Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman, and all that she hath, as ye swore unto her.'
6.23 כג  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַנְּעָרִים הַמְרַגְּלִים, וַיֹּצִיאוּ אֶת-רָחָב וְאֶת-אָבִיהָ וְאֶת-אִמָּהּ וְאֶת-אַחֶיהָ וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לָהּ, וְאֵת כָּל-מִשְׁפְּחוֹתֶיהָ, הוֹצִיאוּ; וַיַּנִּיחוּם--מִחוּץ, לְמַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 And the young men the spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had, all her kindred also they brought out; and they set them without the camp of Israel.
6.24 כד  וְהָעִיר שָׂרְפוּ בָאֵשׁ, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ:  רַק הַכֶּסֶף וְהַזָּהָב, וּכְלֵי הַנְּחֹשֶׁת וְהַבַּרְזֶל--נָתְנוּ, אוֹצַר בֵּית-יְהוָה.	24 And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein; only the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the LORD.
6.25 כה  וְאֶת-רָחָב הַזּוֹנָה וְאֶת-בֵּית אָבִיהָ וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לָהּ, הֶחֱיָה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַתֵּשֶׁב בְּקֶרֶב יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי הֶחְבִּיאָה אֶת-הַמַּלְאָכִים, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לְרַגֵּל אֶת-יְרִיחוֹ.  {פ}	25 But Rahab the harlot, and her father's household, and all that she had, did Joshua save alive; and she dwelt in the midst of Israel, unto this day; because she hid the messengers, whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho. {P}
6.26 כו  וַיַּשְׁבַּע יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, בָּעֵת הַהִיא לֵאמֹר:  אָרוּר הָאִישׁ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר יָקוּם וּבָנָה אֶת-הָעִיר הַזֹּאת אֶת-יְרִיחוֹ--בִּבְכֹרוֹ יְיַסְּדֶנָּה, וּבִצְעִירוֹ יַצִּיב דְּלָתֶיהָ.  {ס}	26 And Joshua charged the people with an oath at that time, saying: 'Cursed be the man before the LORD, that riseth up and buildeth this city, even Jericho; with the loss of his first-born shall he lay the foundation thereof, and with the loss of his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.' {S}
6.27 כז  וַיְהִי יְהוָה, אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וַיְהִי שָׁמְעוֹ, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ.	27 So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was in all the land.
7.1 א  וַיִּמְעֲלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מַעַל, בַּחֵרֶם; וַיִּקַּח עָכָן בֶּן-כַּרְמִי בֶן-זַבְדִּי בֶן-זֶרַח לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה, מִן-הַחֵרֶם, וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	1 But the children of Israel committed a trespass concerning the devoted thing; for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the devoted thing; and the anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of Israel. {S}
7.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֲנָשִׁים מִירִיחוֹ, הָעַי אֲשֶׁר עִם-בֵּית אָוֶן מִקֶּדֶם לְבֵית-אֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם לֵאמֹר, עֲלוּ וְרַגְּלוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וַיַּעֲלוּ, הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיְרַגְּלוּ, אֶת-הָעָי.	2 And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and spoke unto them, saying: 'Go up and spy out the land.' And the men went up and spied out Ai.
7.3 ג  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו אַל-יַעַל כָּל-הָעָם--כְּאַלְפַּיִם אִישׁ אוֹ כִּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ, יַעֲלוּ וְיַכּוּ אֶת-הָעָי; אַל-תְּיַגַּע-שָׁמָּה, אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, כִּי מְעַט, הֵמָּה.	3 And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him: 'Let not all the people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; make not all the people to toil thither; for they are but few.'
7.4 ד  וַיַּעֲלוּ מִן-הָעָם שָׁמָּה, כִּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ; וַיָּנֻסוּ, לִפְנֵי אַנְשֵׁי הָעָי.	4 So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men; and they fled before the men of Ai.
7.5 ה  וַיַּכּוּ מֵהֶם אַנְשֵׁי הָעַי, כִּשְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁשָּׁה אִישׁ, וַיִּרְדְּפוּם לִפְנֵי הַשַּׁעַר עַד-הַשְּׁבָרִים, וַיַּכּוּם בַּמּוֹרָד; וַיִּמַּס לְבַב-הָעָם, וַיְהִי לְמָיִם.	5 And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men; and they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them at the descent; and the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.
7.6 ו  וַיִּקְרַע יְהוֹשֻׁעַ שִׂמְלֹתָיו, וַיִּפֹּל עַל-פָּנָיו אַרְצָה לִפְנֵי אֲרוֹן יְהוָה עַד-הָעֶרֶב--הוּא, וְזִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּעֲלוּ עָפָר, עַל-רֹאשָׁם.	6 And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the LORD until the evening, he and the elders of Israel; and they put dust upon their heads.
7.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, לָמָה הֵעֲבַרְתָּ הַעֲבִיר אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, לָתֵת אֹתָנוּ בְּיַד הָאֱמֹרִי, לְהַאֲבִידֵנוּ; וְלוּ הוֹאַלְנוּ וַנֵּשֶׁב, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן.	7 And Joshua said: 'Alas, O Lord GOD, wherefore hast Thou at all brought this people over the Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to cause us to perish? would that we had been content and dwelt beyond the Jordan!
7.8 ח  בִּי, אֲדֹנָי:  מָה אֹמַר--אַחֲרֵי אֲשֶׁר הָפַךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל עֹרֶף, לִפְנֵי אֹיְבָיו.	8 Oh, Lord, what shall I say, after that Israel hath turned their backs before their enemies!
7.9 ט  וְיִשְׁמְעוּ הַכְּנַעֲנִי, וְכֹל יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, וְנָסַבּוּ עָלֵינוּ, וְהִכְרִיתוּ אֶת-שְׁמֵנוּ מִן-הָאָרֶץ; וּמַה-תַּעֲשֵׂה, לְשִׁמְךָ הַגָּדוֹל.	9 For when the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land hear of it, they will compass us round, and cut off our name from the earth; and what wilt Thou do for Thy great name?'
7.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, קֻם לָךְ; לָמָּה זֶּה, אַתָּה נֹפֵל עַל-פָּנֶיךָ.	10 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Get thee up; wherefore, now, art thou fallen upon thy face?
7.11 יא  חָטָא, יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְגַם עָבְרוּ אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי אוֹתָם; וְגַם לָקְחוּ, מִן-הַחֵרֶם, וְגַם גָּנְבוּ וְגַם כִּחֲשׁוּ, וְגַם שָׂמוּ בִכְלֵיהֶם.	11 Israel hath sinned; yea, they have even transgressed My covenant which I commanded them; yea, they have even taken of the devoted thing; and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have even put it among their own stuff.
7.12 יב  וְלֹא יֻכְלוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לָקוּם לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיהֶם--עֹרֶף יִפְנוּ לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיהֶם, כִּי הָיוּ לְחֵרֶם; לֹא אוֹסִיף לִהְיוֹת עִמָּכֶם, אִם-לֹא תַשְׁמִידוּ הַחֵרֶם מִקִּרְבְּכֶם.	12 Therefore the children of Israel cannot stand before their enemies, they turn their backs before their enemies, because they are become accursed; I will not be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.
7.13 יג  קֻם, קַדֵּשׁ אֶת-הָעָם, וְאָמַרְתָּ, הִתְקַדְּשׁוּ לְמָחָר:  כִּי כֹה אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, חֵרֶם בְּקִרְבְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל--לֹא תוּכַל לָקוּם לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֶיךָ, עַד-הֲסִירְכֶם הַחֵרֶם מִקִּרְבְּכֶם.	13 Up, sanctify the people, and say: Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow; for thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: There is a curse in the midst of thee, O Israel; thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.
7.14 יד  וְנִקְרַבְתֶּם בַּבֹּקֶר, לְשִׁבְטֵיכֶם; וְהָיָה הַשֵּׁבֶט אֲשֶׁר-יִלְכְּדֶנּוּ יְהוָה יִקְרַב לַמִּשְׁפָּחוֹת, וְהַמִּשְׁפָּחָה אֲשֶׁר-יִלְכְּדֶנָּה יְהוָה תִּקְרַב לַבָּתִּים, וְהַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר יִלְכְּדֶנּוּ יְהוָה, יִקְרַב לַגְּבָרִים.	14 In the morning therefore ye shall draw near by your tribes; and it shall be, that the tribe which the LORD taketh shall come near by families; and the family which the LORD shall take shall come near by households; and the household which the LORD shall take shall come near man by man.
7.15 טו  וְהָיָה, הַנִּלְכָּד בַּחֵרֶם--יִשָּׂרֵף בָּאֵשׁ, אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ:  כִּי עָבַר אֶת-בְּרִית יְהוָה, וְכִי-עָשָׂה נְבָלָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	15 And it shall be that he that is taken with the devoted thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath; because he hath transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he hath wrought a wanton deed in Israel.'
7.16 טז  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיַּקְרֵב אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל לִשְׁבָטָיו; וַיִּלָּכֵד, שֵׁבֶט יְהוּדָה.	16 So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel near by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken.
7.17 יז  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֶת-מִשְׁפַּחַת יְהוּדָה, וַיִּלְכֹּד, אֵת מִשְׁפַּחַת הַזַּרְחִי; וַיַּקְרֵב אֶת-מִשְׁפַּחַת הַזַּרְחִי, לַגְּבָרִים, וַיִּלָּכֵד, זַבְדִּי.	17 And he brought near the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zerahites. And he brought near the family of the Zerahites man by man; and Zabdi was taken.
7.18 יח  וַיַּקְרֵב אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ, לַגְּבָרִים; וַיִּלָּכֵד, עָכָן בֶּן-כַּרְמִי בֶן-זַבְדִּי בֶּן-זֶרַח--לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה.	18 And he brought near his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.
7.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-עָכָן, בְּנִי שִׂים-נָא כָבוֹד לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--וְתֶן-לוֹ תוֹדָה; וְהַגֶּד-נָא לִי מֶה עָשִׂיתָ, אַל-תְּכַחֵד מִמֶּנִּי.	19 And Joshua said unto Achan: 'My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the LORD, the God of Israel, and make confession unto Him; and tell me now what thou hast done; hide nothing from me.'
7.20 כ  וַיַּעַן עָכָן אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיֹּאמַר:  אָמְנָה, אָנֹכִי חָטָאתִי לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְכָזֹאת וְכָזֹאת, עָשִׂיתִי.	20 And Achan answered Joshua, and said: 'Of a truth I have sinned against the LORD, the God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done.
7.21 כא  ואראה (וָאֵרֶא) בַשָּׁלָל אַדֶּרֶת שִׁנְעָר אַחַת טוֹבָה וּמָאתַיִם שְׁקָלִים כֶּסֶף, וּלְשׁוֹן זָהָב אֶחָד חֲמִשִּׁים שְׁקָלִים מִשְׁקָלוֹ, וָאֶחְמְדֵם, וָאֶקָּחֵם; וְהִנָּם טְמוּנִים בָּאָרֶץ בְּתוֹךְ הָאָהֳלִי, וְהַכֶּסֶף תַּחְתֶּיהָ.	21 When I saw among the spoil a goodly Shinar mantle, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.'
7.22 כב  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מַלְאָכִים, וַיָּרֻצוּ הָאֹהֱלָה; וְהִנֵּה טְמוּנָה בְּאָהֳלוֹ, וְהַכֶּסֶף תַּחְתֶּיהָ.	22 So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.
7.23 כג  וַיִּקָּחוּם, מִתּוֹךְ הָאֹהֶל, וַיְבִאוּם אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וְאֶל כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּצִּקֻם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	23 And they took them from the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel; and they laid them down before the LORD.
7.24 כד  וַיִּקַּח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-עָכָן בֶּן-זֶרַח וְאֶת-הַכֶּסֶף וְאֶת-הָאַדֶּרֶת וְאֶת-לְשׁוֹן הַזָּהָב וְאֶת-בָּנָיו וְאֶת-בְּנֹתָיו וְאֶת-שׁוֹרוֹ וְאֶת-חֲמֹרוֹ וְאֶת-צֹאנוֹ וְאֶת-אָהֳלוֹ, וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עִמּוֹ; וַיַּעֲלוּ אֹתָם, עֵמֶק עָכוֹר.	24 And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the mantle, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had; and they brought them up unto the valley of Achor.
7.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מֶה עֲכַרְתָּנוּ, יַעְכָּרְךָ יְהוָה בַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וַיִּרְגְּמוּ אֹתוֹ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶבֶן, וַיִּשְׂרְפוּ אֹתָם בָּאֵשׁ, וַיִּסְקְלוּ אֹתָם בָּאֲבָנִים.	25 And Joshua said: 'Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shall trouble thee this day.' And all Israel stoned him with stones; and they burned them with fire, and stoned them with stones.
7.26 כו  וַיָּקִימוּ עָלָיו גַּל-אֲבָנִים גָּדוֹל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וַיָּשָׁב יְהוָה, מֵחֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ; עַל-כֵּן קָרָא שֵׁם הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, עֵמֶק עָכוֹר, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	26 And they raised over him a great heap of stones, unto this day; and the LORD turned from the fierceness of His anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called the valley of Achor, unto this day. {P}
8.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אַל-תִּירָא וְאַל-תֵּחָת--קַח עִמְּךָ אֵת כָּל-עַם הַמִּלְחָמָה, וְקוּם עֲלֵה הָעָי; רְאֵה נָתַתִּי בְיָדְךָ, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ הָעַי וְאֶת-עַמּוֹ, וְאֶת-עִירוֹ, וְאֶת-אַרְצוֹ.	1 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Fear not, neither be thou dismayed; take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai; see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land.
8.2 ב  וְעָשִׂיתָ לָעַי וּלְמַלְכָּהּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ לִירִיחוֹ וּלְמַלְכָּהּ--רַק-שְׁלָלָהּ וּבְהֶמְתָּהּ, תָּבֹזּוּ לָכֶם; שִׂים-לְךָ אֹרֵב לָעִיר, מֵאַחֲרֶיהָ.	2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king; only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves; set thee an ambush for the city behind it.'
8.3 ג  וַיָּקָם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-עַם הַמִּלְחָמָה, לַעֲלוֹת הָעָי; וַיִּבְחַר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף אִישׁ, גִּבּוֹרֵי הַחַיִל, וַיִּשְׁלָחֵם, לָיְלָה.	3 So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up to Ai; and Joshua chose out thirty thousand men, the mighty men of valour, and sent them forth by night.
8.4 ד  וַיְצַו אֹתָם לֵאמֹר, רְאוּ אַתֶּם אֹרְבִים לָעִיר מֵאַחֲרֵי הָעִיר--אַל-תַּרְחִיקוּ מִן-הָעִיר, מְאֹד; וִהְיִיתֶם כֻּלְּכֶם, נְכֹנִים.	4 And he commanded them, saying: 'Behold, ye shall lie in ambush against the city, behind the city; go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready.
8.5 ה  וַאֲנִי, וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתִּי, נִקְרַב, אֶל-הָעִיר; וְהָיָה, כִּי-יֵצְאוּ לִקְרָאתֵנוּ כַּאֲשֶׁר בָּרִאשֹׁנָה, וְנַסְנוּ, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	5 And I, and all the people that are with me, will approach unto the city; and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them.
8.6 ו  וְיָצְאוּ אַחֲרֵינוּ, עַד הַתִּיקֵנוּ אוֹתָם מִן-הָעִיר--כִּי יֹאמְרוּ, נָסִים לְפָנֵינוּ כַּאֲשֶׁר בָּרִאשֹׁנָה; וְנַסְנוּ, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	6 And they will come out after us, till we have drawn them away from the city; for they will say: They flee before us, as at the first; so we will flee before them.
8.7 ז  וְאַתֶּם, תָּקֻמוּ מֵהָאוֹרֵב, וְהוֹרַשְׁתֶּם, אֶת-הָעִיר; וּנְתָנָהּ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, בְּיֶדְכֶם.	7 And ye shall rise up from the ambush, and take possession of the city; for the LORD your God will deliver it into your hand.
8.8 ח  וְהָיָה כְּתָפְשְׂכֶם אֶת-הָעִיר, תַּצִּיתוּ אֶת-הָעִיר בָּאֵשׁ--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, תַּעֲשׂוּ; רְאוּ, צִוִּיתִי אֶתְכֶם.	8 And it shall be, when ye have seized upon the city, that ye shall set the city on fire; according to the word of the LORD shall ye do; see, I have commanded you.'
8.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁלָחֵם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיֵּלְכוּ אֶל-הַמַּאְרָב, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בֵּין בֵּית-אֵל וּבֵין הָעַי, מִיָּם לָעָי; וַיָּלֶן יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, בְּתוֹךְ הָעָם.	9 And Joshua sent them forth; and they went to the ambushment, and abode between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai; but Joshua lodged that night among the people.
8.10 י  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיִּפְקֹד אֶת-הָעָם; וַיַּעַל הוּא וְזִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵי הָעָם--הָעָי.	10 And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.
8.11 יא  וְכָל-הָעָם הַמִּלְחָמָה אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, עָלוּ וַיִּגְּשׁוּ, וַיָּבֹאוּ, נֶגֶד הָעִיר; וַיַּחֲנוּ מִצְּפוֹן לָעַי, וְהַגַּי בֵּינָו וּבֵין-הָעָי.	11 And all the people, even the men of war that were with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai--now there was a valley between him and Ai.
8.12 יב  וַיִּקַּח, כַּחֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ; וַיָּשֶׂם אוֹתָם אֹרֵב, בֵּין בֵּית-אֵל וּבֵין הָעַי--מִיָּם לָעִיר.	12 And he took about five thousand men, and set them in ambush between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai.
8.13 יג  וַיָּשִׂימוּ הָעָם אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, אֲשֶׁר מִצְּפוֹן לָעִיר, וְאֶת-עֲקֵבוֹ, מִיָּם לָעִיר; וַיֵּלֶךְ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, בְּתוֹךְ הָעֵמֶק.	13 So the people set themselves in array, even all the host that was on the north of the city, their rear lying in wait on the west of the city; and Joshua went that night into the midst of the vale.
8.14 יד  וַיְהִי כִּרְאוֹת מֶלֶךְ-הָעַי, וַיְמַהֲרוּ וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ וַיֵּצְאוּ אַנְשֵׁי-הָעִיר לִקְרַאת-יִשְׂרָאֵל לַמִּלְחָמָה הוּא וְכָל-עַמּוֹ לַמּוֹעֵד--לִפְנֵי הָעֲרָבָה; וְהוּא לֹא יָדַע, כִּי-אֹרֵב לוֹ מֵאַחֲרֵי הָעִיר.	14 And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that the men of the city hastened and rose up early and went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at the time appointed, in front of the Arabah; but he knew not that there was an ambush against him behind the city.
8.15 טו  וַיִּנָּגְעוּ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִפְנֵיהֶם; וַיָּנֻסוּ, דֶּרֶךְ הַמִּדְבָּר.	15 And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.
8.16 טז  וַיִּזָּעֲקוּ, כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר בעיר (בָּעַי), לִרְדֹּף, אַחֲרֵיהֶם; וַיִּרְדְּפוּ אַחֲרֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיִּנָּתְקוּ מִן-הָעִיר.	16 And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue after them; and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.
8.17 יז  וְלֹא-נִשְׁאַר אִישׁ, בָּעַי וּבֵית אֵל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָצְאוּ, אַחֲרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּעַזְבוּ אֶת-הָעִיר פְּתוּחָה, וַיִּרְדְּפוּ אַחֲרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	17 And there was not a man left in Ai or Beth-el, that went not out after Israel; and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel. {P}
8.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, נְטֵה בַּכִּידוֹן אֲשֶׁר-בְּיָדְךָ אֶל-הָעַי--כִּי בְיָדְךָ, אֶתְּנֶנָּה; וַיֵּט יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּכִּידוֹן אֲשֶׁר-בְּיָדוֹ, אֶל-הָעִיר.	18 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Stretch out the javelin that is in thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thy hand.' And Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
8.19 יט  וְהָאוֹרֵב קָם מְהֵרָה מִמְּקוֹמוֹ וַיָּרוּצוּ, כִּנְטוֹת יָדוֹ, וַיָּבֹאוּ הָעִיר, וַיִּלְכְּדוּהָ; וַיְמַהֲרוּ, וַיַּצִּיתוּ אֶת-הָעִיר בָּאֵשׁ.	19 And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand, and entered into the city, and took it; and they hastened and set the city on fire.
8.20 כ  וַיִּפְנוּ אַנְשֵׁי הָעַי אַחֲרֵיהֶם וַיִּרְאוּ, וְהִנֵּה עָלָה עֲשַׁן הָעִיר הַשָּׁמַיְמָה, וְלֹא-הָיָה בָהֶם יָדַיִם לָנוּס, הֵנָּה וָהֵנָּה; וְהָעָם הַנָּס הַמִּדְבָּר, נֶהְפַּךְ אֶל-הָרוֹדֵף.	20 And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way; and the people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
8.21 כא  וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל רָאוּ, כִּי-לָכַד הָאֹרֵב אֶת-הָעִיר, וְכִי עָלָה, עֲשַׁן הָעִיר; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-אַנְשֵׁי הָעָי.	21 And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned back, and slew the men of Ai.
8.22 כב  וְאֵלֶּה יָצְאוּ מִן-הָעִיר, לִקְרָאתָם, וַיִּהְיוּ לְיִשְׂרָאֵל בַּתָּוֶךְ, אֵלֶּה מִזֶּה וְאֵלֶּה מִזֶּה; וַיַּכּוּ אוֹתָם, עַד-בִּלְתִּי הִשְׁאִיר-לוֹ שָׂרִיד וּפָלִיט.	22 And the other came forth out of the city against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side; and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.
8.23 כג  וְאֶת-מֶלֶךְ הָעַי, תָּפְשׂוּ חָי; וַיַּקְרִבוּ אֹתוֹ, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ.	23 And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.
8.24 כד  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל לַהֲרֹג אֶת-כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָעַי בַּשָּׂדֶה, בַּמִּדְבָּר אֲשֶׁר רְדָפוּם בּוֹ, וַיִּפְּלוּ כֻלָּם לְפִי-חֶרֶב, עַד-תֻּמָּם; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל הָעַי, וַיַּכּוּ אֹתָהּ לְפִי-חָרֶב.	24 And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, even in the wilderness wherein they pursued them, and they were all fallen by the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all Israel returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.
8.25 כה  וַיְהִי כָל-הַנֹּפְלִים בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, מֵאִישׁ וְעַד-אִשָּׁה--שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, אָלֶף:  כֹּל, אַנְשֵׁי הָעָי.	25 And all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.
8.26 כו  וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ לֹא-הֵשִׁיב יָדוֹ, אֲשֶׁר נָטָה בַּכִּידוֹן, עַד אֲשֶׁר הֶחֱרִים, אֵת כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָעָי.	26 For Joshua drew not back his hand, wherewith he stretched out the javelin, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.
8.27 כז  רַק הַבְּהֵמָה, וּשְׁלַל הָעִיר הַהִיא, בָּזְזוּ לָהֶם, יִשְׂרָאֵל--כִּדְבַר יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ.	27 Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according unto the word of the LORD which He commanded Joshua.
8.28 כח  וַיִּשְׂרֹף יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶת-הָעָי; וַיְשִׂימֶהָ תֵּל-עוֹלָם שְׁמָמָה, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	28 So Joshua burnt Ai, and made it a heap for ever, even a desolation, unto this day.
8.29 כט  וְאֶת-מֶלֶךְ הָעַי תָּלָה עַל-הָעֵץ, עַד-עֵת הָעָרֶב; וּכְבוֹא הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ צִוָּה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וַיֹּרִידוּ אֶת-נִבְלָתוֹ מִן-הָעֵץ, וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּ אוֹתָהּ אֶל-פֶּתַח שַׁעַר הָעִיר, וַיָּקִימוּ עָלָיו גַּל-אֲבָנִים גָּדוֹל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	29 And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until the eventide; and at the going down of the sun Joshua commanded, and they took his carcass down from the tree, and cast it at the entrance of the gate of the city, and raised thereon a great heap of stones, unto this day. {P}
8.30 ל  אָז יִבְנֶה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מִזְבֵּחַ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּהַר, עֵיבָל.	30 Then Joshua built an altar unto the LORD, the God of Israel, in mount Ebal,
8.31 לא  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּכָּתוּב בְּסֵפֶר תּוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה--מִזְבַּח אֲבָנִים שְׁלֵמוֹת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הֵנִיף עֲלֵיהֶן בַּרְזֶל; וַיַּעֲלוּ עָלָיו עֹלוֹת לַיהוָה, וַיִּזְבְּחוּ שְׁלָמִים.	31 as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of unhewn stones, upon which no man had lifted up any iron; and they offered thereon burnt-offerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed peace-offerings.
8.32 לב  וַיִּכְתָּב-שָׁם, עַל-הָאֲבָנִים--אֵת, מִשְׁנֵה תּוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה, אֲשֶׁר כָּתַב, לִפְנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	32 And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote before the children of Israel.
8.33 לג  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּזְקֵנָיו וְשֹׁטְרִים וְשֹׁפְטָיו עֹמְדִים מִזֶּה וּמִזֶּה לָאָרוֹן נֶגֶד הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם נֹשְׂאֵי אֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה, כַּגֵּר כָּאֶזְרָח--חֶצְיוֹ אֶל-מוּל הַר-גְּרִזִים, וְהַחֶצְיוֹ אֶל-מוּל הַר-עֵיבָל:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה, לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-הָעָם יִשְׂרָאֵל--בָּרִאשֹׁנָה.	33 And all Israel, and their elders and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, that bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD, as well the stranger as the home-born; half of them in front of mount Gerizim and half of them in front of mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded at the first, that they should bless the people of Israel.
8.34 לד  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, קָרָא אֶת-כָּל-דִּבְרֵי הַתּוֹרָה, הַבְּרָכָה, וְהַקְּלָלָה--כְּכָל-הַכָּתוּב, בְּסֵפֶר הַתּוֹרָה.	34 And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessing and the curse, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
8.35 לה  לֹא-הָיָה דָבָר, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה--אֲשֶׁר לֹא-קָרָא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, נֶגֶד כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל וְהַנָּשִׁים וְהַטַּף, וְהַגֵּר, הַהֹלֵךְ בְּקִרְבָּם.	35 There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the assembly of Israel, and the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that walked among them.
9.1 א  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ כָּל-הַמְּלָכִים אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן בָּהָר וּבַשְּׁפֵלָה, וּבְכֹל חוֹף הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל, אֶל-מוּל, הַלְּבָנוֹן--הַחִתִּי, וְהָאֱמֹרִי, הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַפְּרִזִּי, הַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי.	1 And it came to pass, when all the kings that were beyond the Jordan, in the hill-country, and in the Lowland, and on all the shore of the Great Sea in front of Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof,
9.2 ב  וַיִּתְקַבְּצוּ יַחְדָּו, לְהִלָּחֵם עִם-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְעִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל--פֶּה, אֶחָד.  {פ}	2 that they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord. {P}
9.3 ג  וְיֹשְׁבֵי גִבְעוֹן שָׁמְעוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לִירִיחוֹ--וְלָעָי.	3 But when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai,
9.4 ד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ גַם-הֵמָּה בְּעָרְמָה, וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיִּצְטַיָּרוּ; וַיִּקְחוּ שַׂקִּים בָּלִים, לַחֲמוֹרֵיהֶם, וְנֹאדוֹת יַיִן בָּלִים, וּמְבֻקָּעִים וּמְצֹרָרִים.	4 they also did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine skins, worn and rent and patched up;
9.5 ה  וּנְעָלוֹת בָּלוֹת וּמְטֻלָּאוֹת בְּרַגְלֵיהֶם, וּשְׂלָמוֹת בָּלוֹת עֲלֵיהֶם; וְכֹל לֶחֶם צֵידָם, יָבֵשׁ הָיָה נִקֻּדִים.	5 and worn shoes and clouted upon their feet, and worn garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision was dry and was become crumbs.
9.6 ו  וַיֵּלְכוּ אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, הַגִּלְגָּל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו וְאֶל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה בָּאנוּ, וְעַתָּה, כִּרְתוּ-לָנוּ בְרִית.	6 And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of Israel: 'We are come from a far country; now therefore make ye a covenant with us.'
9.7 ז  ויאמרו (וַיֹּאמֶר) אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-הַחִוִּי:  אוּלַי, בְּקִרְבִּי אַתָּה יוֹשֵׁב, וְאֵיךְ, אכרות- (אֶכְרָת-) לְךָ בְרִית.	7 And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites: 'Peradventure ye dwell among us; and how shall we make a covenant with you?'
9.8 ח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, עֲבָדֶיךָ אֲנָחְנוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מִי אַתֶּם, וּמֵאַיִן תָּבֹאוּ.	8 And they said unto Joshua: 'We are thy servants.' And Joshua said unto them: 'Who are ye? and from whence come ye?'
9.9 ט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו, מֵאֶרֶץ רְחוֹקָה מְאֹד בָּאוּ עֲבָדֶיךָ, לְשֵׁם, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ:  כִּי-שָׁמַעְנוּ שָׁמְעוֹ, וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה בְּמִצְרָיִם.	9 And they said unto him: 'From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy God; for we have heard the fame of Him, and all that He did in Egypt,
9.10 י  וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, לִשְׁנֵי מַלְכֵי הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן--לְסִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ חֶשְׁבּוֹן, וּלְעוֹג מֶלֶךְ-הַבָּשָׁן אֲשֶׁר בְּעַשְׁתָּרוֹת.	10 and all that He did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, who was at Ashtaroth.
9.11 יא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלֵינוּ זְקֵינֵינוּ וְכָל-יֹשְׁבֵי אַרְצֵנוּ לֵאמֹר, קְחוּ בְיֶדְכֶם צֵידָה לַדֶּרֶךְ, וּלְכוּ, לִקְרָאתָם; וַאֲמַרְתֶּם אֲלֵיהֶם עַבְדֵיכֶם אֲנַחְנוּ, וְעַתָּה כִּרְתוּ-לָנוּ בְרִית.	11 And our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spoke to us, saying: Take provision in your hand for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them: We are your servants; and now make ye a covenant with us.
9.12 יב  זֶה לַחְמֵנוּ, חָם הִצְטַיַּדְנוּ אֹתוֹ מִבָּתֵּינוּ, בְּיוֹם צֵאתֵנוּ, לָלֶכֶת אֲלֵיכֶם; וְעַתָּה הִנֵּה יָבֵשׁ, וְהָיָה נִקֻּדִים.	12 This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and is become crumbs.
9.13 יג  וְאֵלֶּה נֹאדוֹת הַיַּיִן אֲשֶׁר מִלֵּאנוּ חֲדָשִׁים, וְהִנֵּה הִתְבַּקָּעוּ; וְאֵלֶּה שַׂלְמוֹתֵינוּ, וּנְעָלֵינוּ, בָּלוּ, מֵרֹב הַדֶּרֶךְ מְאֹד.	13 And these wine-skins, which we filled, were new; and, behold, they are rent. And these our garments and our shoes are worn by reason of the very long journey.'
9.14 יד  וַיִּקְחוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, מִצֵּידָם; וְאֶת-פִּי יְהוָה, לֹא שָׁאָלוּ.	14 And the men took of their provision, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the LORD.
9.15 טו  וַיַּעַשׂ לָהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ שָׁלוֹם, וַיִּכְרֹת לָהֶם בְּרִית לְחַיּוֹתָם; וַיִּשָּׁבְעוּ לָהֶם, נְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה.	15 And Joshua made peace with them, and made a covenant with them, to let them live; and the princes of the congregation swore unto them.
9.16 טז  וַיְהִי, מִקְצֵה שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, אַחֲרֵי, אֲשֶׁר-כָּרְתוּ לָהֶם בְּרִית; וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, כִּי-קְרֹבִים הֵם אֵלָיו, וּבְקִרְבּוֹ, הֵם יֹשְׁבִים.	16 And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a covenant with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours, and that they dwelt among them.
9.17 יז  וַיִּסְעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-עָרֵיהֶם--בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי; וְעָרֵיהֶם גִּבְעוֹן וְהַכְּפִירָה, וּבְאֵרוֹת וְקִרְיַת יְעָרִים.	17 And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim.
9.18 יח  וְלֹא הִכּוּם, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי-נִשְׁבְּעוּ לָהֶם נְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה, בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּלֹּנוּ כָל-הָעֵדָה, עַל-הַנְּשִׂיאִים.	18 And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD, the God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the princes.
9.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הַנְּשִׂיאִים, אֶל-כָּל-הָעֵדָה, אֲנַחְנוּ נִשְׁבַּעְנוּ לָהֶם, בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְעַתָּה, לֹא נוּכַל לִנְגֹּעַ בָּהֶם.	19 But all the princes said unto all the congregation: 'We have sworn unto them by the LORD, the God of Israel; now therefore we may not touch them.
9.20 כ  זֹאת נַעֲשֶׂה לָהֶם, וְהַחֲיֵה אוֹתָם; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה עָלֵינוּ קֶצֶף, עַל-הַשְּׁבוּעָה אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּעְנוּ לָהֶם.	20 This we will do to them, and let them live; lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we swore unto them.'
9.21 כא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֲלֵיהֶם הַנְּשִׂיאִים, יִחְיוּ; וַיִּהְיוּ חֹטְבֵי עֵצִים וְשֹׁאֲבֵי-מַיִם, לְכָל-הָעֵדָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבְּרוּ לָהֶם, הַנְּשִׂיאִים.	21 And the princes said concerning them: 'Let them live'; so they became hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation, as the princes had spoken concerning them.
9.22 כב  וַיִּקְרָא לָהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם לֵאמֹר:  לָמָּה רִמִּיתֶם אֹתָנוּ לֵאמֹר, רְחוֹקִים אֲנַחְנוּ מִכֶּם מְאֹד, וְאַתֶּם, בְּקִרְבֵּנוּ יֹשְׁבִים.	22 And Joshua called for them, and he spoke unto them, saying: 'Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying: We are very far from you, when ye dwell among us?
9.23 כג  וְעַתָּה, אֲרוּרִים אַתֶּם; וְלֹא-יִכָּרֵת מִכֶּם עֶבֶד, וְחֹטְבֵי עֵצִים וְשֹׁאֲבֵי-מַיִם--לְבֵית אֱלֹהָי.	23 Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall never fail to be of you bondmen, both hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.'
9.24 כד  וַיַּעֲנוּ אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כִּי הֻגֵּד הֻגַּד לַעֲבָדֶיךָ אֵת אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֶת-מֹשֶׁה עַבְדּוֹ, לָתֵת לָכֶם אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, וּלְהַשְׁמִיד אֶת-כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ מִפְּנֵיכֶם; וַנִּירָא מְאֹד לְנַפְשֹׁתֵינוּ מִפְּנֵיכֶם, וַנַּעֲשֵׂה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	24 And they answered Joshua, and said: 'Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the LORD thy God commanded His servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you; therefore we were sore afraid for our lives because of you, and have done this thing.
9.25 כה  וְעַתָּה, הִנְנוּ בְיָדֶךָ:  כַּטּוֹב וְכַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינֶיךָ לַעֲשׂוֹת לָנוּ, עֲשֵׂה.	25 And now, behold, we are in thy hand: as it seemeth good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.'
9.26 כו  וַיַּעַשׂ לָהֶם, כֵּן; וַיַּצֵּל אוֹתָם מִיַּד בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלֹא הֲרָגוּם.	26 And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them not.
9.27 כז  וַיִּתְּנֵם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, חֹטְבֵי עֵצִים וְשֹׁאֲבֵי מַיִם--לָעֵדָה; וּלְמִזְבַּח יְהוָה עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יִבְחָר.  {פ}	27 And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the LORD, unto this day, in the place which He should choose. {P}
10.1 א  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ אֲדֹנִי-צֶדֶק מֶלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, כִּי-לָכַד יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-הָעַי וַיַּחֲרִימָהּ--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לִירִיחוֹ וּלְמַלְכָּהּ, כֵּן-עָשָׂה לָעַי וּלְמַלְכָּהּ; וְכִי הִשְׁלִימוּ יֹשְׁבֵי גִבְעוֹן, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּהְיוּ, בְּקִרְבָּם.	1 Now it came to pass, when Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them;
10.2 ב  וַיִּירְאוּ מְאֹד--כִּי עִיר גְּדוֹלָה גִּבְעוֹן, כְּאַחַת עָרֵי הַמַּמְלָכָה; וְכִי הִיא גְדוֹלָה מִן-הָעַי, וְכָל-אֲנָשֶׁיהָ גִּבֹּרִים.	2 that they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were mighty.
10.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֲדֹנִי-צֶדֶק מֶלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶל-הוֹהָם מֶלֶךְ-חֶבְרוֹן וְאֶל-פִּרְאָם מֶלֶךְ-יַרְמוּת וְאֶל-יָפִיעַ מֶלֶךְ-לָכִישׁ וְאֶל-דְּבִיר מֶלֶךְ-עֶגְלוֹן--לֵאמֹר.	3 Wherefore Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying:
10.4 ד  עֲלוּ-אֵלַי וְעִזְרֻנִי, וְנַכֶּה אֶת-גִּבְעוֹן:  כִּי-הִשְׁלִימָה אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וְאֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 'Come up unto me, and help me, and let us smite Gibeon; for it hath made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel.'
10.5 ה  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ וַיַּעֲלוּ חֲמֵשֶׁת מַלְכֵי הָאֱמֹרִי, מֶלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם מֶלֶךְ-חֶבְרוֹן מֶלֶךְ-יַרְמוּת מֶלֶךְ-לָכִישׁ מֶלֶךְ-עֶגְלוֹן--הֵם, וְכָל-מַחֲנֵיהֶם; וַיַּחֲנוּ, עַל-גִּבְעוֹן, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ, עָלֶיהָ.	5 Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their hosts, and encamped against Gibeon, and made war against it.
10.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ אַנְשֵׁי גִבְעוֹן אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה הַגִּלְגָּלָה לֵאמֹר, אַל-תֶּרֶף יָדֶיךָ מֵעֲבָדֶיךָ:  עֲלֵה אֵלֵינוּ מְהֵרָה, וְהוֹשִׁיעָה לָּנוּ וְעָזְרֵנוּ--כִּי נִקְבְּצוּ אֵלֵינוּ, כָּל-מַלְכֵי הָאֱמֹרִי יֹשְׁבֵי הָהָר.	6 And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying: 'Slack not thy hands from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us; for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the hill-country are gathered together against us.'
10.7 ז  וַיַּעַל יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מִן-הַגִּלְגָּל, הוּא וְכָל-עַם הַמִּלְחָמָה עִמּוֹ, וְכֹל, גִּבּוֹרֵי הֶחָיִל.  {פ}	7 So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valour. {P}
10.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אַל-תִּירָא מֵהֶם, כִּי בְיָדְךָ נְתַתִּים:  לֹא-יַעֲמֹד אִישׁ מֵהֶם, בְּפָנֶיךָ.	8 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Fear them not; for I have delivered them into thy hand; there shall not a man of them stand against thee.'
10.9 ט  וַיָּבֹא אֲלֵיהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, פִּתְאֹם:  כָּל-הַלַּיְלָה, עָלָה מִן-הַגִּלְגָּל.	9 Joshua therefore came upon them suddenly; for he went up from Gilgal all the night.
10.10 י  וַיְהֻמֵּם יְהוָה לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּכֵּם מַכָּה-גְדוֹלָה בְּגִבְעוֹן; וַיִּרְדְּפֵם, דֶּרֶךְ מַעֲלֵה בֵית-חוֹרֹן, וַיַּכֵּם עַד-עֲזֵקָה, וְעַד-מַקֵּדָה.	10 And the LORD discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon; and they chased them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.
10.11 יא  וַיְהִי בְּנֻסָם מִפְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֵם בְּמוֹרַד בֵּית-חוֹרֹן וַיהוָה הִשְׁלִיךְ עֲלֵיהֶם אֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם עַד-עֲזֵקָה--וַיָּמֻתוּ:  רַבִּים, אֲשֶׁר-מֵתוּ בְּאַבְנֵי הַבָּרָד, מֵאֲשֶׁר הָרְגוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בֶּחָרֶב.  {ס}	11 And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, while they were at the descent of Beth-horon, that the LORD cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died; they were more who died with the hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword. {S}
10.12 יב  אָז יְדַבֵּר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, לַיהוָה, בְּיוֹם תֵּת יְהוָה אֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי, לִפְנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר לְעֵינֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שֶׁמֶשׁ בְּגִבְעוֹן דּוֹם, וְיָרֵחַ, בְּעֵמֶק אַיָּלוֹן.	12 Then spoke Joshua to the LORD in the day when the LORD delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel; and he said in the sight of Israel: 'Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Aijalon.'
10.13 יג  וַיִּדֹּם הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ וְיָרֵחַ עָמָד, עַד-יִקֹּם גּוֹי אֹיְבָיו--הֲלֹא-הִיא כְתוּבָה, עַל-סֵפֶר הַיָּשָׁר; וַיַּעֲמֹד הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ בַּחֲצִי הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְלֹא-אָץ לָבוֹא כְּיוֹם תָּמִים.	13 And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the nation had avenged themselves of their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jashar? And the sun stayed in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.
10.14 יד  וְלֹא הָיָה כַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, לְפָנָיו וְאַחֲרָיו, לִשְׁמֹעַ יְהוָה, בְּקוֹל אִישׁ:  כִּי יְהוָה, נִלְחָם לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man; for the LORD fought for Israel. {S}
10.15 טו  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה הַגִּלְגָּלָה.	15 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
10.16 טז  וַיָּנֻסוּ, חֲמֵשֶׁת הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיֵּחָבְאוּ בַמְּעָרָה, בְּמַקֵּדָה.	16 And these five kings fled, and hid themselves in the cave at Makkedah.
10.17 יז  וַיֻּגַּד, לִיהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר:  נִמְצְאוּ חֲמֵשֶׁת הַמְּלָכִים, נֶחְבְּאִים בַּמְּעָרָה בְּמַקֵּדָה.	17 And it was told Joshua, saying: 'The five kings are found, hidden in the cave at Makkedah.'
10.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, גֹּלּוּ אֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת אֶל-פִּי הַמְּעָרָה, וְהַפְקִידוּ עָלֶיהָ אֲנָשִׁים, לְשָׁמְרָם.	18 And Joshua said: 'Roll great stones unto the mouth of the cave, and set men by it to keep them;
10.19 יט  וְאַתֶּם, אַל-תַּעֲמֹדוּ--רִדְפוּ אַחֲרֵי אֹיְבֵיכֶם, וְזִנַּבְתֶּם אוֹתָם:  אַל-תִּתְּנוּם, לָבוֹא אֶל-עָרֵיהֶם, כִּי נְתָנָם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, בְּיֶדְכֶם.	19 but stay not ye; pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their cities; for the LORD your God hath delivered them into your hand.'
10.20 כ  וַיְהִי כְּכַלּוֹת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַכּוֹתָם מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה-מְאֹד--עַד-תֻּמָּם; וְהַשְּׂרִידִים שָׂרְדוּ מֵהֶם, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-עָרֵי הַמִּבְצָר.	20 And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, and the remnant which remained of them had entered into the fortified cities,
10.21 כא  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ כָל-הָעָם אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מַקֵּדָה, בְּשָׁלוֹם:  לֹא-חָרַץ לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְאִישׁ--אֶת-לְשֹׁנוֹ.	21 that all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace; none whetted his tongue against any of the children of Israel.
10.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, פִּתְחוּ אֶת-פִּי הַמְּעָרָה; וְהוֹצִיאוּ אֵלַי, אֶת-חֲמֵשֶׁת הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה--מִן-הַמְּעָרָה.	22 Then said Joshua: 'Open the mouth of the cave, and bring forth those five kings unto me out of the cave.'
10.23 כג  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ כֵן--וַיֹּצִיאוּ אֵלָיו אֶת-חֲמֵשֶׁת הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה, מִן-הַמְּעָרָה:  אֵת מֶלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ חֶבְרוֹן אֶת-מֶלֶךְ יַרְמוּת, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ לָכִישׁ, אֶת-מֶלֶךְ עֶגְלוֹן.	23 And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon.
10.24 כד  וַיְהִי כְּהוֹצִיאָם אֶת-הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-קְצִינֵי אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה הֶהָלְכוּא אִתּוֹ, קִרְבוּ שִׂימוּ אֶת-רַגְלֵיכֶם עַל-צַוְּארֵי הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיִּקְרְבוּ, וַיָּשִׂימוּ אֶת-רַגְלֵיהֶם עַל-צַוְּארֵיהֶם.	24 And it came to pass, when they brought forth those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the chiefs of the men of war that went with him: 'Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings.' And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.
10.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אַל-תִּירְאוּ וְאַל-תֵּחָתּוּ:  חִזְקוּ וְאִמְצוּ--כִּי כָכָה יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה לְכָל-אֹיְבֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם נִלְחָמִים אוֹתָם.	25 And Joshua said unto them: 'Fear not, nor be dismayed; be strong and of good courage; for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.'
10.26 כו  וַיַּכֵּם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיְמִיתֵם, וַיִּתְלֵם, עַל חֲמִשָּׁה עֵצִים; וַיִּהְיוּ תְּלוּיִם עַל-הָעֵצִים, עַד-הָעָרֶב.	26 And afterward Joshua smote them, and put them to death, and hanged them on five trees; and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
10.27 כז  וַיְהִי לְעֵת בּוֹא הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, צִוָּה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וַיֹּרִידוּם מֵעַל הָעֵצִים, וַיַּשְׁלִכֻם, אֶל-הַמְּעָרָה אֲשֶׁר נֶחְבְּאוּ-שָׁם; וַיָּשִׂמוּ אֲבָנִים גְּדֹלוֹת, עַל-פִּי הַמְּעָרָה, עַד-עֶצֶם, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	27 And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had hidden themselves, and laid great stones on the mouth of the cave, unto this very day. {S}
10.28 כח  וְאֶת-מַקֵּדָה לָכַד יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וַיַּכֶּהָ לְפִי-חֶרֶב וְאֶת-מַלְכָּהּ--הֶחֱרִם אוֹתָם וְאֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ, לֹא הִשְׁאִיר שָׂרִיד; וַיַּעַשׂ לְמֶלֶךְ מַקֵּדָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְמֶלֶךְ יְרִיחוֹ.  {ס}	28 And Joshua took Makkedah on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof; he utterly destroyed them and all the souls that were therein, he left none remaining; and he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done unto the king of Jericho. {S}
10.29 כט  וַיַּעֲבֹר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, מִמַּקֵּדָה--לִבְנָה; וַיִּלָּחֶם, עִם-לִבְנָה.	29 And Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah.
10.30 ל  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה גַּם-אוֹתָהּ בְּיַד יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-מַלְכָּהּ, וַיַּכֶּהָ לְפִי-חֶרֶב וְאֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ, לֹא-הִשְׁאִיר בָּהּ שָׂרִיד; וַיַּעַשׂ לְמַלְכָּהּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְמֶלֶךְ יְרִיחוֹ.  {ס}	30 And the LORD delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining in it; and he did unto the king thereof as he had done unto the king of Jericho. {S}
10.31 לא  וַיַּעֲבֹר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, מִלִּבְנָה--לָכִישָׁה; וַיִּחַן עָלֶיהָ, וַיִּלָּחֶם בָּהּ.	31 And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it.
10.32 לב  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה אֶת-לָכִישׁ בְּיַד יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ בַּיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי, וַיַּכֶּהָ לְפִי-חֶרֶב, וְאֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ--כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, לְלִבְנָה.  {פ}	32 And the LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, and he took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah. {P}
10.33 לג  אָז עָלָה, הֹרָם מֶלֶךְ גֶּזֶר, לַעְזֹר, אֶת-לָכִישׁ; וַיַּכֵּהוּ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְאֶת-עַמּוֹ, עַד-בִּלְתִּי הִשְׁאִיר-לוֹ שָׂרִיד.	33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.
10.34 לד  וַיַּעֲבֹר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, מִלָּכִישׁ--עֶגְלֹנָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ עָלֶיהָ, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ עָלֶיהָ.	34 And Joshua passed from Lachish, and all Israel with him, unto Eglon; and they encamped against it, and fought against it.
10.35 לה  וַיִּלְכְּדוּהָ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, וַיַּכּוּהָ לְפִי-חֶרֶב--וְאֵת כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא הֶחֱרִים:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, לְלָכִישׁ.  {פ}	35 And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish. {P}
10.36 לו  וַיַּעַל יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, מֵעֶגְלוֹנָה--חֶבְרוֹנָה; וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ, עָלֶיהָ.	36 And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it.
10.37 לז  וַיִּלְכְּדוּהָ וַיַּכּוּהָ-לְפִי-חֶרֶב וְאֶת-מַלְכָּהּ וְאֶת-כָּל-עָרֶיהָ וְאֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ, לֹא-הִשְׁאִיר שָׂרִיד, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה, לְעֶגְלוֹן; וַיַּחֲרֵם אוֹתָהּ, וְאֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ.  {ס}	37 And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but he utterly destroyed it, and all the souls that were therein. {S}
10.38 לח  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, דְּבִרָה; וַיִּלָּחֶם, עָלֶיהָ.	38 And Joshua turned back, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it.
10.39 לט  וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ וְאֶת-מַלְכָּהּ וְאֶת-כָּל-עָרֶיהָ, וַיַּכּוּם לְפִי-חֶרֶב, וַיַּחֲרִימוּ אֶת-כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ, לֹא הִשְׁאִיר שָׂרִיד:  כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְחֶבְרוֹן, כֵּן-עָשָׂה לִדְבִרָה וּלְמַלְכָּהּ, וְכַאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְלִבְנָה, וּלְמַלְכָּהּ.	39 And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining; as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to the king thereof.
10.40 מ  וַיַּכֶּה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ הָהָר וְהַנֶּגֶב וְהַשְּׁפֵלָה וְהָאֲשֵׁדוֹת, וְאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵיהֶם--לֹא הִשְׁאִיר, שָׂרִיד; וְאֵת כָּל-הַנְּשָׁמָה, הֶחֱרִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	40 So Joshua smote all the land, the hill-country, and the South, and the Lowland, and the slopes, and all their kings; he left none remaining; but he utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD, the God of Israel, commanded.
10.41 מא  וַיַּכֵּם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ מִקָּדֵשׁ בַּרְנֵעַ, וְעַד-עַזָּה; וְאֵת כָּל-אֶרֶץ גֹּשֶׁן, וְעַד-גִּבְעוֹן.	41 And Joshua smote them from Kadesh-barnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.
10.42 מב  וְאֵת כָּל-הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה וְאֶת-אַרְצָם, לָכַד יְהוֹשֻׁעַ פַּעַם אֶחָת:  כִּי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, נִלְחָם, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	42 And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the LORD, the God of Israel, fought for Israel.
10.43 מג  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל עִמּוֹ, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה הַגִּלְגָּלָה.  {פ}	43 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal. {P}
11.1 א  וַיְהִי, כִּשְׁמֹעַ יָבִין מֶלֶךְ-חָצוֹר; וַיִּשְׁלַח, אֶל-יוֹבָב מֶלֶךְ מָדוֹן, וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ שִׁמְרוֹן, וְאֶל-מֶלֶךְ אַכְשָׁף.	1 And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor heard thereof, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,
11.2 ב  וְאֶל-הַמְּלָכִים אֲשֶׁר מִצְּפוֹן, בָּהָר וּבָעֲרָבָה נֶגֶב כִּנְרוֹת--וּבַשְּׁפֵלָה; וּבְנָפוֹת דּוֹר, מִיָּם.	2 and to the kings that were on the north, in the hill-country and in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, and in the Lowland, and in the regions of Dor on the west,
11.3 ג  הַכְּנַעֲנִי מִמִּזְרָח וּמִיָּם, וְהָאֱמֹרִי וְהַחִתִּי וְהַפְּרִזִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי בָּהָר; וְהַחִוִּי תַּחַת חֶרְמוֹן, בְּאֶרֶץ הַמִּצְפָּה.	3 to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the hill-country, and the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpah.
11.4 ד  וַיֵּצְאוּ הֵם, וְכָל-מַחֲנֵיהֶם עִמָּם--עַם-רָב, כַּחוֹל אֲשֶׁר עַל-שְׂפַת-הַיָּם לָרֹב; וְסוּס וָרֶכֶב, רַב-מְאֹד.	4 And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea-shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.
11.5 ה  וַיִּוָּעֲדוּ, כֹּל הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיָּבֹאוּ וַיַּחֲנוּ יַחְדָּו, אֶל-מֵי מֵרוֹם, לְהִלָּחֵם, עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	5 And all these kings met together, and they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight with Israel. {P}
11.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אַל-תִּירָא מִפְּנֵיהֶם--כִּי-מָחָר כָּעֵת הַזֹּאת אָנֹכִי נֹתֵן אֶת-כֻּלָּם חֲלָלִים, לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; אֶת-סוּסֵיהֶם תְּעַקֵּר, וְאֶת-מַרְכְּבֹתֵיהֶם תִּשְׂרֹף בָּאֵשׁ.	6 And the LORD said unto Joshua: 'Be not afraid because of them; for to-morrow at this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel; thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.'
11.7 ז  וַיָּבֹא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְכָל-עַם הַמִּלְחָמָה עִמּוֹ עֲלֵיהֶם, עַל-מֵי מֵרוֹם--פִּתְאֹם; וַיִּפְּלוּ, בָּהֶם.	7 So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly, and fell upon them.
11.8 ח  וַיִּתְּנֵם יְהוָה בְּיַד-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּכּוּם, וַיִּרְדְּפוּם עַד-צִידוֹן רַבָּה וְעַד מִשְׂרְפוֹת מַיִם, וְעַד-בִּקְעַת מִצְפֶּה מִזְרָחָה; וַיַּכֻּם, עַד-בִּלְתִּי הִשְׁאִיר-לָהֶם שָׂרִיד.	8 And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, and they smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephoth-maim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining.
11.9 ט  וַיַּעַשׂ לָהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, כַּאֲשֶׁר אָמַר-לוֹ יְהוָה:  אֶת-סוּסֵיהֶם עִקֵּר, וְאֶת-מַרְכְּבֹתֵיהֶם שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ.  {ס}	9 And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him; he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire. {S}
11.10 י  וַיָּשָׁב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בָּעֵת הַהִיא, וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-חָצוֹר, וְאֶת-מַלְכָּהּ, הִכָּה בֶחָרֶב:  כִּי-חָצוֹר לְפָנִים--הִיא, רֹאשׁ כָּל-הַמַּמְלָכוֹת הָאֵלֶּה.	10 And Joshua turned back at that time, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.
11.11 יא  וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ לְפִי-חֶרֶב, הַחֲרֵם--לֹא נוֹתַר, כָּל-נְשָׁמָה; וְאֶת-חָצוֹר, שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ.	11 And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them; there was none left that breathed; and he burnt Hazor with fire.
11.12 יב  וְאֶת-כָּל-עָרֵי הַמְּלָכִים-הָאֵלֶּה וְאֶת-כָּל-מַלְכֵיהֶם לָכַד יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיַּכֵּם לְפִי-חֶרֶב--הֶחֱרִים אוֹתָם:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה, מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה.	12 And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and he smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed them; as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded.
11.13 יג  רַק כָּל-הֶעָרִים, הָעֹמְדוֹת עַל-תִּלָּם--לֹא שְׂרָפָם, יִשְׂרָאֵל:  זוּלָתִי אֶת-חָצוֹר לְבַדָּהּ, שָׂרַף יְהוֹשֻׁעַ.	13 But as for the cities that stood on their mounds, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only--that did Joshua burn.
11.14 יד  וְכֹל שְׁלַל הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְהַבְּהֵמָה, בָּזְזוּ לָהֶם, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  רַק אֶת-כָּל-הָאָדָם הִכּוּ לְפִי-חֶרֶב, עַד-הִשְׁמִדָם אוֹתָם--לֹא הִשְׁאִירוּ, כָּל-נְשָׁמָה.	14 And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they any that breathed.
11.15 טו  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה עַבְדּוֹ, כֵּן-צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וְכֵן, עָשָׂה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ--לֹא-הֵסִיר דָּבָר, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	15 As the LORD commanded Moses His servant, so did Moses command Joshua; and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.
11.16 טז  וַיִּקַּח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, הָהָר וְאֶת-כָּל-הַנֶּגֶב וְאֵת כָּל-אֶרֶץ הַגֹּשֶׁן, וְאֶת-הַשְּׁפֵלָה, וְאֶת-הָעֲרָבָה; וְאֶת-הַר יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּשְׁפֵלָתֹה.	16 So Joshua took all that land, the hill-country, and all the South, and all the land of Goshen, and the Lowland, and the Arabah, and the hill-country of Israel, and the Lowland of the same;
11.17 יז  מִן-הָהָר הֶחָלָק, הָעוֹלֶה שֵׂעִיר, וְעַד-בַּעַל גָּד בְּבִקְעַת הַלְּבָנוֹן, תַּחַת הַר-חֶרְמוֹן; וְאֵת כָּל-מַלְכֵיהֶם לָכַד, וַיַּכֵּם וַיְמִיתֵם.	17 from the bare mountain, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon; and all their kings he took, and smote them, and put them to death.
11.18 יח  יָמִים רַבִּים, עָשָׂה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-כָּל-הַמְּלָכִים הָאֵלֶּה--מִלְחָמָה.	18 Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
11.19 יט  לֹא-הָיְתָה עִיר, אֲשֶׁר הִשְׁלִימָה אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּלְתִּי הַחִוִּי, יֹשְׁבֵי גִבְעוֹן:  אֶת-הַכֹּל, לָקְחוּ בַמִּלְחָמָה.	19 There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon; they took all in battle.
11.20 כ  כִּי מֵאֵת יְהוָה הָיְתָה לְחַזֵּק אֶת-לִבָּם לִקְרַאת הַמִּלְחָמָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמַעַן הַחֲרִימָם, לְבִלְתִּי הֱיוֹת-לָהֶם, תְּחִנָּה:  כִּי לְמַעַן הַשְׁמִידָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	20 For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, to come against Israel in battle, that they might be utterly destroyed, that they might have no favour, but that they might be destroyed, as the LORD commanded Moses. {S}
11.21 כא  וַיָּבֹא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בָּעֵת הַהִיא, וַיַּכְרֵת אֶת-הָעֲנָקִים מִן-הָהָר מִן-חֶבְרוֹן מִן-דְּבִר מִן-עֲנָב, וּמִכֹּל הַר יְהוּדָה, וּמִכֹּל הַר יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עִם-עָרֵיהֶם, הֶחֱרִימָם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ.	21 And Joshua came at that time, and cut off the Anakim from the hill-country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the hill-country of Judah, and from all the hill-country of Israel; Joshua utterly destroyed them with their cities.
11.22 כב  לֹא-נוֹתַר עֲנָקִים, בְּאֶרֶץ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  רַק, בְּעַזָּה בְּגַת וּבְאַשְׁדּוֹד--נִשְׁאָרוּ.	22 There was none of the Anakim left in the land of the children of Israel; only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, did some remain.
11.23 כג  וַיִּקַּח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וַיִּתְּנָהּ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לְנַחֲלָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל כְּמַחְלְקֹתָם, לְשִׁבְטֵיהֶם; וְהָאָרֶץ שָׁקְטָה, מִמִּלְחָמָה.  {ס}	23 So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the LORD spoke unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land had rest from war. {S}
12.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר הִכּוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיִּרְשׁוּ אֶת-אַרְצָם, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן, מִזְרְחָה הַשָּׁמֶשׁ--מִנַּחַל אַרְנוֹן עַד-הַר חֶרְמוֹן, וְכָל-הָעֲרָבָה מִזְרָחָה.	1 Now these are the kings of the land, whom the children of Israel smote, and possessed their land beyond the Jordan toward the sunrising, from the valley of Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the Arabah eastward:
12.2 ב  סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן--מֹשֵׁל מֵעֲרוֹעֵר אֲשֶׁר עַל-שְׂפַת-נַחַל אַרְנוֹן וְתוֹךְ הַנַּחַל, וַחֲצִי הַגִּלְעָד, וְעַד יַבֹּק הַנַּחַל, גְּבוּל בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of Arnon, and the middle of the valley, and half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, the border of the children of Ammon;
12.3 ג  וְהָעֲרָבָה עַד-יָם כִּנְרוֹת מִזְרָחָה, וְעַד יָם הָעֲרָבָה יָם-הַמֶּלַח מִזְרָחָה, דֶּרֶךְ, בֵּית הַיְשִׁמוֹת; וּמִתֵּימָן--תַּחַת, אַשְׁדּוֹת הַפִּסְגָּה.	3 and the Arabah unto the sea of Chinneroth, eastward, and unto the sea of the Arabah, even the Salt Sea, eastward, the way to Beth-jeshimoth; and on the south, under the slopes of Pisgah;
12.4 ד  וּגְבוּל, עוֹג מֶלֶךְ הַבָּשָׁן, מִיֶּתֶר, הָרְפָאִים--הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּעַשְׁתָּרוֹת, וּבְאֶדְרֶעִי.	4 and the border of Og king of Bashan, of the remnant of the Rephaim, who dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,
12.5 ה  וּמֹשֵׁל בְּהַר חֶרְמוֹן וּבְסַלְכָה, וּבְכָל-הַבָּשָׁן, עַד-גְּבוּל הַגְּשׁוּרִי, וְהַמַּעֲכָתִי; וַחֲצִי, הַגִּלְעָד--גְּבוּל, סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ-חֶשְׁבּוֹן.	5 and ruled in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and half Gilead, even unto the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
12.6 ו  מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הִכּוּם; וַיִּתְּנָהּ מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה יְרֻשָּׁה, לָראוּבֵנִי וְלַגָּדִי, וְלַחֲצִי, שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה.  {ס}	6 Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel smote them; and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh. {S}
12.7 ז  וְאֵלֶּה מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן יָמָּה, מִבַּעַל גָּד בְּבִקְעַת הַלְּבָנוֹן, וְעַד-הָהָר הֶחָלָק הָעֹלֶה שֵׂעִירָה; וַיִּתְּנָהּ יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לְשִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יְרֻשָּׁה--כְּמַחְלְקֹתָם.	7 And these are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the children of Israel smote beyond the Jordan westward, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the bare mountain, that goeth up to Seir; and Joshua gave it unto the tribes of Israel for a possession according to their divisions;
12.8 ח  בָּהָר וּבַשְּׁפֵלָה, וּבָעֲרָבָה וּבָאֲשֵׁדוֹת, וּבַמִּדְבָּר, וּבַנֶּגֶב--הַחִתִּי, הָאֱמֹרִי, וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי הַפְּרִזִּי, הַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי.  {ש}	8 in the hill-country, and in the Lowland, and in the Arabah, and in the slopes, and in the wilderness, and in the South; the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: {P}
12.9 ט  מֶלֶךְ יְרִיחוֹ,  {ס}  אֶחָד;  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ הָעַי אֲשֶׁר-מִצַּד בֵּית-אֵל, אֶחָד.  {ר}	9 the king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Beth-el, one;
12.10 י  מֶלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִַם  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ חֶבְרוֹן  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	10 the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
12.11 יא  מֶלֶךְ יַרְמוּת  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ לָכִישׁ  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	11 the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
12.12 יב  מֶלֶךְ עֶגְלוֹן  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ גֶּזֶר  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	12 the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
12.13 יג  מֶלֶךְ דְּבִר  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ גֶּדֶר  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	13 the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
12.14 יד  מֶלֶךְ חָרְמָה  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ עֲרָד  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	14 the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
12.15 טו  מֶלֶךְ לִבְנָה  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ עֲדֻלָּם  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	15 the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
12.16 טז  מֶלֶךְ מַקֵּדָה  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ בֵּית-אֵל  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	16 the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Beth-el, one;
12.17 יז  מֶלֶךְ תַּפּוּחַ  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ חֵפֶר  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	17 the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
12.18 יח  מֶלֶךְ אֲפֵק  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ לַשָּׁרוֹן  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	18 the king of Aphek, one; the king of the Sharon, one;
12.19 יט  מֶלֶךְ מָדוֹן  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ חָצוֹר  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	19 the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
12.20 כ  מֶלֶךְ שִׁמְרוֹן מְרֹאון  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ אַכְשָׁף  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	20 the king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
12.21 כא  מֶלֶךְ תַּעְנַךְ  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ מְגִדּוֹ  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	21 the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
12.22 כב  מֶלֶךְ קֶדֶשׁ  {ס}  אֶחָד,  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ-יָקְנְעָם לַכַּרְמֶל  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	22 the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one;
12.23 כג  מֶלֶךְ דּוֹר לְנָפַת דּוֹר,  {ס}  אֶחָד;  {ס}  מֶלֶךְ-גּוֹיִם לְגִלְגָּל,  {ס}  אֶחָד.  {ר}	23 the king of Dor in the region of Dor, one; the king of Goiim in the Gilgal, one;
12.24 כד  מֶלֶךְ תִּרְצָה,  {ס}  אֶחָד;  {ס}  כָּל-מְלָכִים, שְׁלֹשִׁים  {ס}  וְאֶחָד.  {ר}  {ש}	24 the king of Tirzah, one. All the kings thirty and one. {P}
13.1 א  וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ זָקֵן, בָּא בַּיָּמִים; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, אַתָּה זָקַנְתָּה בָּאתָ בַיָּמִים, וְהָאָרֶץ נִשְׁאֲרָה הַרְבֵּה-מְאֹד, לְרִשְׁתָּהּ.	1 Now Joshua was old and well stricken in years; and the LORD said unto him: 'Thou art old and well stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.
13.2 ב  זֹאת הָאָרֶץ, הַנִּשְׁאָרֶת:  כָּל-גְּלִילוֹת הַפְּלִשְׁתִּים, וְכָל-הַגְּשׁוּרִי.	2 This is the land that yet remaineth: all the regions of the Philistines, and all the Geshurites;
13.3 ג  מִן-הַשִּׁיחוֹר אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי מִצְרַיִם, וְעַד גְּבוּל עֶקְרוֹן צָפוֹנָה--לַכְּנַעֲנִי, תֵּחָשֵׁב; חֲמֵשֶׁת סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, הָעַזָּתִי וְהָאַשְׁדּוֹדִי הָאֶשְׁקְלוֹנִי הַגִּתִּי, וְהָעֶקְרוֹנִי, וְהָעַוִּים.	3 from the Shihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the border of Ekron northward--which is counted to the Canaanites; the five lords of the Philistines: the Gazite, and the Ashdodite, the Ashkelonite, the Gittite, and the Ekronite; also the Avvim
13.4 ד  מִתֵּימָן כָּל-אֶרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִי, וּמְעָרָה אֲשֶׁר לַצִּידֹנִים--עַד-אֲפֵקָה:  עַד, גְּבוּל הָאֱמֹרִי.	4 on the south; all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that belongeth to the Zidonians, unto Aphek, to the border of the Amorites;
13.5 ה  וְהָאָרֶץ הַגִּבְלִי, וְכָל-הַלְּבָנוֹן מִזְרַח הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, מִבַּעַל גָּד, תַּחַת הַר-חֶרְמוֹן--עַד, לְבוֹא חֲמָת.	5 and the land of the Gebalites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baal-gad under mount Hermon unto the entrance of Hamath;
13.6 ו  כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָהָר מִן-הַלְּבָנוֹן עַד-מִשְׂרְפֹת מַיִם, כָּל-צִידֹנִים--אָנֹכִי אוֹרִישֵׁם, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  רַק הַפִּלֶהָ לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּנַחֲלָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר, צִוִּיתִיךָ.	6 all the inhabitants of the hill-country from Lebanon unto Misrephoth-maim, even all the Zidonians; them will I drive out from before the children of Israel; only allot thou it unto Israel for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.
13.7 ז  וְעַתָּה, חַלֵּק אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת בְּנַחֲלָה--לְתִשְׁעַת הַשְּׁבָטִים; וַחֲצִי, הַשֵּׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה.	7 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.'
13.8 ח  עִמּוֹ, הָראוּבֵנִי וְהַגָּדִי, לָקְחוּ, נַחֲלָתָם--אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָהֶם מֹשֶׁה, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן מִזְרָחָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָהֶם, מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה.	8 With him the Reubenites and the Gadites received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond the Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them;
13.9 ט  מֵעֲרוֹעֵר אֲשֶׁר עַל-שְׂפַת-נַחַל אַרְנוֹן וְהָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹךְ-הַנַּחַל, וְכָל-הַמִּישֹׁר מֵידְבָא--עַד-דִּיבוֹן.	9 from Aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of Arnon, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the table-land from Medeba unto Dibon;
13.10 י  וְכֹל, עָרֵי סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ, בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן--עַד-גְּבוּל, בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	10 and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Ammon;
13.11 יא  וְהַגִּלְעָד וּגְבוּל הַגְּשׁוּרִי וְהַמַּעֲכָתִי, וְכֹל הַר חֶרְמוֹן וְכָל-הַבָּשָׁן--עַד-סַלְכָה.	11 and Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;
13.12 יב  כָּל-מַמְלְכוּת עוֹג בַּבָּשָׁן, אֲשֶׁר-מָלַךְ בְּעַשְׁתָּרוֹת וּבְאֶדְרֶעִי:  הוּא נִשְׁאַר מִיֶּתֶר הָרְפָאִים, וַיַּכֵּם מֹשֶׁה וַיֹּרִשֵׁם.	12 all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei--the same was left of the remnant of the Rephaim--for these did Moses smite, and drove them out.
13.13 יג  וְלֹא הוֹרִישׁוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַגְּשׁוּרִי וְאֶת-הַמַּעֲכָתִי; וַיֵּשֶׁב גְּשׁוּר וּמַעֲכָת בְּקֶרֶב יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	13 Nevertheless the children of Israel drove not out the Geshurites, nor the Maacathites; but Geshur and Maacath dwelt in the midst of Israel unto this day.
13.14 יד  רַק לְשֵׁבֶט הַלֵּוִי, לֹא נָתַן נַחֲלָה:  אִשֵּׁי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוּא נַחֲלָתוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר-לוֹ.  {פ}	14 Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave no inheritance; the offerings of the LORD, the God of Israel, made by fire are his inheritance, as He spoke unto him. {P}
13.15 טו  וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה, לְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-רְאוּבֵן לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	15 And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben according to their families.
13.16 טז  וַיְהִי לָהֶם הַגְּבוּל, מֵעֲרוֹעֵר אֲשֶׁר עַל-שְׂפַת-נַחַל אַרְנוֹן וְהָעִיר אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹךְ-הַנַּחַל וְכָל-הַמִּישֹׁר--עַל-מֵידְבָא.	16 And their border was from Aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of Arnon, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the table-land by Medeba;
13.17 יז  חֶשְׁבּוֹן וְכָל-עָרֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר בַּמִּישֹׁר; דִּיבֹן וּבָמוֹת בַּעַל, וּבֵית בַּעַל מְעוֹן.	17 Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the table-land; Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon;
13.18 יח  וְיַהְצָה וּקְדֵמֹת, וּמֵפָעַת.	18 and Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath;
13.19 יט  וְקִרְיָתַיִם וְשִׂבְמָה, וְצֶרֶת הַשַּׁחַר בְּהַר הָעֵמֶק.	19 and Kiriathaim, and Sibmah, and Zerethshahar in the mount of the valley;
13.20 כ  וּבֵית פְּעוֹר וְאַשְׁדּוֹת הַפִּסְגָּה, וּבֵית הַיְשִׁמוֹת.	20 and Beth-peor, and the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth;
13.21 כא  וְכֹל, עָרֵי הַמִּישֹׁר, וְכָל-מַמְלְכוּת סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן:  אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה מֹשֶׁה אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-נְשִׂיאֵי מִדְיָן, אֶת-אֱוִי וְאֶת-רֶקֶם וְאֶת-צוּר וְאֶת-חוּר וְאֶת-רֶבַע, נְסִיכֵי סִיחוֹן, יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ.	21 and all the cities of the table-land, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the chiefs of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the princes of Sihon, that dwelt in the land.
13.22 כב  וְאֶת-בִּלְעָם בֶּן-בְּעוֹר, הַקּוֹסֵם--הָרְגוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּחֶרֶב, אֶל-חַלְלֵיהֶם.	22 Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among the rest of their slain.
13.23 כג  וַיְהִי, גְּבוּל בְּנֵי רְאוּבֵן--הַיַּרְדֵּן, וּגְבוּל:  זֹאת נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם, הֶעָרִים וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {פ}	23 And as for the border of the children of Reuben, the Jordan was their border. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben according to their families, the cities and the villages thereof. {P}
13.24 כד  וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה לְמַטֵּה-גָד, לִבְנֵי-גָד לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	24 And Moses gave unto the tribe of Gad, unto the children of Gad, according to their families.
13.25 כה  וַיְהִי לָהֶם, הַגְּבוּל--יַעְזֵר וְכָל-עָרֵי הַגִּלְעָד, וַחֲצִי אֶרֶץ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן:  עַד-עֲרוֹעֵר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי רַבָּה.	25 And their border was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before Rabbah;
13.26 כו  וּמֵחֶשְׁבּוֹן עַד-רָמַת הַמִּצְפֶּה, וּבְטֹנִים; וּמִמַּחֲנַיִם, עַד-גְּבוּל לִדְבִר.	26 and from Heshbon unto Ramath-mizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Lidbir;
13.27 כז  וּבָעֵמֶק בֵּית הָרָם וּבֵית נִמְרָה וְסֻכּוֹת וְצָפוֹן, יֶתֶר מַמְלְכוּת סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ חֶשְׁבּוֹן, הַיַּרְדֵּן, וּגְבֻל--עַד-קְצֵה יָם-כִּנֶּרֶת, עֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן מִזְרָחָה.	27 and in the valley, Beth-haram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, the Jordan being the border thereof, unto the uttermost part of the sea of Chinnereth beyond the Jordan eastward.
13.28 כח  זֹאת נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי-גָד, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, הֶעָרִים, וְחַצְרֵיהֶם.  {ס}	28 This is the inheritance of the children of Gad according to their families, the cities and the villages thereof. {S}
13.29 כט  וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה, לַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט מְנַשֶּׁה; וַיְהִי, לַחֲצִי מַטֵּה בְנֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה--לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם.	29 And Moses gave inheritance unto the half-tribe of Manasseh; and it was for the half-tribe of the children of Manasseh according to their families.
13.30 ל  וַיְהִי גְבוּלָם, מִמַּחֲנַיִם כָּל-הַבָּשָׁן כָּל-מַמְלְכוּת עוֹג מֶלֶךְ-הַבָּשָׁן וְכָל-חַוֺּת יָאִיר אֲשֶׁר בַּבָּשָׁן--שִׁשִּׁים עִיר.	30 And their border was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the villages of Jair, which are in Bashan, threescore cities;
13.31 לא  וַחֲצִי הַגִּלְעָד וְעַשְׁתָּרוֹת וְאֶדְרֶעִי, עָרֵי מַמְלְכוּת עוֹג בַּבָּשָׁן, לִבְנֵי מָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה, לַחֲצִי בְנֵי-מָכִיר לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם.	31 and half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, the cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were for the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even for the half of the children of Machir according to their families.
13.32 לב  אֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-נִחַל מֹשֶׁה בְּעַרְבוֹת מוֹאָב, מֵעֵבֶר לְיַרְדֵּן יְרִיחוֹ, מִזְרָחָה.  {פ}	32 These are the inheritances which Moses distributed in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan at Jericho, eastward. {P}
13.33 לג  וּלְשֵׁבֶט, הַלֵּוִי--לֹא-נָתַן מֹשֶׁה, נַחֲלָה:  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוּא נַחֲלָתָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר לָהֶם.  {ס}	33 But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave no inheritance; the LORD, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, as He spoke unto them. {S}
14.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה אֲשֶׁר-נָחֲלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן--אֲשֶׁר נִחֲלוּ אוֹתָם, אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, וְרָאשֵׁי אֲבוֹת הַמַּטּוֹת, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	1 And these are the inheritances which the children of Israel took in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers' houses of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed unto them,
14.2 ב  בְּגוֹרַל, נַחֲלָתָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה, לְתִשְׁעַת הַמַּטּוֹת וַחֲצִי הַמַּטֶּה.	2 by the lot of their inheritance, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half-tribe.--
14.3 ג  כִּי-נָתַן מֹשֶׁה נַחֲלַת שְׁנֵי הַמַּטּוֹת, וַחֲצִי הַמַּטֶּה, מֵעֵבֶר, לַיַּרְדֵּן; וְלַלְוִיִּם--לֹא-נָתַן נַחֲלָה, בְּתוֹכָם.	3 For Moses had given the inheritance of the two tribes and the half-tribe beyond the Jordan; but unto the Levites he gave no inheritance among them.
14.4 ד  כִּי-הָיוּ בְנֵי-יוֹסֵף שְׁנֵי מַטּוֹת, מְנַשֶּׁה וְאֶפְרָיִם; וְלֹא-נָתְנוּ חֵלֶק לַלְוִיִּם בָּאָרֶץ, כִּי אִם-עָרִים לָשֶׁבֶת, וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶם, לְמִקְנֵיהֶם וּלְקִנְיָנָם.	4 For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim; and they gave no portion unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in, with the open land about them for their cattle and for their substance.--
14.5 ה  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן עָשׂוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּחְלְקוּ, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	5 As the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land. {P}
14.6 ו  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, בַּגִּלְגָּל, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה הַקְּנִזִּי:  אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ אֶת-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים, עַל אֹדוֹתַי וְעַל אֹדוֹתֶיךָ--בְּקָדֵשׁ בַּרְנֵעַ.	6 Then the children of Judah drew nigh unto Joshua in Gilgal; and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said unto him: 'Thou knowest the thing that the LORD spoke unto Moses the man of God concerning me and concerning thee in Kadesh-barnea.
14.7 ז  בֶּן-אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה אָנֹכִי, בִּשְׁלֹחַ מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה אֹתִי מִקָּדֵשׁ בַּרְנֵעַ--לְרַגֵּל אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וָאָשֵׁב אֹתוֹ דָּבָר, כַּאֲשֶׁר עִם-לְבָבִי.	7 Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land; and I brought him back word as it was in my heart.
14.8 ח  וְאַחַי אֲשֶׁר עָלוּ עִמִּי, הִמְסִיו אֶת-לֵב הָעָם; וְאָנֹכִי מִלֵּאתִי, אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי.	8 Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt; but I wholly followed the LORD my God.
14.9 ט  וַיִּשָּׁבַע מֹשֶׁה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר, אִם-לֹא הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר דָּרְכָה רַגְלְךָ בָּהּ, לְךָ תִהְיֶה לְנַחֲלָה וּלְבָנֶיךָ עַד-עוֹלָם:  כִּי מִלֵּאתָ, אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי.	9 And Moses swore on that day, saying: Surely the land whereon thy foot hath trodden shall be an inheritance to thee and to thy children for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the LORD my God.
14.10 י  וְעַתָּה, הִנֵּה הֶחֱיָה יְהוָה אוֹתִי כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֵּר, זֶה אַרְבָּעִים וְחָמֵשׁ שָׁנָה מֵאָז דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֲשֶׁר-הָלַךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּמִּדְבָּר; וְעַתָּה הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי הַיּוֹם, בֶּן-חָמֵשׁ וּשְׁמֹנִים שָׁנָה.	10 And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as He spoke, these forty and five years, from the time that the LORD spoke this word unto Moses, while Israel walked in the wilderness; and now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.
14.11 יא  עוֹדֶנִּי הַיּוֹם חָזָק, כַּאֲשֶׁר בְּיוֹם שְׁלֹחַ אוֹתִי מֹשֶׁה--כְּכֹחִי אָז, וּכְכֹחִי עָתָּה:  לַמִּלְחָמָה, וְלָצֵאת וְלָבוֹא.	11 As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me; as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, and to go out and to come in.
14.12 יב  וְעַתָּה, תְּנָה-לִּי אֶת-הָהָר הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא:  כִּי אַתָּה-שָׁמַעְתָּ בַיּוֹם הַהוּא כִּי-עֲנָקִים שָׁם, וְעָרִים גְּדֹלוֹת בְּצֻרוֹת--אוּלַי יְהוָה אוֹתִי וְהוֹרַשְׁתִּים, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.	12 Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spoke in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakim were there, and cities great and fortified; it may be that the LORD will be with me, and I shall drive them out, as the LORD spoke.'
14.13 יג  וַיְבָרְכֵהוּ, יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-חֶבְרוֹן לְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, לְנַחֲלָה.	13 And Joshua blessed him; and he gave Hebron unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh for an inheritance.
14.14 יד  עַל-כֵּן הָיְתָה-חֶבְרוֹן לְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה הַקְּנִזִּי, לְנַחֲלָה, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--יַעַן, אֲשֶׁר מִלֵּא, אַחֲרֵי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	14 Therefore Hebron became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, unto this day; because that he wholly followed the LORD, the God of Israel.
14.15 טו  וְשֵׁם חֶבְרוֹן לְפָנִים קִרְיַת אַרְבַּע, הָאָדָם הַגָּדוֹל בָּעֲנָקִים הוּא; וְהָאָרֶץ שָׁקְטָה, מִמִּלְחָמָה.  {פ}	15 Now the name of Hebron beforetime was Kiriath-arba, which Arba was the greatest man among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war. {P}
15.1 א  וַיְהִי הַגּוֹרָל, לְמַטֵּה בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  אֶל-גְּבוּל אֱדוֹם מִדְבַּר-צִן נֶגְבָּה, מִקְצֵה תֵימָן.	1 And the lot for the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families was unto the border of Edom, even to the wilderness of Zin southward, at the uttermost part of the south.
15.2 ב  וַיְהִי לָהֶם גְּבוּל נֶגֶב, מִקְצֵה יָם הַמֶּלַח, מִן-הַלָּשֹׁן, הַפֹּנֶה נֶגְבָּה.	2 And their south border was from the uttermost part of the Salt Sea, from the bay that looked southward.
15.3 ג  וְיָצָא אֶל-מִנֶּגֶב לְמַעֲלֵה עַקְרַבִּים, וְעָבַר צִנָה, וְעָלָה מִנֶּגֶב, לְקָדֵשׁ בַּרְנֵעַ; וְעָבַר חֶצְרוֹן וְעָלָה אַדָּרָה, וְנָסַב הַקַּרְקָעָה.	3 And it went out southward of the ascent of Akrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and went up by the south of Kadesh-barnea, and passed along by Hezron, and went up to Addar, and turned about to Karka.
15.4 ד  וְעָבַר עַצְמוֹנָה, וְיָצָא נַחַל מִצְרַיִם, והיה (וְהָיוּ) תֹּצְאוֹת הַגְּבוּל, יָמָּה; זֶה-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, גְּבוּל נֶגֶב.	4 And it passed along to Azmon, and went out at the Brook of Egypt; and the goings out of the border were at the sea; this shall be your south border.
15.5 ה  וּגְבוּל קֵדְמָה יָם הַמֶּלַח, עַד-קְצֵה הַיַּרְדֵּן; וּגְבוּל לִפְאַת צָפוֹנָה, מִלְּשׁוֹן הַיָּם, מִקְצֵה, הַיַּרְדֵּן.	5 And the east border was the Salt Sea, even unto the end of the Jordan. And the border of the north side was from the bay of the sea at the end of the Jordan.
15.6 ו  וְעָלָה הַגְּבוּל, בֵּית חָגְלָה, וְעָבַר, מִצְּפוֹן לְבֵית הָעֲרָבָה; וְעָלָה הַגְּבוּל, אֶבֶן בֹּהַן בֶּן-רְאוּבֵן.	6 And the border went up to Beth-hoglah, and passed along by the north of Beth-arabah; and the border went up to the Stone of Bohan the son of Reuben.
15.7 ז  וְעָלָה הַגְּבוּל דְּבִרָה, מֵעֵמֶק עָכוֹר, וְצָפוֹנָה פֹּנֶה אֶל-הַגִּלְגָּל אֲשֶׁר-נֹכַח לְמַעֲלֵה אֲדֻמִּים, אֲשֶׁר מִנֶּגֶב לַנָּחַל; וְעָבַר הַגְּבוּל אֶל-מֵי-עֵין שֶׁמֶשׁ, וְהָיוּ תֹצְאֹתָיו אֶל-עֵין רֹגֵל.	7 And the border went up to Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is over against the ascent of Adummim, which is on the south side of the brook; and the border passed along to the waters of En-shemesh, and the goings out thereof were at En-rogel.
15.8 ח  וְעָלָה הַגְּבוּל גֵּי בֶן-הִנֹּם, אֶל-כֶּתֶף הַיְבוּסִי מִנֶּגֶב--הִיא, יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְעָלָה הַגְּבוּל אֶל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי גֵי-הִנֹּם יָמָּה, אֲשֶׁר בִּקְצֵה עֵמֶק-רְפָאִים, צָפוֹנָה.	8 And the border went up by the Valley of the son of Hinnom unto the side of the Jebusite southward--the same is Jerusalem--and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the Valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the uttermost part of the vale of Rephaim northward.
15.9 ט  וְתָאַר הַגְּבוּל מֵרֹאשׁ הָהָר, אֶל-מַעְיַן מֵי נֶפְתּוֹחַ, וְיָצָא, אֶל-עָרֵי הַר-עֶפְרוֹן; וְתָאַר הַגְּבוּל בַּעֲלָה, הִיא קִרְיַת יְעָרִים.	9 And the border was drawn from the top of the mountain unto the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah--the same is Kiriath-jearim.
15.10 י  וְנָסַב הַגְּבוּל מִבַּעֲלָה יָמָּה, אֶל-הַר שֵׂעִיר, וְעָבַר אֶל-כֶּתֶף הַר-יְעָרִים מִצָּפוֹנָה, הִיא כְסָלוֹן; וְיָרַד בֵּית-שֶׁמֶשׁ, וְעָבַר תִּמְנָה.	10 And the border turned about from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim on the north--the same is Chesalon--and went down to Beth-shemesh, and passed along by Timnah.
15.11 יא  וְיָצָא הַגְּבוּל אֶל-כֶּתֶף עֶקְרוֹן, צָפוֹנָה, וְתָאַר הַגְּבוּל שִׁכְּרוֹנָה, וְעָבַר הַר-הַבַּעֲלָה וְיָצָא יַבְנְאֵל; וְהָיוּ תֹּצְאוֹת הַגְּבוּל, יָמָּה.	11 And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward; and the border was drawn to Shikkeron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out at Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.
15.12 יב  וּגְבוּל יָם, הַיָּמָּה הַגָּדוֹל וּגְבוּל; זֶה גְּבוּל בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה, סָבִיב--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	12 And as for the west border, the Great Sea was the border thereof. This is the border of the children of Judah round about according to their families.
15.13 יג  וּלְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, נָתַן חֵלֶק בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה, אֶל-פִּי יְהוָה, לִיהוֹשֻׁעַ--אֶת-קִרְיַת אַרְבַּע אֲבִי הָעֲנָק, הִיא חֶבְרוֹן.	13 And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a portion among the children of Judah, according to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua, even Kiriath-arba, which Arba was the father of Anak--the same is Hebron.
15.14 יד  וַיֹּרֶשׁ מִשָּׁם כָּלֵב, אֶת-שְׁלוֹשָׁה בְּנֵי הָעֲנָק--אֶת-שֵׁשַׁי וְאֶת-אֲחִימַן וְאֶת-תַּלְמַי, יְלִידֵי הָעֲנָק.	14 And Caleb drove out thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.
15.15 טו  וַיַּעַל מִשָּׁם, אֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי דְּבִר; וְשֵׁם-דְּבִר לְפָנִים, קִרְיַת-סֵפֶר.	15 And he went up thence against the inhabitants of Debir--now the name of Debir beforetime was Kiriath-sepher.
15.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר כָּלֵב, אֲשֶׁר-יַכֶּה אֶת-קִרְיַת-סֵפֶר וּלְכָדָהּ--וְנָתַתִּי לוֹ אֶת-עַכְסָה בִתִּי, לְאִשָּׁה.	16 And Caleb said: 'He that smiteth Kiriath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.'
15.17 יז  וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ עָתְנִיאֵל בֶּן-קְנַז, אֲחִי כָלֵב; וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ אֶת-עַכְסָה בִתּוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה.	17 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it; and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
15.18 יח  וַיְהִי בְּבוֹאָהּ, וַתְּסִיתֵהוּ לִשְׁאוֹל מֵאֵת-אָבִיהָ שָׂדֶה, וַתִּצְנַח, מֵעַל הַחֲמוֹר; וַיֹּאמֶר-לָהּ כָּלֵב, מַה-לָּךְ.	18 And it came to pass, when she came unto him, that she persuaded him to ask of her father a field; and she alighted from off her ass; and Caleb said unto her: 'What wouldest thou?'
15.19 יט  וַתֹּאמֶר תְּנָה-לִּי בְרָכָה, כִּי אֶרֶץ הַנֶּגֶב נְתַתָּנִי, וְנָתַתָּה לִי, גֻּלֹּת מָיִם; וַיִּתֶּן-לָהּ, אֵת גֻּלֹּת עִלִּיּוֹת, וְאֵת, גֻּלֹּת תַּחְתִּיּוֹת.  {פ}	19 And she said: 'Give me a blessing; for that thou hast set me in the Southland, give me therefore springs of water.' And he gave her the Upper Springs and the Nether Springs. {P}
15.20 כ  זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	20 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.
15.21 כא  וַיִּהְיוּ הֶעָרִים, מִקְצֵה לְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה, אֶל-גְּבוּל אֱדוֹם, בַּנֶּגְבָּה--קַבְצְאֵל וְעֵדֶר, וְיָגוּר.	21 And the cities at the uttermost part of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the border of Edom in the South were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur;
15.22 כב  וְקִינָה וְדִימוֹנָה, וְעַדְעָדָה.	22 and Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah;
15.23 כג  וְקֶדֶשׁ וְחָצוֹר, וְיִתְנָן.	23 and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan;
15.24 כד  זִיף וָטֶלֶם, וּבְעָלוֹת.	24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth;
15.25 כה  וְחָצוֹר חֲדַתָּה וּקְרִיּוֹת, חֶצְרוֹן הִיא חָצוֹר.	25 and Hazor, and Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron--the same is Hazor;
15.26 כו  אֲמָם וּשְׁמַע, וּמוֹלָדָה.	26 Amam, and Shema, and Moladah;
15.27 כז  וַחֲצַר גַּדָּה וְחֶשְׁמוֹן, וּבֵית פָּלֶט.	27 and Hazar-gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-pelet;
15.28 כח  וַחֲצַר שׁוּעָל וּבְאֵר שֶׁבַע, וּבִזְיוֹתְיָה.	28 and Hazar-shual, and Beer-sheba, and Biziothiah;
15.29 כט  בַּעֲלָה וְעִיִּים, וָעָצֶם.	29 Baalah, and Iim, and Ezem;
15.30 ל  וְאֶלְתּוֹלַד וּכְסִיל, וְחָרְמָה.	30 and Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah;
15.31 לא  וְצִקְלַג וּמַדְמַנָּה, וְסַנְסַנָּה.	31 and Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah;
15.32 לב  וּלְבָאוֹת וְשִׁלְחִים, וְעַיִן וְרִמּוֹן:  כָּל-עָרִים עֶשְׂרִים וָתֵשַׁע, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	32 and Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon; all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages. {S}
15.33 לג  בַּשְּׁפֵלָה--אֶשְׁתָּאוֹל וְצָרְעָה, וְאַשְׁנָה.	33 In the Lowland: Eshtaol, and Zorah, and Ashnah;
15.34 לד  וְזָנוֹחַ וְעֵין גַּנִּים, תַּפּוּחַ וְהָעֵינָם.	34 and Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and Enam;
15.35 לה  יַרְמוּת, וַעֲדֻלָּם, שׂוֹכֹה, וַעֲזֵקָה.	35 Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah;
15.36 לו  וְשַׁעֲרַיִם, וַעֲדִיתַיִם, וְהַגְּדֵרָה, וּגְדֵרֹתָיִם:  עָרִים אַרְבַּע-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	36 and Shaaraim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, with Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages. {S}
15.37 לז  צְנָן וַחֲדָשָׁה, וּמִגְדַּל-גָּד.	37 Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-gad;
15.38 לח  וְדִלְעָן וְהַמִּצְפֶּה, וְיָקְתְאֵל.	38 and Dilan, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel;
15.39 לט  לָכִישׁ וּבָצְקַת, וְעֶגְלוֹן.	39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon;
15.40 מ  וְכַבּוֹן וְלַחְמָס, וְכִתְלִישׁ.	40 and Cabbon, and Lahmas, and Chithlish;
15.41 מא  וּגְדֵרוֹת, בֵּית-דָּגוֹן וְנַעֲמָה וּמַקֵּדָה:  עָרִים שֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	41 and Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages. {S}
15.42 מב  לִבְנָה וָעֶתֶר, וְעָשָׁן.	42 Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan;
15.43 מג  וְיִפְתָּח וְאַשְׁנָה, וּנְצִיב.	43 and Iphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib;
15.44 מד  וּקְעִילָה וְאַכְזִיב, וּמָרֵאשָׁה:  עָרִים תֵּשַׁע, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	44 and Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages. {S}
15.45 מה  עֶקְרוֹן וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, וַחֲצֵרֶיהָ.	45 Ekron, with its towns and its villages;
15.46 מו  מֵעֶקְרוֹן, וָיָמָּה:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-עַל-יַד אַשְׁדּוֹד, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	46 from Ekron even unto the sea, all that were by the side of Ashdod, with their villages. {S}
15.47 מז  אַשְׁדּוֹד בְּנוֹתֶיהָ וַחֲצֵרֶיהָ, עַזָּה בְּנוֹתֶיהָ וַחֲצֵרֶיהָ--עַד-נַחַל מִצְרָיִם; וְהַיָּם הגבול (הַגָּדוֹל), וּגְבוּל.  {ס}	47 Ashdod, its towns and its villages; Gaza, its towns and its villages; unto the Brook of Egypt, the Great Sea being the border thereof. {S}
15.48 מח  וּבָהָר--שָׁמִיר וְיַתִּיר, וְשׂוֹכֹה.	48 And in the hill-country: Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh;
15.49 מט  וְדַנָּה וְקִרְיַת-סַנָּה, הִיא דְבִר.  {ס}	49 and Dannah, and Kiriath-sannah--the same is Debir; {S}
15.50 נ  וַעֲנָב וְאֶשְׁתְּמֹה, וְעָנִים.	50 and Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim;
15.51 נא  וְגֹשֶׁן וְחֹלֹן, וְגִלֹה:  עָרִים אַחַת-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	51 and Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages. {S}
15.52 נב  אֲרַב וְרוּמָה, וְאֶשְׁעָן.	52 Arab, and Rumah, and Eshan;
15.53 נג  וינים (וְיָנוּם) וּבֵית-תַּפּוּחַ, וַאֲפֵקָה.	53 and Janum, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah;
15.54 נד  וְחֻמְטָה, וְקִרְיַת אַרְבַּע הִיא חֶבְרוֹן--וְצִיעֹר:  עָרִים תֵּשַׁע, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	54 and Humtah, and Kiriath-arba--the same is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages. {S}
15.55 נה  מָעוֹן כַּרְמֶל, וָזִיף וְיוּטָּה.	55 Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah;
15.56 נו  וְיִזְרְעֶאל וְיָקְדְעָם, וְזָנוֹחַ.	56 and Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah;
15.57 נז  הַקַּיִן, גִּבְעָה וְתִמְנָה:  עָרִים עֶשֶׂר, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	57 Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages. {S}
15.58 נח  חַלְחוּל בֵּית-צוּר, וּגְדוֹר.	58 Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor;
15.59 נט  וּמַעֲרָת וּבֵית-עֲנוֹת, וְאֶלְתְּקֹן:  עָרִים שֵׁשׁ, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {פ}	59 and Maarath, and Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages. {P}
15.60 ס  קִרְיַת-בַּעַל, הִיא קִרְיַת יְעָרִים--וְהָרַבָּה:  עָרִים שְׁתַּיִם, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	60 Kiriath-baal--the same is Kiriath-jearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages. {S}
15.61 סא  בַּמִּדְבָּר--בֵּית, הָעֲרָבָה, מִדִּין, וּסְכָכָה.	61 In the wilderness: Beth-arabah, Middin, and Secacah;
15.62 סב  וְהַנִּבְשָׁן וְעִיר-הַמֶּלַח, וְעֵין גֶּדִי:  עָרִים שֵׁשׁ, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	62 and Nibshan, and the City of Salt, and En-gedi; six cities with their villages.
15.63 סג  וְאֶת-הַיְבוּסִי יוֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לֹא-יוכלו (יָכְלוּ) בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה לְהוֹרִישָׁם; וַיֵּשֶׁב הַיְבוּסִי אֶת-בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	63 And as for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dwelt with the children of Judah at Jerusalem, unto this day. {P}
16.1 א  וַיֵּצֵא הַגּוֹרָל לִבְנֵי יוֹסֵף, מִיַּרְדֵּן יְרִיחוֹ, לְמֵי יְרִיחוֹ, מִזְרָחָה; הַמִּדְבָּר, עֹלֶה מִירִיחוֹ בָּהָר--בֵּית-אֵל.	1 And the lot for the children of Joseph went out from the Jordan at Jericho, at the waters of Jericho on the east, going up from Jericho through the hill-country to the wilderness, even to Beth-el.
16.2 ב  וְיָצָא מִבֵּית-אֵל, לוּזָה; וְעָבַר אֶל-גְּבוּל הָאַרְכִּי, עֲטָרוֹת.	2 And it went out from Beth-el-luz, and passed along unto the border of the Archites to Ataroth.
16.3 ג  וְיָרַד-יָמָּה אֶל-גְּבוּל הַיַּפְלֵטִי, עַד גְּבוּל בֵּית-חוֹרֹן תַּחְתּוֹן--וְעַד-גָּזֶר; וְהָיוּ תֹצְאֹתָו, יָמָּה.	3 And it went down westward to the border of the Japhletites, unto the border of Beth-horon the nether, even unto Gezer; and the goings out thereof were at the sea.
16.4 ד  וַיִּנְחֲלוּ בְנֵי-יוֹסֵף, מְנַשֶּׁה וְאֶפְרָיִם.	4 And the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
16.5 ה  וַיְהִי גְּבוּל בְּנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם; וַיְהִי גְּבוּל נַחֲלָתָם, מִזְרָחָה, עַטְרוֹת אַדָּר, עַד-בֵּית חוֹרֹן עֶלְיוֹן.	5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus; even the border of their inheritance eastward was Atroth-addar, unto Beth-horon the upper.
16.6 ו  וְיָצָא הַגְּבוּל הַיָּמָּה, הַמִּכְמְתָת מִצָּפוֹן, וְנָסַב הַגְּבוּל מִזְרָחָה, תַּאֲנַת שִׁלֹה; וְעָבַר אוֹתוֹ, מִמִּזְרַח יָנוֹחָה.	6 And the border went out westward, Mich-methath being on the north; and the border turned about eastward unto Taanath-shiloh, and passed along it on the east of Janoah.
16.7 ז  וְיָרַד מִיָּנוֹחָה, עֲטָרוֹת וְנַעֲרָתָה; וּפָגַע, בִּירִיחוֹ, וְיָצָא, הַיַּרְדֵּן.	7 And it went down from Janoah to Ataroth, and to Naarah, and reached unto Jericho, and went out at the Jordan.
16.8 ח  מִתַּפּוּחַ יֵלֵךְ הַגְּבוּל יָמָּה, נַחַל קָנָה, וְהָיוּ תֹצְאֹתָיו, הַיָּמָּה; זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	8 From Tappuah the border went along westward to the brook of Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim according to their families;
16.9 ט  וְהֶעָרִים, הַמִּבְדָּלוֹת לִבְנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, בְּתוֹךְ, נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה--כָּל-הֶעָרִים, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	9 together with the cities which were separated for the children of Ephraim in the midst of the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.
16.10 י  וְלֹא הוֹרִישׁוּ, אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּגָזֶר; וַיֵּשֶׁב הַכְּנַעֲנִי בְּקֶרֶב אֶפְרַיִם, עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, וַיְהִי, לְמַס-עֹבֵד.  {פ}	10 And they drove not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in the midst of Ephraim, unto this day, and became servants to do taskwork. {P}
17.1 א  וַיְהִי הַגּוֹרָל לְמַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה, כִּי-הוּא בְּכוֹר יוֹסֵף--לְמָכִיר בְּכוֹר מְנַשֶּׁה אֲבִי הַגִּלְעָד, כִּי הוּא הָיָה אִישׁ מִלְחָמָה, וַיְהִי-לוֹ, הַגִּלְעָד וְהַבָּשָׁן.	1 And this was the lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the first-born of Joseph. As for Machir the first-born of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
17.2 ב  וַיְהִי לִבְנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה הַנּוֹתָרִים, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לִבְנֵי אֲבִיעֶזֶר וְלִבְנֵי-חֵלֶק וְלִבְנֵי אַשְׂרִיאֵל וְלִבְנֵי-שֶׁכֶם, וְלִבְנֵי-חֵפֶר וְלִבְנֵי שְׁמִידָע; אֵלֶּה בְּנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה בֶּן-יוֹסֵף, הַזְּכָרִים--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	2 And the lot was for the rest of the children of Manasseh according to their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida; these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph according to their families.
17.3 ג  וְלִצְלָפְחָד בֶּן-חֵפֶר בֶּן-גִּלְעָד בֶּן-מָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה, לֹא-הָיוּ לוֹ בָּנִים--כִּי אִם-בָּנוֹת; וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת בְּנֹתָיו--מַחְלָה וְנֹעָה, חָגְלָה מִלְכָּה וְתִרְצָה.	3 But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters; and these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
17.4 ד  וַתִּקְרַבְנָה לִפְנֵי אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן וְלִפְנֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, וְלִפְנֵי הַנְּשִׂיאִים לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה צִוָּה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, לָתֶת-לָנוּ נַחֲלָה בְּתוֹךְ אַחֵינוּ; וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם אֶל-פִּי יְהוָה, נַחֲלָה, בְּתוֹךְ, אֲחֵי אֲבִיהֶן.	4 And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying: 'The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren'; therefore according to the commandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.
17.5 ה  וַיִּפְּלוּ חַבְלֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה, עֲשָׂרָה--לְבַד מֵאֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד, וְהַבָּשָׁן, אֲשֶׁר, מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן.	5 And there fell ten parts to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is beyond the Jordan;
17.6 ו  כִּי בְּנוֹת מְנַשֶּׁה, נָחֲלוּ נַחֲלָה בְּתוֹךְ בָּנָיו; וְאֶרֶץ, הַגִּלְעָד, הָיְתָה, לִבְנֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה הַנּוֹתָרִים.	6 because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons; and the land of Gilead belonged unto the rest of the sons of Manasseh.
17.7 ז  וַיְהִי גְבוּל-מְנַשֶּׁה, מֵאָשֵׁר, הַמִּכְמְתָת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי שְׁכֶם; וְהָלַךְ הַגְּבוּל אֶל-הַיָּמִין, אֶל-יֹשְׁבֵי עֵין תַּפּוּחַ.	7 And the border of Manasseh was, beginning from Asher, Michmethath, which is before Shechem; and the border went along to the right hand, unto the inhabitants of En-tappuah.--
17.8 ח  לִמְנַשֶּׁה, הָיְתָה אֶרֶץ תַּפּוּחַ; וְתַפּוּחַ אֶל-גְּבוּל מְנַשֶּׁה, לִבְנֵי אֶפְרָיִם.	8 The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh; but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim.--
17.9 ט  וְיָרַד הַגְּבוּל נַחַל קָנָה נֶגְבָּה לַנַּחַל, עָרִים הָאֵלֶּה לְאֶפְרַיִם, בְּתוֹךְ, עָרֵי מְנַשֶּׁה; וּגְבוּל מְנַשֶּׁה מִצְּפוֹן לַנַּחַל, וַיְהִי תֹצְאֹתָיו הַיָּמָּה.	9 And the border went down unto the brook of Kanah, southward of the brook, by cities which belonged to Ephraim among the cities of Manasseh; but the border of Manasseh was on the north side of the brook; and the goings out thereof were at the sea:
17.10 י  נֶגְבָּה לְאֶפְרַיִם, וְצָפוֹנָה לִמְנַשֶּׁה, וַיְהִי הַיָּם, גְּבוּלוֹ; וּבְאָשֵׁר יִפְגְּעוּן מִצָּפוֹן, וּבְיִשָּׂשכָר מִמִּזְרָח.	10 southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manasseh's, and the sea was his border; and they reached to Asher on the north, and to Issachar on the east.
17.11 יא  וַיְהִי לִמְנַשֶּׁה בְּיִשָּׂשכָר וּבְאָשֵׁר, בֵּית-שְׁאָן וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ וְיִבְלְעָם וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ וְאֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי דֹאר וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ וְיֹשְׁבֵי עֵין-דֹּר וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, וְיֹשְׁבֵי תַעְנַךְ וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, וְיֹשְׁבֵי מְגִדּוֹ וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ--שְׁלֹשֶׁת, הַנָּפֶת.	11 And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Beth-shean and its towns, and Ibleam and its towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of En-dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns, even the three regions.
17.12 יב  וְלֹא יָכְלוּ בְּנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, לְהוֹרִישׁ אֶת-הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַיּוֹאֶל, הַכְּנַעֲנִי, לָשֶׁבֶת, בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת.	12 Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of those cities; but the Canaanites were resolved to dwell in that land.
17.13 יג  וַיְהִי, כִּי חָזְקוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּתְּנוּ אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי, לָמַס; וְהוֹרֵשׁ, לֹא הוֹרִישׁוֹ.  {ס}	13 And it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to taskwork, but did not utterly drive them out. {S}
17.14 יד  וַיְדַבְּרוּ בְּנֵי יוֹסֵף, אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר:  מַדּוּעַ נָתַתָּה לִּי נַחֲלָה, גּוֹרָל אֶחָד וְחֶבֶל אֶחָד, וַאֲנִי עַם-רָב, עַד אֲשֶׁר-עַד-כֹּה בֵּרְכַנִי יְהוָה.	14 And the children of Joseph spoke unto Joshua, saying: 'Why hast thou given me but one lot and one part for an inheritance, seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath blessed me thus?'
17.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אִם-עַם-רַב אַתָּה עֲלֵה לְךָ הַיַּעְרָה, וּבֵרֵאתָ לְךָ שָׁם, בְּאֶרֶץ הַפְּרִזִּי וְהָרְפָאִים:  כִּי-אָץ לְךָ, הַר-אֶפְרָיִם.	15 And Joshua said unto them: 'If thou be a great people, get thee up to the forest, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the Rephaim; since the hill-country of Ephraim is too narrow for thee.'
17.16 טז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְּנֵי יוֹסֵף, לֹא-יִמָּצֵא לָנוּ הָהָר; וְרֶכֶב בַּרְזֶל, בְּכָל-הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַיֹּשֵׁב בְּאֶרֶץ-הָעֵמֶק, לַאֲשֶׁר בְּבֵית-שְׁאָן וּבְנוֹתֶיהָ, וְלַאֲשֶׁר בְּעֵמֶק יִזְרְעֶאל.	16 And the children of Joseph said: 'The hill-country will not be enough for us; and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both they who are in Beth-shean and its towns, and they who are in the valley of Jezreel.'
17.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-בֵּית יוֹסֵף, לְאֶפְרַיִם וְלִמְנַשֶּׁה לֵאמֹר:  עַם-רַב אַתָּה, וְכֹחַ גָּדוֹל לָךְ--לֹא-יִהְיֶה לְךָ, גּוֹרָל אֶחָד.	17 And Joshua spoke unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying: 'Thou art a great people, and hast great power; thou shalt not have one lot only;
17.18 יח  כִּי הַר יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ, כִּי-יַעַר הוּא, וּבֵרֵאתוֹ, וְהָיָה לְךָ תֹּצְאֹתָיו:  כִּי-תוֹרִישׁ אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי, כִּי רֶכֶב בַּרְזֶל לוֹ--כִּי חָזָק, הוּא.  {פ}	18 but the hill-country shall be thine; for though it is a forest, thou shalt cut it down, and the goings out thereof shall be thine; for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have chariots of iron, and though they be strong.' {P}
18.1 א  וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁלֹה, וַיַּשְׁכִּינוּ שָׁם, אֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְהָאָרֶץ נִכְבְּשָׁה, לִפְנֵיהֶם.	1 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled themselves together at Shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting there; and the land was subdued before them.
18.2 ב  וַיִּוָּתְרוּ בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-חָלְקוּ אֶת-נַחֲלָתָם--שִׁבְעָה, שְׁבָטִים.	2 And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance.
18.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  עַד-אָנָה, אַתֶּם מִתְרַפִּים, לָבוֹא לָרֶשֶׁת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם.	3 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel: 'How long are ye slack to go in to possess the land, which the LORD, the God of your fathers, hath given you?
18.4 ד  הָבוּ לָכֶם שְׁלֹשָׁה אֲנָשִׁים, לַשָּׁבֶט; וְאֶשְׁלָחֵם, וְיָקֻמוּ וְיִתְהַלְּכוּ בָאָרֶץ וְיִכְתְּבוּ אוֹתָהּ לְפִי נַחֲלָתָם--וְיָבֹאוּ אֵלָי.	4 Appoint for you three men for each tribe; and I will send them, and they shall arise, and walk through the land, and describe it according to their inheritance; and they shall come unto me.
18.5 ה  וְהִתְחַלְּקוּ אֹתָהּ, לְשִׁבְעָה חֲלָקִים:  יְהוּדָה יַעֲמֹד עַל-גְּבוּלוֹ, מִנֶּגֶב, וּבֵית יוֹסֵף יַעַמְדוּ עַל-גְּבוּלָם, מִצָּפוֹן.	5 And they shall divide it into seven portions: Judah shall abide in his border on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their border on the north.
18.6 ו  וְאַתֶּם תִּכְתְּבוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, שִׁבְעָה חֲלָקִים, וַהֲבֵאתֶם אֵלַי, הֵנָּה; וְיָרִיתִי לָכֶם גּוֹרָל פֹּה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	6 And ye shall describe the land into seven portions, and bring the description hither to me; and I will cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.
18.7 ז  כִּי אֵין-חֵלֶק לַלְוִיִּם בְּקִרְבְּכֶם, כִּי-כְהֻנַּת יְהוָה נַחֲלָתוֹ; וְגָד וּרְאוּבֵן וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה לָקְחוּ נַחֲלָתָם, מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן מִזְרָחָה, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָהֶם, מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה.	7 For the Levites have no portion among you, for the priesthood of the LORD is their inheritance; and Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan eastward, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.'
18.8 ח  וַיָּקֻמוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיֵּלֵכוּ; וַיְצַו יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-הַהֹלְכִים לִכְתֹּב אֶת-הָאָרֶץ לֵאמֹר, לְכוּ וְהִתְהַלְּכוּ בָאָרֶץ וְכִתְבוּ אוֹתָהּ וְשׁוּבוּ אֵלַי, וּפֹה אַשְׁלִיךְ לָכֶם גּוֹרָל לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בְּשִׁלֹה.	8 And the men arose, and went; and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying: 'Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come back to me, and I will cast lots for you here before the LORD in Shiloh.'
18.9 ט  וַיֵּלְכוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים וַיַּעַבְרוּ בָאָרֶץ, וַיִּכְתְּבוּהָ לֶעָרִים לְשִׁבְעָה חֲלָקִים עַל-סֵפֶר; וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, שִׁלֹה.	9 And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven portions in a book, and they came to Joshua unto the camp at Shiloh.
18.10 י  וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ לָהֶם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ גּוֹרָל בְּשִׁלֹה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיְחַלֶּק-שָׁם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּמַחְלְקֹתָם.  {פ}	10 And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD; and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions. {P}
18.11 יא  וַיַּעַל, גּוֹרַל מַטֵּה בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם; וַיֵּצֵא, גְּבוּל גּוֹרָלָם, בֵּין בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, וּבֵין בְּנֵי יוֹסֵף.	11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families; and the border of their lot went out between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.
18.12 יב  וַיְהִי לָהֶם הַגְּבוּל לִפְאַת צָפוֹנָה, מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן; וְעָלָה הַגְּבוּל אֶל-כֶּתֶף יְרִיחוֹ מִצָּפוֹן, וְעָלָה בָהָר יָמָּה, והיה (וְהָיוּ) תֹּצְאֹתָיו, מִדְבַּרָה בֵּית אָוֶן.	12 And their border on the north side was from the Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north, and went up through the hill-country westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
18.13 יג  וְעָבַר מִשָּׁם הַגְּבוּל לוּזָה, אֶל-כֶּתֶף לוּזָה נֶגְבָּה--הִיא, בֵּית-אֵל; וְיָרַד הַגְּבוּל, עַטְרוֹת אַדָּר, עַל-הָהָר, אֲשֶׁר מִנֶּגֶב לְבֵית-חֹרוֹן תַּחְתּוֹן.	13 And the border passed along from thence to Luz, to the side of Luz--the same is Beth-el--southward; and the border went down to Atroth-addar, by the mountain that lieth on the south of Beth-horon the nether.
18.14 יד  וְתָאַר הַגְּבוּל וְנָסַב לִפְאַת-יָם נֶגְבָּה, מִן-הָהָר אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי בֵית-חֹרוֹן נֶגְבָּה, והיה (וְהָיוּ) תֹצְאֹתָיו אֶל-קִרְיַת-בַּעַל הִיא קִרְיַת יְעָרִים, עִיר בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה; זֹאת, פְּאַת-יָם.	14 And the border was drawn and turned about on the west side southward, from the mountain that lieth before Beth-horon southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kiriath-baal--the same is Kiriath-jearim--a city of the children of Judah; this was the west side.
18.15 טו  וּפְאַת-נֶגְבָּה, מִקְצֵה קִרְיַת יְעָרִים; וְיָצָא הַגְּבוּל, יָמָּה, וְיָצָא, אֶל-מַעְיַן מֵי נֶפְתּוֹחַ.	15 And the south side was from the uttermost part of Kiriath-jearim, and the border went out westward, and went out to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah.
18.16 טז  וְיָרַד הַגְּבוּל אֶל-קְצֵה הָהָר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי גֵּי בֶן-הִנֹּם, אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵמֶק רְפָאִים, צָפוֹנָה; וְיָרַד גֵּי הִנֹּם אֶל-כֶּתֶף הַיְבוּסִי, נֶגְבָּה, וְיָרַד, עֵין רֹגֵל.	16 And the border went down to the uttermost part of the mountain that lieth before the Valley of the son of Hinnom, which is in the vale of Rephaim northward; and it went down to the Valley of Hinnom, to the side of the Jebusite southward, and went down to En-rogel.
18.17 יז  וְתָאַר מִצָּפוֹן, וְיָצָא עֵין שֶׁמֶשׁ, וְיָצָא אֶל-גְּלִילוֹת, אֲשֶׁר-נֹכַח מַעֲלֵה אֲדֻמִּים; וְיָרַד, אֶבֶן בֹּהַן בֶּן-רְאוּבֵן.	17 And it was drawn on the north, and went out at En-shemesh, and went out to Geliloth, which is over against the ascent of Adummim; and it went down to the Stone of Bohan the son of Reuben.
18.18 יח  וְעָבַר אֶל-כֶּתֶף מוּל-הָעֲרָבָה, צָפוֹנָה; וְיָרַד, הָעֲרָבָתָה.	18 And it passed along to the side over against the Arabah northward, and went down unto the Arabah.
18.19 יט  וְעָבַר הַגְּבוּל אֶל-כֶּתֶף בֵּית-חָגְלָה, צָפוֹנָה, והיה (וְהָיוּ) תצאותיו (תֹּצְאוֹת) הַגְּבוּל אֶל-לְשׁוֹן יָם-הַמֶּלַח צָפוֹנָה, אֶל-קְצֵה הַיַּרְדֵּן נֶגְבָּה; זֶה, גְּבוּל נֶגֶב.	19 And the border passed along to the side of Beth-hoglah northward; and the goings out of the border were at the north bay of the Salt Sea, at the south end of the Jordan; this was the south border.
18.20 כ  וְהַיַּרְדֵּן יִגְבֹּל-אֹתוֹ, לִפְאַת-קֵדְמָה:  זֹאת נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן לִגְבוּלֹתֶיהָ, סָבִיב--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.  {פ}	20 And the Jordan was to be the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the borders thereof round about, according to their families. {P}
18.21 כא  וְהָיוּ הֶעָרִים, לְמַטֵּה בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן--לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתֵיהֶם:  יְרִיחוֹ וּבֵית-חָגְלָה, וְעֵמֶק קְצִיץ.	21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and Emek-keziz;
18.22 כב  וּבֵית הָעֲרָבָה וּצְמָרַיִם, וּבֵית-אֵל.	22 and Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim, and Beth-el;
18.23 כג  וְהָעַוִּים וְהַפָּרָה, וְעָפְרָה.	23 and Avvim, and Parah, and Ophrah;
18.24 כד  וּכְפַר העמני (הָעַמֹּנָה) וְהָעָפְנִי, וָגָבַע:  עָרִים שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	24 and Chephar-ammonah, and Ophni, and Geba; twelve cities with their villages:
18.25 כה  גִּבְעוֹן וְהָרָמָה, וּבְאֵרוֹת.	25 Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth;
18.26 כו  וְהַמִּצְפֶּה וְהַכְּפִירָה, וְהַמֹּצָה.	26 and Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah;
18.27 כז  וְרֶקֶם וְיִרְפְּאֵל, וְתַרְאֲלָה.	27 and Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah;
18.28 כח  וְצֵלַע הָאֶלֶף וְהַיְבוּסִי הִיא יְרוּשָׁלִַם, גִּבְעַת קִרְיַת--עָרִים אַרְבַּע-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן:  זֹאת נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי-בִנְיָמִן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.  {פ}	28 and Zela, Eleph, and the Jebusite--the same is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kiriath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families. {P}
19.1 א  וַיֵּצֵא הַגּוֹרָל הַשֵּׁנִי, לְשִׁמְעוֹן--לְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-שִׁמְעוֹן, לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם; וַיְהִי, נַחֲלָתָם, בְּתוֹךְ, נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה.	1 And the second lot came out for Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families; and their inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of the children of Judah.
19.2 ב  וַיְהִי לָהֶם, בְּנַחֲלָתָם--בְּאֵר-שֶׁבַע וְשֶׁבַע, וּמוֹלָדָה.	2 And they had for their inheritance Beer-sheba with Sheba, and Moladah;
19.3 ג  וַחֲצַר שׁוּעָל וּבָלָה, וָעָצֶם.	3 and Hazarshual, and Balah, and Ezem;
19.4 ד  וְאֶלְתּוֹלַד וּבְתוּל, וְחָרְמָה.	4 and Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah;
19.5 ה  וְצִקְלַג וּבֵית-הַמַּרְכָּבוֹת, וַחֲצַר סוּסָה.	5 and Ziklag, and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah;
19.6 ו  וּבֵית לְבָאוֹת, וְשָׁרוּחֶן:  עָרִים שְׁלֹשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	6 and Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities with their villages:
19.7 ז  עַיִן רִמּוֹן, וָעֶתֶר וְעָשָׁן:  עָרִים אַרְבַּע, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	7 Ain, Rimmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities with their villages;
19.8 ח  וְכָל-הַחֲצֵרִים, אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹת הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, עַד-בַּעֲלַת בְּאֵר, רָאמַת נֶגֶב:  זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-שִׁמְעוֹן--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	8 and all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalath-beer, as far as Ramah of the South. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
19.9 ט  מֵחֶבֶל בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן:  כִּי-הָיָה חֵלֶק בְּנֵי-יְהוּדָה, רַב מֵהֶם, וַיִּנְחֲלוּ בְנֵי-שִׁמְעוֹן, בְּתוֹךְ נַחֲלָתָם.  {פ}	9 Out of the allotment of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon, for the portion of the children of Judah was too much for them; therefore the children of Simeon had inheritance in the midst of their inheritance. {P}
19.10 י  וַיַּעַל הַגּוֹרָל הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, לִבְנֵי זְבוּלֻן לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם; וַיְהִי גְּבוּל נַחֲלָתָם, עַד-שָׂרִיד.	10 And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families; and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid.
19.11 יא  וְעָלָה גְבוּלָם לַיָּמָּה וּמַרְעֲלָה, וּפָגַע בְּדַבָּשֶׁת; וּפָגַע, אֶל-הַנַּחַל, אֲשֶׁר, עַל-פְּנֵי יָקְנְעָם.	11 And their border went up westward, even to Maralah, and reached to Dabbesheth; and it reached to the brook that is before Jokneam.
19.12 יב  וְשָׁב מִשָּׂרִיד, קֵדְמָה מִזְרַח הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, עַל-גְּבוּל כִּסְלֹת, תָּבֹר; וְיָצָא אֶל-הַדָּבְרַת, וְעָלָה יָפִיעַ.	12 And it turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chisloth-tabor; and it went out to Dobrath, and went up to Japhia.
19.13 יג  וּמִשָּׁם עָבַר קֵדְמָה מִזְרָחָה, גִּתָּה חֵפֶר עִתָּה קָצִין; וְיָצָא רִמּוֹן הַמְּתֹאָר, הַנֵּעָה.	13 And from thence it passed along eastward to Gath-hepher, to Ethkazin; and it went out at Rimmon-methoar unto Neah.
19.14 יד  וְנָסַב אֹתוֹ הַגְּבוּל, מִצְּפוֹן חַנָּתֹן; וְהָיוּ, תֹּצְאֹתָיו, גֵּי, יִפְתַּח-אֵל.	14 And the border turned about it on the north to Hannathon; and the goings out thereof were at the valley of Iphtahel;
19.15 טו  וְקַטָּת וְנַהֲלָל וְשִׁמְרוֹן, וְיִדְאֲלָה וּבֵית לָחֶם:  עָרִים שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	15 and Kattath, and Nahalal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth-lehem; twelve cities with their villages.
19.16 טז  זֹאת נַחֲלַת בְּנֵי-זְבוּלֻן, לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם--הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {פ}	16 This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages. {P}
19.17 יז  לְיִשָּׂשכָר--יָצָא, הַגּוֹרָל הָרְבִיעִי:  לִבְנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר, לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם.	17 The fourth lot came out for Issachar, even for the children of Issachar according to their families.
19.18 יח  וַיְהִי, גְּבוּלָם--יִזְרְעֶאלָה וְהַכְּסוּלֹת, וְשׁוּנֵם.	18 And their border was Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem;
19.19 יט  וַחֲפָרַיִם וְשִׁיאֹן, וַאֲנָחֲרַת.	19 and Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath;
19.20 כ  וְהָרַבִּית וְקִשְׁיוֹן, וָאָבֶץ.	20 and Rabbith, and Kishion, and Ebez;
19.21 כא  וְרֶמֶת וְעֵין-גַּנִּים וְעֵין חַדָּה, וּבֵית פַּצֵּץ.	21 and Remeth, and En-gannim, and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez;
19.22 כב  וּפָגַע הַגְּבוּל בְּתָבוֹר ושחצומה (וְשַׁחֲצִימָה) וּבֵית שֶׁמֶשׁ, וְהָיוּ תֹּצְאוֹת גְּבוּלָם הַיַּרְדֵּן:  עָרִים שֵׁשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	22 and the border reached to Tabor, and Shahazim, and Beth-shemesh; and the goings out of their border were at the Jordan; sixteen cities with their villages.
19.23 כג  זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-יִשָּׂשכָר--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  הֶעָרִים, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {פ}	23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities with their villages. {P}
19.24 כד  וַיֵּצֵא הַגּוֹרָל הַחֲמִישִׁי, לְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-אָשֵׁר לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם.	24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families.
19.25 כה  וַיְהִי, גְּבוּלָם--חֶלְקַת וַחֲלִי, וָבֶטֶן וְאַכְשָׁף.	25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph;
19.26 כו  וְאַלַמֶּלֶךְ וְעַמְעָד, וּמִשְׁאָל; וּפָגַע בְּכַרְמֶל הַיָּמָּה, וּבְשִׁיחוֹר לִבְנָת.	26 and Allam-melech, and Amad, and Mishal; and it reached to Carmel westward, and to Shihor-libnath.
19.27 כז  וְשָׁב מִזְרַח הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, בֵּית דָּגֹן, וּפָגַע בִּזְבֻלוּן וּבְגֵי יִפְתַּח-אֵל צָפוֹנָה בֵּית הָעֵמֶק, וּנְעִיאֵל; וְיָצָא אֶל-כָּבוּל, מִשְּׂמֹאל.	27 And it turned toward the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and reached to Zebulun and to the valley of Iphtahel northward at Beth-emek and Neiel; and it went out to Cabul on the left hand,
19.28 כח  וְעֶבְרֹן וּרְחֹב, וְחַמּוֹן וְקָנָה, עַד, צִידוֹן רַבָּה.	28 and Ebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon.
19.29 כט  וְשָׁב הַגְּבוּל הָרָמָה, וְעַד-עִיר מִבְצַר-צֹר; וְשָׁב הַגְּבוּל חֹסָה, ויהיו (וְהָיוּ) תֹצְאֹתָיו הַיָּמָּה מֵחֶבֶל אַכְזִיבָה.	29 And the border turned to Ramah, and to the fortified city of Tyre; and the border turned to Hosah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea from Hebel to Achzib;
19.30 ל  וְעֻמָה וַאֲפֵק, וּרְחֹב:  עָרִים עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	30 Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob; twenty and two cities with their villages.
19.31 לא  זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-אָשֵׁר--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {פ}	31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages. {P}
19.32 לב  לִבְנֵי נַפְתָּלִי, יָצָא הַגּוֹרָל הַשִּׁשִּׁי--לִבְנֵי נַפְתָּלִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	32 The sixth lot came out for the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali according to their families.
19.33 לג  וַיְהִי גְבוּלָם, מֵחֵלֶף מֵאֵלוֹן בְּצַעֲנַנִּים וַאֲדָמִי הַנֶּקֶב וְיַבְנְאֵל--עַד-לַקּוּם; וַיְהִי תֹצְאֹתָיו, הַיַּרְדֵּן.	33 And their border was from Heleph, from Elon-beza-anannim, and Adami-nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakkum; and the goings out thereof were at the Jordan.
19.34 לד  וְשָׁב הַגְּבוּל יָמָּה אַזְנוֹת תָּבוֹר, וְיָצָא מִשָּׁם חוּקֹקָה; וּפָגַע בִּזְבֻלוּן מִנֶּגֶב, וּבְאָשֵׁר פָּגַע מִיָּם, וּבִיהוּדָה, הַיַּרְדֵּן מִזְרַח הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.	34 And the border turned westward to Aznoth-tabor, and went out from thence to Hukok; and it reached to Zebulun on the south, and reached to Asher on the west, and to Judah at the Jordan toward the sunrising.
19.35 לה  וְעָרֵי, מִבְצָר--הַצִּדִּים צֵר, וְחַמַּת רַקַּת וְכִנָּרֶת.	35 And the fortified cities were Ziddim-zer, and Hammath, and Rakkath, and Chinnereth;
19.36 לו  וַאֲדָמָה וְהָרָמָה, וְחָצוֹר.	36 and Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor;
19.37 לז  וְקֶדֶשׁ וְאֶדְרֶעִי, וְעֵין חָצוֹר.	37 and Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor;
19.38 לח  וְיִרְאוֹן, וּמִגְדַּל-אֵל, חֳרֵם וּבֵית-עֲנָת, וּבֵית שָׁמֶשׁ:  עָרִים תְּשַׁע-עֶשְׂרֵה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.	38 and Iron, and Migdal-el, and Horem, and Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
19.39 לט  זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-נַפְתָּלִי--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  הֶעָרִים, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {פ}	39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities with their villages. {P}
19.40 מ  לְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-דָן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, יָצָא, הַגּוֹרָל הַשְּׁבִיעִי.	40 The seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families.
19.41 מא  וַיְהִי, גְּבוּל נַחֲלָתָם--צָרְעָה וְאֶשְׁתָּאוֹל, וְעִיר שָׁמֶשׁ.	41 And the border of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh;
19.42 מב  וְשַׁעֲלַבִּין וְאַיָּלוֹן, וְיִתְלָה.	42 and Shaalabbin, and Aijalon, and Ithlah;
19.43 מג  וְאֵילוֹן וְתִמְנָתָה, וְעֶקְרוֹן.	43 and Elon, and Timnah, and Ekron;
19.44 מד  וְאֶלְתְּקֵה וְגִבְּתוֹן, וּבַעֲלָת.	44 and Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath;
19.45 מה  וִיהֻד וּבְנֵי-בְרַק, וְגַת-רִמּוֹן.	45 and Jehud, and Bene-berak, and Gath-rimmon;
19.46 מו  וּמֵי הַיַּרְקוֹן, וְהָרַקּוֹן; עִם-הַגְּבוּל, מוּל יָפוֹ.	46 and Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border over against Joppa.
19.47 מז  וַיֵּצֵא גְבוּל-בְּנֵי-דָן, מֵהֶם; וַיַּעֲלוּ בְנֵי-דָן וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ עִם-לֶשֶׁם וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אוֹתָהּ וַיַּכּוּ אוֹתָהּ לְפִי-חֶרֶב, וַיִּרְשׁוּ אוֹתָהּ וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָהּ, וַיִּקְרְאוּ לְלֶשֶׁם דָּן, כְּשֵׁם דָּן אֲבִיהֶם.	47 And the border of the children of Dan was too strait for them; so the children of Dan went up and fought against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.
19.48 מח  זֹאת, נַחֲלַת מַטֵּה בְנֵי-דָן--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְחַצְרֵיהֶן.  {ס}	48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages. {S}
19.49 מט  וַיְכַלּוּ לִנְחֹל-אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, לִגְבוּלֹתֶיהָ; וַיִּתְּנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל נַחֲלָה לִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, בְּתוֹכָם.	49 When they had made an end of distributing the land for inheritance by the borders thereof, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun in the midst of them;
19.50 נ  עַל-פִּי יְהוָה נָתְנוּ לוֹ, אֶת-הָעִיר אֲשֶׁר שָׁאָל--אֶת-תִּמְנַת-סֶרַח, בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וַיִּבְנֶה אֶת-הָעִיר, וַיֵּשֶׁב בָּהּ.	50 according to the commandment of the LORD they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in the hill-country of Ephraim; and he built the city, and dwelt therein.
19.51 נא  אֵלֶּה הַנְּחָלֹת אֲשֶׁר נִחֲלוּ אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן וְרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְמַטּוֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּגוֹרָל בְּשִׁלֹה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיְכַלּוּ, מֵחַלֵּק אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.  {פ}	51 These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers' houses of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the door of the tent of meeting. So they made an end of dividing the land. {P}
20.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Joshua, saying:
20.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  תְּנוּ לָכֶם אֶת-עָרֵי הַמִּקְלָט, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	2 'Speak to the children of Israel, saying: Assign you the cities of refuge, whereof I spoke unto you by the hand of Moses;
20.3 ג  לָנוּס שָׁמָּה רוֹצֵחַ, מַכֵּה-נֶפֶשׁ בִּשְׁגָגָה בִּבְלִי-דָעַת; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם לְמִקְלָט, מִגֹּאֵל הַדָּם.	3 that the manslayer that killeth any person through error and unawares may flee thither; and they shall be unto you for a refuge from the avenger of blood.
20.4 ד  וְנָס אֶל-אַחַת מֵהֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְעָמַד פֶּתַח שַׁעַר הָעִיר, וְדִבֶּר בְּאָזְנֵי זִקְנֵי הָעִיר-הַהִיא, אֶת-דְּבָרָיו; וְאָסְפוּ אֹתוֹ הָעִירָה אֲלֵיהֶם, וְנָתְנוּ-לוֹ מָקוֹם וְיָשַׁב עִמָּם.	4 And he shall flee unto one of those cities, and shall stand at the entrance of the gate of the city, and declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city; and they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
20.5 ה  וְכִי יִרְדֹּף גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, אַחֲרָיו, וְלֹא-יַסְגִּרוּ אֶת-הָרֹצֵחַ, בְּיָדוֹ:  כִּי בִבְלִי-דַעַת הִכָּה אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ, וְלֹא-שֹׂנֵא הוּא לוֹ מִתְּמוֹל שִׁלְשׁוֹם.	5 And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver up the manslayer into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unawares, and hated him not beforetime.
20.6 ו  וְיָשַׁב בָּעִיר הַהִיא, עַד-עָמְדוֹ לִפְנֵי הָעֵדָה לַמִּשְׁפָּט, עַד-מוֹת הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם; אָז יָשׁוּב הָרוֹצֵחַ, וּבָא אֶל-עִירוֹ וְאֶל-בֵּיתוֹ--אֶל-הָעִיר, אֲשֶׁר-נָס מִשָּׁם.	6 And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days; then may the manslayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.'
20.7 ז  וַיַּקְדִּשׁוּ אֶת-קֶדֶשׁ בַּגָּלִיל, בְּהַר נַפְתָּלִי, וְאֶת-שְׁכֶם, בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וְאֶת-קִרְיַת אַרְבַּע הִיא חֶבְרוֹן, בְּהַר יְהוּדָה.	7 And they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill-country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba--the same is Hebron--in the hill-country of Judah.
20.8 ח  וּמֵעֵבֶר לְיַרְדֵּן יְרִיחוֹ, מִזְרָחָה, נָתְנוּ אֶת-בֶּצֶר בַּמִּדְבָּר בַּמִּישֹׁר, מִמַּטֵּה רְאוּבֵן; וְאֶת-רָאמֹת בַּגִּלְעָד מִמַּטֵּה-גָד, וְאֶת-גלון (גּוֹלָן) בַּבָּשָׁן מִמַּטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה.	8 And beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness in the table-land out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
20.9 ט  אֵלֶּה הָיוּ עָרֵי הַמּוּעָדָה לְכֹל בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכָם, לָנוּס שָׁמָּה, כָּל-מַכֵּה-נֶפֶשׁ בִּשְׁגָגָה; וְלֹא יָמוּת, בְּיַד גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, עַד-עָמְדוֹ, לִפְנֵי הָעֵדָה.  {פ}	9 These were the appointed cities for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any person through error might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation. {P}
21.1 א  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ, רָאשֵׁי אֲבוֹת הַלְוִיִּם, אֶל-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן; וְאֶל-רָאשֵׁי אֲבוֹת הַמַּטּוֹת, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	1 Then came near the heads of fathers' houses of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of fathers' houses of the tribes of the children of Israel;
21.2 ב  וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֲלֵיהֶם בְּשִׁלֹה, בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן לֵאמֹר, יְהוָה צִוָּה בְיַד-מֹשֶׁה, לָתֶת-לָנוּ עָרִים לָשָׁבֶת; וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן, לִבְהֶמְתֵּנוּ.  {פ}	2 and they spoke unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying: 'The LORD commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the open land thereabout for our cattle.' {P}
21.3 ג  וַיִּתְּנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לַלְוִיִּם מִנַּחֲלָתָם, אֶל-פִּי יְהוָה, אֶת-הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְאֶת-מִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן.	3 And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, according to the commandment of the LORD, these cities with the open land about them.
21.4 ד  וַיֵּצֵא הַגּוֹרָל, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹת הַקְּהָתִי; וַיְהִי לִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן מִן-הַלְוִיִּם, מִמַּטֵּה יְהוּדָה וּמִמַּטֵּה הַשִּׁמְעֹנִי וּמִמַּטֵּה בִנְיָמִן בַּגּוֹרָל--עָרִים, שְׁלֹשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה.  {ס}	4 And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites; and the children of Aaron the priest, who were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of the Simeonites, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities. {S}
21.5 ה  וְלִבְנֵי קְהָת הַנּוֹתָרִים, מִמִּשְׁפְּחֹת מַטֵּה-אֶפְרַיִם וּמִמַּטֵּה-דָן וּמֵחֲצִי מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה בַּגּוֹרָל--עָרִים עָשֶׂר.  {ס}	5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, ten cities. {S}
21.6 ו  וְלִבְנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן, מִמִּשְׁפְּחוֹת מַטֵּה-יִשָּׂשכָר וּמִמַּטֵּה-אָשֵׁר וּמִמַּטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי וּמֵחֲצִי מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה בַבָּשָׁן בַּגּוֹרָל--עָרִים, שְׁלֹשׁ עֶשְׂרֵה.  {ס}	6 And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities. {S}
21.7 ז  לִבְנֵי מְרָרִי לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, מִמַּטֵּה רְאוּבֵן וּמִמַּטֵּה-גָד וּמִמַּטֵּה זְבוּלֻן--עָרִים, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה.  {ס}	7 The children of Merari according to their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities. {S}
21.8 ח  וַיִּתְּנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לַלְוִיִּם, אֶת-הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה וְאֶת-מִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה, בַּגּוֹרָל.  {פ}	8 And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with the open land about them, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses. {P}
21.9 ט  וַיִּתְּנוּ, מִמַּטֵּה בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, וּמִמַּטֵּה, בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן--אֵת הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרָא אֶתְהֶן בְּשֵׁם.	9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name.
21.10 י  וַיְהִי לִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן, מִמִּשְׁפְּחוֹת הַקְּהָתִי מִבְּנֵי לֵוִי:  כִּי לָהֶם הָיָה הַגּוֹרָל, רִאישֹׁנָה.	10 And they were for the children of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi; for theirs was the first lot.
21.11 יא  וַיִּתְּנוּ לָהֶם אֶת-קִרְיַת אַרְבַּע אֲבִי הָעֲנוֹק, הִיא חֶבְרוֹן--בְּהַר יְהוּדָה; וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, סְבִיבֹתֶיהָ.	11 And they gave them Kiriath-arba, which Arba was the father of Anak--the same is Hebron--in the hill-country of Judah, with the open land round about it.
21.12 יב  וְאֶת-שְׂדֵה הָעִיר, וְאֶת-חֲצֵרֶיהָ, נָתְנוּ לְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, בַּאֲחֻזָּתוֹ.  {ס}	12 But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession. {S}
21.13 יג  וְלִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, נָתְנוּ אֶת-עִיר מִקְלַט הָרֹצֵחַ--אֶת-חֶבְרוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ; וְאֶת-לִבְנָה, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	13 And unto the children of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron with the open land about it, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Libnah with the open land about it;
21.14 יד  וְאֶת-יַתִּר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-אֶשְׁתְּמֹעַ, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	14 and Jattir with the open land about it, and Eshtemoa with the open land about it;
21.15 טו  וְאֶת-חֹלֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-דְּבִר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	15 and Holon with the open land about it, and Debir with the open land about it;
21.16 טז  וְאֶת-עַיִן וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-יֻטָּה וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, אֶת-בֵּית שֶׁמֶשׁ, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים תֵּשַׁע--מֵאֵת, שְׁנֵי הַשְּׁבָטִים הָאֵלֶּה.  {ס}	16 and Ain with the open land about it, and Juttah with the open land about it, and Beth-shemesh with the open land about it; nine cities out of those two tribes. {S}
21.17 יז  וּמִמַּטֵּה בִנְיָמִין, אֶת-גִּבְעוֹן וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, אֶת-גֶּבַע, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with the open land about it, Geba with the open land about it;
21.18 יח  אֶת-עֲנָתוֹת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-עַלְמוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.	18 Anathoth with the open land about it, and Almon with the open land about it; four cities.
21.19 יט  כָּל-עָרֵי בְנֵי-אַהֲרֹן, הַכֹּהֲנִים--שְׁלֹשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה עָרִים, וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן.  {ס}	19 All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with the open land about them. {S}
21.20 כ  וּלְמִשְׁפְּחוֹת בְּנֵי-קְהָת הַלְוִיִּם, הַנּוֹתָרִים מִבְּנֵי קְהָת; וַיְהִי עָרֵי גוֹרָלָם, מִמַּטֵּה אֶפְרָיִם.	20 And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites, even the rest of the children of Kohath, they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
21.21 כא  וַיִּתְּנוּ לָהֶם אֶת-עִיר מִקְלַט הָרֹצֵחַ, אֶת-שְׁכֶם וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ--בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וְאֶת-גֶּזֶר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	21 And they gave them Shechem with the open land about it in the hill-country of Ephraim, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Gezer with the open land about it;
21.22 כב  וְאֶת-קִבְצַיִם, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-בֵּית חוֹרֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.  {ס}	22 and Kibzaim with the open land about it, and Beth-horon with the open land about it; four cities. {S}
21.23 כג  וּמִמַּטֵּה-דָן--אֶת-אֶלְתְּקֵא, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ; אֶת-גִּבְּתוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	23 And out of the tribe of Dan, Elteke with the open land about it, Gibbethon with the open land about it;
21.24 כד  אֶת-אַיָּלוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, אֶת-גַּת-רִמּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.	24 Aijalon with the open land about it, Gath-rimmon with the open land about it; four cities.
21.25 כה  וּמִמַּחֲצִית, מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה--אֶת-תַּעְנַךְ וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-גַּת רִמּוֹן וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, שְׁתָּיִם.	25 And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach with the open land about it, and Gath-rimmon with the open land about it; two cities.
21.26 כו  כָּל-עָרִים עֶשֶׂר, וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן, לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹת בְּנֵי-קְהָת, הַנּוֹתָרִים.  {ס}	26 All the cities of the families of the rest of the children of Kohath were ten with the open land about them. {S}
21.27 כז  וְלִבְנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן, מִמִּשְׁפְּחֹת הַלְוִיִּם--מֵחֲצִי מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה אֶת-עִיר מִקְלַט הָרֹצֵחַ, אֶת-גלון (גּוֹלָן) בַּבָּשָׁן וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ וְאֶת-בְּעֶשְׁתְּרָה וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, שְׁתָּיִם.  {ס}	27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the half-tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with the open land about it, the city of refuge for the manslayer; and Beeshterah with the open land about it; two cities. {S}
21.28 כח  וּמִמַּטֵּה יִשָּׂשכָר, אֶת-קִשְׁיוֹן וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ; אֶת-דָּבְרַת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishion with the open land about it, Dobrath with the open land about it;
21.29 כט  אֶת-יַרְמוּת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, אֶת-עֵין גַּנִּים, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.  {ס}	29 Jarmuth with the open land about it, En-gannim with the open land about it; four cities. {S}
21.30 ל  וּמִמַּטֵּה אָשֵׁר, אֶת-מִשְׁאָל וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ; אֶת-עַבְדּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with the open land about it, Abdon with the open land about it;
21.31 לא  אֶת-חֶלְקָת, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-רְחֹב, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.  {ס}	31 Helkath with the open land about it, and Rehob with the open land about it; four cities. {S}
21.32 לב  וּמִמַּטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי אֶת-עִיר מִקְלַט הָרֹצֵחַ, אֶת-קֶדֶשׁ בַּגָּלִיל וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ וְאֶת-חַמֹּת דֹּאר וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, וְאֶת-קַרְתָּן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, שָׁלֹשׁ.	32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with the open land about it, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Hammoth-dor with the open land about it, and Kartan with the open land about it; three cities.
21.33 לג  כָּל-עָרֵי הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--שְׁלֹשׁ-עֶשְׂרֵה עִיר, וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן.  {ס}	33 All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with the open land about them. {S}
21.34 לד  וּלְמִשְׁפְּחוֹת בְּנֵי-מְרָרִי, הַלְוִיִּם הַנּוֹתָרִים--מֵאֵת מַטֵּה זְבוּלֻן, אֶת-יָקְנְעָם וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ; אֶת-קַרְתָּה, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	34 And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with the open land about it, and Kartah with the open land about it;
21.35 לה  אֶת-דִּמְנָה, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, אֶת-נַהֲלָל, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.  {ס}	35 Dimnah with the open land about it, Nahalal with the open land about it; four cities. {S}
21.36 לו  וּמִמַּטֵּה-גָד, אֶת-עִיר מִקְלַט הָרֹצֵחַ, אֶת-רָמֹת בַּגִּלְעָד, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ; וְאֶת-מַחֲנַיִם, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ.	36 And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with the open land about it, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Mahanaim with the open land about it;
21.37 לז  אֶת-חֶשְׁבּוֹן, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ, אֶת-יַעְזֵר, וְאֶת-מִגְרָשֶׁהָ:  כָּל-עָרִים, אַרְבַּע.	37 Heshbon with the open land about it, Jazer with the open land about it; four cities in all.
21.38 לח  כָּל-הֶעָרִים לִבְנֵי מְרָרִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, הַנּוֹתָרִים, מִמִּשְׁפְּחוֹת הַלְוִיִּם; וַיְהִי, גּוֹרָלָם--עָרִים, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה.	38 All these were the cities of the children of Merari according to their families, even the rest of the families of the Levites; and their lot was twelve cities.
21.39 לט  כֹּל עָרֵי הַלְוִיִּם, בְּתוֹךְ אֲחֻזַּת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל--עָרִים אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁמֹנֶה, וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן.	39 All the cities of the Levites--forty and eight cities with the open land about them--shall be in the midst of the possession of the children of Israel,
21.40 מ  תִּהְיֶינָה, הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה--עִיר עִיר, וּמִגְרָשֶׁיהָ סְבִיבֹתֶיהָ:  כֵּן, לְכָל-הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.  {ס}	40 even these cities, every one with the open land round about it; thus it shall be with all these cities. {S}
21.41 מא  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע לָתֵת לַאֲבוֹתָם; וַיִּרָשׁוּהָ, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָהּ.	41 So the LORD gave unto Israel all the land which He swore to give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.
21.42 מב  וַיָּנַח יְהוָה לָהֶם מִסָּבִיב, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּע לַאֲבוֹתָם; וְלֹא-עָמַד אִישׁ בִּפְנֵיהֶם, מִכָּל-אֹיְבֵיהֶם--אֵת כָּל-אֹיְבֵיהֶם, נָתַן יְהוָה בְּיָדָם.	42 And the LORD gave them rest round about, according to all that He swore unto their fathers; and there stood not a man of all their enemies against them; the LORD delivered all their enemies into their hand.
21.43 מג  לֹא-נָפַל דָּבָר--מִכֹּל הַדָּבָר הַטּוֹב, אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הַכֹּל, בָּא.  {פ}	43 There failed not aught of any good thing which the LORD had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass. {P}
21.44 /
21.45 /
22.1 א  אָז יִקְרָא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, לָראוּבֵנִי וְלַגָּדִי, וְלַחֲצִי, מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה.	1 Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh,
22.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם--אַתֶּם שְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה אֶתְכֶם מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה; וַתִּשְׁמְעוּ בְקוֹלִי, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתִי אֶתְכֶם.	2 and said unto them: 'Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have hearkened unto my voice in all that I commanded you;
22.3 ג  לֹא-עֲזַבְתֶּם אֶת-אֲחֵיכֶם, זֶה יָמִים רַבִּים, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם--אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת, מִצְוַת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	3 ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of the LORD your God.
22.4 ד  וְעַתָּה, הֵנִיחַ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם לַאֲחֵיכֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר לָהֶם; וְעַתָּה פְּנוּ וּלְכוּ לָכֶם לְאָהֳלֵיכֶם, אֶל-אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזַּתְכֶם, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד יְהוָה, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן.	4 And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as He spoke unto them; therefore now turn ye, and get you unto your tents, unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan.
22.5 ה  רַק שִׁמְרוּ מְאֹד, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת-הַמִּצְוָה וְאֶת-הַתּוֹרָה אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה אֶתְכֶם מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-יְהוָה, לְאַהֲבָה אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם וְלָלֶכֶת בְּכָל-דְּרָכָיו וְלִשְׁמֹר מִצְוֺתָיו, וּלְדָבְקָה-בוֹ; וּלְעָבְדוֹ, בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם וּבְכָל-נַפְשְׁכֶם.	5 Only take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, to love the LORD your God, and to walk in all His ways, and to keep His commandments, and to cleave unto Him, and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul.'
22.6 ו  וַיְבָרְכֵם, יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וַיְשַׁלְּחֵם, וַיֵּלְכוּ אֶל-אָהֳלֵיהֶם.  {פ}	6 So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away; and they went unto their tents. {P}
22.7 ז  וְלַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה, נָתַן מֹשֶׁה בַּבָּשָׁן, וּלְחֶצְיוֹ נָתַן יְהוֹשֻׁעַ עִם-אֲחֵיהֶם, מעבר (בְּעֵבֶר) הַיַּרְדֵּן יָמָּה; וְגַם כִּי שִׁלְּחָם יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶל-אָהֳלֵיהֶם--וַיְבָרְכֵם.	7 Now to the one half-tribe of Manasseh Moses had given inheritance in Bashan; but unto the other half gave Joshua among their brethren beyond the Jordan westward. Moreover when Joshua sent them away unto their tents, he blessed them,
22.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם לֵאמֹר, בִּנְכָסִים רַבִּים שׁוּבוּ אֶל-אָהֳלֵיכֶם וּבְמִקְנֶה רַב-מְאֹד, בְּכֶסֶף וּבְזָהָב וּבִנְחֹשֶׁת וּבְבַרְזֶל וּבִשְׂלָמוֹת, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד; חִלְקוּ שְׁלַל-אֹיְבֵיכֶם, עִם-אֲחֵיכֶם.  {פ}	8 and spoke unto them, saying: 'Return with much wealth unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment; divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.' {P}
22.9 ט  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ וַיֵּלְכוּ בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה, מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִשִּׁלֹה, אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ-כְּנָעַן--לָלֶכֶת אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד, אֶל-אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזָּתָם אֲשֶׁר נֹאחֲזוּ-בָהּ, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	9 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the land of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
22.10 י  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-גְּלִילוֹת הַיַּרְדֵּן, אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן; וַיִּבְנוּ בְנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה שָׁם מִזְבֵּחַ, עַל-הַיַּרְדֵּן--מִזְבֵּחַ גָּדוֹל, לְמַרְאֶה.	10 And when they came unto the region about the Jordan, that is in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by the Jordan, a great altar to look upon.
22.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה בָנוּ בְנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אֶל-מוּל אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן--אֶל-גְּלִילוֹת הַיַּרְדֵּן, אֶל-עֵבֶר בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	11 And the children of Israel heard say: 'Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar in the forefront of the land of Canaan, in the region about the Jordan, on the side that pertaineth to the children of Israel.'
22.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שִׁלֹה, לַעֲלוֹת עֲלֵיהֶם, לַצָּבָא.  {פ}	12 And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up against them to war. {P}
22.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וְאֶל-בְּנֵי-גָד, וְאֶל-חֲצִי שֵׁבֶט-מְנַשֶּׁה--אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד:  אֶת-פִּינְחָס, בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן.	13 And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest;
22.14 יד  וַעֲשָׂרָה נְשִׂאִים, עִמּוֹ--נָשִׂיא אֶחָד נָשִׂיא אֶחָד לְבֵית אָב, לְכֹל מַטּוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאִישׁ רֹאשׁ בֵּית-אֲבוֹתָם הֵמָּה, לְאַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	14 and with him ten princes, one prince of a fathers' house for each of the tribes of Israel; and they were every one of them head of their fathers' houses among the thousands of Israel.
22.15 טו  וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וְאֶל-בְּנֵי-גָד, וְאֶל-חֲצִי שֵׁבֶט-מְנַשֶּׁה--אֶל-אֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד; וַיְדַבְּרוּ אִתָּם, לֵאמֹר.	15 And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spoke with them, saying:
22.16 טז  כֹּה אָמְרוּ כֹּל עֲדַת יְהוָה, מָה-הַמַּעַל הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר מְעַלְתֶּם בֵּאלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לָשׁוּב הַיּוֹם, מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה--בִּבְנוֹתְכֶם לָכֶם מִזְבֵּחַ, לִמְרָדְכֶם הַיּוֹם בַּיהוָה.	16 'Thus saith the whole congregation of the LORD: What treachery is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, to rebel this day against the LORD?
22.17 יז  הַמְעַט-לָנוּ, אֶת-עֲוֺן פְּעוֹר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הִטַּהַרְנוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; וַיְהִי הַנֶּגֶף, בַּעֲדַת יְהוָה.	17 Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves unto this day, although there came a plague upon the congregation of the LORD,
22.18 יח  וְאַתֶּם תָּשֻׁבוּ הַיּוֹם, מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה; וְהָיָה, אַתֶּם תִּמְרְדוּ הַיּוֹם בַּיהוָה, וּמָחָר, אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל יִקְצֹף.	18 that ye must turn away this day from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel to-day against the LORD, that to-morrow He will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.
22.19 יט  וְאַךְ אִם-טְמֵאָה אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזַּתְכֶם, עִבְרוּ לָכֶם אֶל-אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזַּת יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר שָׁכַן-שָׁם מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה, וְהֵאָחֲזוּ, בְּתוֹכֵנוּ; וּבַיהוָה אַל-תִּמְרֹדוּ, וְאֹתָנוּ אַל-תִּמְרֹדוּ, בִּבְנֹתְכֶם לָכֶם מִזְבֵּחַ, מִבַּלְעֲדֵי מִזְבַּח יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	19 Howbeit, if the land of your possession be unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the LORD, wherein the LORD'S tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us; but rebel not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar besides the altar of the LORD our God.
22.20 כ  הֲלוֹא עָכָן בֶּן-זֶרַח, מָעַל מַעַל בַּחֵרֶם, וְעַל-כָּל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָיָה קָצֶף:  וְהוּא אִישׁ אֶחָד, לֹא גָוַע בַּעֲוֺנוֹ.  {ס}	20 Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass concerning the devoted thing, and wrath fell upon all the congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.' {S}
22.21 כא  וַיַּעֲנוּ בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד, וַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט הַמְנַשֶּׁה; וַיְדַבְּרוּ, אֶת-רָאשֵׁי אַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	21 Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered, and spoke unto the heads of the thousands of Israel:
22.22 כב  אֵל אֱלֹהִים יְהוָה אֵל אֱלֹהִים יְהוָה, הוּא יֹדֵעַ, וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, הוּא יֵדָע:  אִם-בְּמֶרֶד וְאִם-בְּמַעַל בַּיהוָה, אַל-תּוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	22 'God, God, the LORD, God, God, the LORD, He knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in treachery against the LORD--save Thou us not this day--
22.23 כג  לִבְנוֹת לָנוּ מִזְבֵּחַ, לָשׁוּב מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה; וְאִם-לְהַעֲלוֹת עָלָיו עוֹלָה וּמִנְחָה, וְאִם-לַעֲשׂוֹת עָלָיו זִבְחֵי שְׁלָמִים--יְהוָה, הוּא יְבַקֵּשׁ.	23 that we have built us an altar to turn away from following the LORD; or if to offer thereon burnt-offering or meal-offering, or if to offer sacrifices of peace-offerings thereon, let the LORD Himself require it;
22.24 כד  וְאִם-לֹא מִדְּאָגָה מִדָּבָר, עָשִׂינוּ אֶת-זֹאת לֵאמֹר:  מָחָר, יֹאמְרוּ בְנֵיכֶם לְבָנֵינוּ לֵאמֹר, מַה-לָּכֶם, וְלַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	24 and if we have not rather out of anxiety about a matter done this, saying: In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying: What have ye to do with the LORD, the God of Israel?
22.25 כה  וּגְבוּל נָתַן-יְהוָה בֵּינֵנוּ וּבֵינֵיכֶם בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן--אֵין-לָכֶם חֵלֶק, בַּיהוָה; וְהִשְׁבִּיתוּ בְנֵיכֶם אֶת-בָּנֵינוּ, לְבִלְתִּי יְרֹא אֶת-יְהוָה.	25 for the LORD hath made the Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye have no portion in the LORD; so might your children make our children cease from fearing the LORD.
22.26 כו  וַנֹּאמֶר--נַעֲשֶׂה-נָּא לָנוּ, לִבְנוֹת אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  לֹא לְעוֹלָה, וְלֹא לְזָבַח.	26 Therefore we said: Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice;
22.27 כז  כִּי עֵד הוּא בֵּינֵינוּ וּבֵינֵיכֶם, וּבֵין דֹּרוֹתֵינוּ אַחֲרֵינוּ, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-עֲבֹדַת יְהוָה לְפָנָיו, בְּעֹלוֹתֵינוּ וּבִזְבָחֵינוּ וּבִשְׁלָמֵינוּ:  וְלֹא-יֹאמְרוּ בְנֵיכֶם מָחָר לְבָנֵינוּ, אֵין-לָכֶם חֵלֶק בַּיהוָה.	27 but it shall be a witness between us and you, and between our generations after us, that we may do the service of the LORD before Him with our burnt-offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace-offerings; that your children may not say to our children in time to come: Ye have no portion in the LORD.
22.28 כח  וַנֹּאמֶר--וְהָיָה כִּי-יֹאמְרוּ אֵלֵינוּ וְאֶל-דֹּרֹתֵינוּ, מָחָר; וְאָמַרְנוּ רְאוּ אֶת-תַּבְנִית מִזְבַּח יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר-עָשׂוּ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, לֹא לְעוֹלָה וְלֹא לְזֶבַח--כִּי-עֵד הוּא, בֵּינֵינוּ וּבֵינֵיכֶם.	28 Therefore said we: It shall be, when they so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we shall say: Behold the pattern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made, not for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice; but it is a witness between us and you.
22.29 כט  חָלִילָה לָּנוּ מִמֶּנּוּ לִמְרֹד בַּיהוָה, וְלָשׁוּב הַיּוֹם מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה, לִבְנוֹת מִזְבֵּחַ, לְעֹלָה לְמִנְחָה וּלְזָבַח--מִלְּבַד, מִזְבַּח יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, אֲשֶׁר, לִפְנֵי מִשְׁכָּנוֹ.  {פ}	29 Far be it from us that we should rebel against the LORD, and turn away this day from following the LORD, to build an altar for burnt-offering, for meal-offering, or for sacrifice, besides the altar of the LORD our God that is before His tabernacle.' {P}
22.30 ל  וַיִּשְׁמַע פִּינְחָס הַכֹּהֵן, וּנְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה וְרָאשֵׁי אַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר דִּבְּרוּ בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד וּבְנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה; וַיִּיטַב, בְּעֵינֵיהֶם.	30 And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation, even the heads of the thousands of Israel that were with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them well.
22.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר פִּינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן אֶל-בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וְאֶל-בְּנֵי-גָד וְאֶל-בְּנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, הַיּוֹם יָדַעְנוּ כִּי-בְתוֹכֵנוּ יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מְעַלְתֶּם בַּיהוָה, הַמַּעַל הַזֶּה; אָז, הִצַּלְתֶּם אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--מִיַּד יְהוָה.	31 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh: 'This day we know that the LORD is in the midst of us, because ye have not committed this treachery against the LORD; now have ye delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the LORD.'
22.32 לב  וַיָּשָׁב פִּינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן וְהַנְּשִׂיאִים מֵאֵת בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּמֵאֵת בְּנֵי-גָד מֵאֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד, אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן--אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיָּשִׁבוּ אוֹתָם, דָּבָר.	32 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them back word.
22.33 לג  וַיִּיטַב הַדָּבָר, בְּעֵינֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְבָרְכוּ אֱלֹהִים, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא אָמְרוּ, לַעֲלוֹת עֲלֵיהֶם לַצָּבָא, לְשַׁחֵת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד יֹשְׁבִים בָּהּ.	33 And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and spoke no more of going up against them to war, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and the children of Gad dwelt.
22.34 לד  וַיִּקְרְאוּ בְּנֵי-רְאוּבֵן וּבְנֵי-גָד, לַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  כִּי עֵד הוּא בֵּינֹתֵינוּ, כִּי יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים.  {פ}	34 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar--: 'for it is a witness between us that the LORD is God.' {P}
23.1 א  וַיְהִי, מִיָּמִים רַבִּים, אַחֲרֵי אֲשֶׁר-הֵנִיחַ יְהוָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל מִכָּל-אֹיְבֵיהֶם, מִסָּבִיב; וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ זָקֵן, בָּא בַּיָּמִים.	1 And it came to pass after many days, when the LORD had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, and Joshua was old and well stricken in years;
23.2 ב  וַיִּקְרָא יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, לְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לִזְקֵנָיו וּלְרָאשָׁיו, וּלְשֹׁפְטָיו וּלְשֹׁטְרָיו; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם--אֲנִי זָקַנְתִּי, בָּאתִי בַּיָּמִים.	2 that Joshua called for all Israel, for their elders and for their heads, and for their judges and for their officers, and said unto them: 'I am old and well stricken in years.
23.3 ג  וְאַתֶּם רְאִיתֶם, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם לְכָל-הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה--מִפְּנֵיכֶם:  כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, הוּא הַנִּלְחָם לָכֶם.	3 And ye have seen all that the LORD your God hath done unto all these nations because of you; for the LORD your God, He it is that hath fought for you.
23.4 ד  רְאוּ הִפַּלְתִּי לָכֶם אֶת-הַגּוֹיִם הַנִּשְׁאָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּנַחֲלָה--לְשִׁבְטֵיכֶם:  מִן-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וְכָל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר הִכְרַתִּי, וְהַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל, מְבוֹא הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.	4 Behold, I have allotted unto you for an inheritance, according to your tribes, these nations that remain, from the Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the Great Sea toward the going down of the sun.
23.5 ה  וַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, הוּא יֶהְדֳּפֵם מִפְּנֵיכֶם, וְהוֹרִישׁ אֹתָם, מִלִּפְנֵיכֶם; וִירִשְׁתֶּם, אֶת-אַרְצָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, לָכֶם.	5 And the LORD your God, He shall thrust them out from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as the LORD your God spoke unto you.
23.6 ו  וַחֲזַקְתֶּם מְאֹד--לִשְׁמֹר וְלַעֲשׂוֹת, אֵת כָּל-הַכָּתוּב בְּסֵפֶר תּוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה:  לְבִלְתִּי סוּר-מִמֶּנּוּ, יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול.	6 Therefore be ye very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left;
23.7 ז  לְבִלְתִּי-בֹא בַּגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, הַנִּשְׁאָרִים הָאֵלֶּה אִתְּכֶם; וּבְשֵׁם אֱלֹהֵיהֶם לֹא-תַזְכִּירוּ, וְלֹא תַשְׁבִּיעוּ, וְלֹא תַעַבְדוּם, וְלֹא תִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם.	7 that ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor worship them;
23.8 ח  כִּי אִם-בַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, תִּדְבָּקוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עֲשִׂיתֶם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	8 but cleave unto the LORD your God, as ye have done unto this day;
23.9 ט  וַיּוֹרֶשׁ יְהוָה מִפְּנֵיכֶם, גּוֹיִם גְּדֹלִים וַעֲצוּמִים; וְאַתֶּם, לֹא-עָמַד אִישׁ בִּפְנֵיכֶם, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	9 wherefore the LORD hath driven out from before you great nations and mighty; but as for you, no man hath stood against you unto this day.
23.10 י  אִישׁ-אֶחָד מִכֶּם, יִרְדָּף-אָלֶף:  כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, הוּא הַנִּלְחָם לָכֶם, כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר לָכֶם.	10 One man of you hath chased a thousand; for the LORD your God, He it is that fought for you, as He spoke unto you.
23.11 יא  וְנִשְׁמַרְתֶּם מְאֹד, לְנַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם, לְאַהֲבָה, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	11 Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD your God.
23.12 יב  כִּי אִם-שׁוֹב תָּשׁוּבוּ, וּדְבַקְתֶּם בְּיֶתֶר הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, הַנִּשְׁאָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אִתְּכֶם; וְהִתְחַתַּנְתֶּם בָּהֶם וּבָאתֶם בָּהֶם, וְהֵם בָּכֶם.	12 Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you, and make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you;
23.13 יג  יָדוֹעַ, תֵּדְעוּ, כִּי לֹא יוֹסִיף יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם לְהוֹרִישׁ אֶת-הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, מִלִּפְנֵיכֶם; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם לְפַח וּלְמוֹקֵשׁ, וּלְשֹׁטֵט בְּצִדֵּיכֶם וְלִצְנִנִים בְּעֵינֵיכֶם, עַד-אֲבָדְכֶם מֵעַל הָאֲדָמָה הַטּוֹבָה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	13 know for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive these nations from out of your sight; but they shall be a snare and a trap unto you, and a scourge in your sides, and pricks in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.
23.14 יד  וְהִנֵּה אָנֹכִי הוֹלֵךְ הַיּוֹם, בְּדֶרֶךְ כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; וִידַעְתֶּם בְּכָל-לְבַבְכֶם וּבְכָל-נַפְשְׁכֶם, כִּי לֹא-נָפַל דָּבָר אֶחָד מִכֹּל הַדְּבָרִים הַטּוֹבִים אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם עֲלֵיכֶם--הַכֹּל בָּאוּ לָכֶם, לֹא-נָפַל מִמֶּנּוּ דָּבָר אֶחָד.	14 And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth; consider ye therefore in all your heart and in all your soul, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, not one thing hath failed thereof.
23.15 טו  וְהָיָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר-בָּא עֲלֵיכֶם כָּל-הַדָּבָר הַטּוֹב, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲלֵיכֶם:  כֵּן יָבִיא יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם, אֵת כָּל-הַדָּבָר הָרָע--עַד-הַשְׁמִידוֹ אוֹתְכֶם מֵעַל הָאֲדָמָה הַטּוֹבָה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.	15 And it shall come to pass, that as all the good things are come upon you of which the LORD your God spoke unto you, so shall the LORD bring upon you all the evil things, until He have destroyed you from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.
23.16 טז  בְּעָבְרְכֶם אֶת-בְּרִית יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה אֶתְכֶם, וַהֲלַכְתֶּם וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוִיתֶם לָהֶם--וְחָרָה אַף-יְהוָה, בָּכֶם, וַאֲבַדְתֶּם מְהֵרָה, מֵעַל הָאָרֶץ הַטּוֹבָה אֲשֶׁר נָתַן לָכֶם.  {פ}	16 When ye transgress the covenant of the LORD your God, which He commanded you, and go and serve other gods, and worship them; then shall the anger of the LORD be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which He hath given unto you.' {P}
24.1 א  וַיֶּאֱסֹף יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-כָּל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁכֶמָה; וַיִּקְרָא לְזִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וּלְרָאשָׁיו, וּלְשֹׁפְטָיו וּלְשֹׁטְרָיו, וַיִּתְיַצְּבוּ, לִפְנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים.	1 And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.
24.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר יָשְׁבוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם מֵעוֹלָם, תֶּרַח אֲבִי אַבְרָהָם וַאֲבִי נָחוֹר; וַיַּעַבְדוּ, אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.	2 And Joshua said unto all the people: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Your fathers dwelt of old time beyond the River, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor; and they served other gods.
24.3 ג  וָאֶקַּח אֶת-אֲבִיכֶם אֶת-אַבְרָהָם, מֵעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר, וָאוֹלֵךְ אֹתוֹ, בְּכָל-אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן; וארב (וָאַרְבֶּה), אֶת-זַרְעוֹ, וָאֶתֶּן-לוֹ, אֶת-יִצְחָק.	3 And I took your father Abraham from beyond the River, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.
24.4 ד  וָאֶתֵּן לְיִצְחָק, אֶת-יַעֲקֹב וְאֶת-עֵשָׂו; וָאֶתֵּן לְעֵשָׂו אֶת-הַר שֵׂעִיר, לָרֶשֶׁת אוֹתוֹ, וְיַעֲקֹב וּבָנָיו, יָרְדוּ מִצְרָיִם.	4 And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau; and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; and Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.
24.5 ה  וָאֶשְׁלַח אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן, וָאֶגֹּף אֶת-מִצְרַיִם, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי, בְּקִרְבּוֹ; וְאַחַר, הוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם.	5 And I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did in the midst thereof; and afterward I brought you out.
24.6 ו  וָאוֹצִיא אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם מִמִּצְרַיִם, וַתָּבֹאוּ הַיָּמָּה; וַיִּרְדְּפוּ מִצְרַיִם אַחֲרֵי אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם, בְּרֶכֶב וּבְפָרָשִׁים--יַם-סוּף.	6 And I brought your fathers out of Egypt; and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and with horsemen unto the Red Sea.
24.7 ז  וַיִּצְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיָּשֶׂם מַאֲפֵל בֵּינֵיכֶם וּבֵין הַמִּצְרִים וַיָּבֵא עָלָיו אֶת-הַיָּם וַיְכַסֵּהוּ, וַתִּרְאֶינָה עֵינֵיכֶם, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי בְּמִצְרָיִם; וַתֵּשְׁבוּ בַמִּדְבָּר, יָמִים רַבִּים.	7 And when they cried out unto the LORD, He put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes saw what I did in Egypt; and ye dwelt in the wilderness many days.
24.8 ח  ואבאה (וָאָבִא) אֶתְכֶם, אֶל-אֶרֶץ הָאֱמֹרִי הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ, אִתְּכֶם; וָאֶתֵּן אוֹתָם בְּיֶדְכֶם וַתִּירְשׁוּ אֶת-אַרְצָם, וָאַשְׁמִידֵם מִפְּנֵיכֶם.	8 And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, that dwelt beyond the Jordan; and they fought with you; and I gave them into your hand, and ye possessed their land; and I destroyed them from before you.
24.9 ט  וַיָּקָם בָּלָק בֶּן-צִפּוֹר מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב, וַיִּלָּחֶם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּשְׁלַח, וַיִּקְרָא לְבִלְעָם בֶּן-בְּעוֹר--לְקַלֵּל אֶתְכֶם.	9 Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and fought against Israel; and he sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you.
24.10 י  וְלֹא אָבִיתִי, לִשְׁמֹעַ לְבִלְעָם; וַיְבָרֶךְ בָּרוֹךְ אֶתְכֶם, וָאַצִּל אֶתְכֶם מִיָּדוֹ.	10 But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he even blessed you; so I delivered you out of his hand.
24.11 יא  וַתַּעַבְרוּ אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, וַתָּבֹאוּ אֶל-יְרִיחוֹ, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ בָכֶם בַּעֲלֵי-יְרִיחוֹ הָאֱמֹרִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי וְהַחִתִּי וְהַגִּרְגָּשִׁי, הַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי; וָאֶתֵּן אוֹתָם, בְּיֶדְכֶם.	11 And ye went over the Jordan, and came unto Jericho; and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Girgashite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; and I delivered them into your hand.
24.12 יב  וָאֶשְׁלַח לִפְנֵיכֶם, אֶת-הַצִּרְעָה, וַתְּגָרֶשׁ אוֹתָם מִפְּנֵיכֶם, שְׁנֵי מַלְכֵי הָאֱמֹרִי:  לֹא בְחַרְבְּךָ, וְלֹא בְקַשְׁתֶּךָ.	12 And I sent the hornet before you, which drove them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
24.13 יג  וָאֶתֵּן לָכֶם אֶרֶץ אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָגַעְתָּ בָּהּ, וְעָרִים אֲשֶׁר לֹא-בְנִיתֶם, וַתֵּשְׁבוּ, בָּהֶם; כְּרָמִים וְזֵיתִים אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נְטַעְתֶּם, אַתֶּם אֹכְלִים.	13 And I gave you a land whereon thou hadst not laboured, and cities which ye built not, and ye dwell therein; of vineyards and olive-yards which ye planted not do ye eat.
24.14 יד  וְעַתָּה יְראוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וְעִבְדוּ אֹתוֹ--בְּתָמִים וּבֶאֱמֶת; וְהָסִירוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר עָבְדוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם בְּעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר וּבְמִצְרַיִם, וְעִבְדוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה.	14 Now therefore fear the LORD, and serve Him in sincerity and in truth; and put away the gods which your fathers served beyond the River, and in Egypt; and serve ye the LORD.
24.15 טו  וְאִם רַע בְּעֵינֵיכֶם לַעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה, בַּחֲרוּ לָכֶם הַיּוֹם אֶת-מִי תַעֲבֹדוּן--אִם אֶת-אֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר-עָבְדוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם אֲשֶׁר בעבר (מֵעֵבֶר) הַנָּהָר, וְאִם אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הָאֱמֹרִי אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם יֹשְׁבִים בְּאַרְצָם; וְאָנֹכִי וּבֵיתִי, נַעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה.  {פ}	15 And if it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were beyond the River, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve the LORD.' {P}
24.16 טז  וַיַּעַן הָעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר, חָלִילָה לָּנוּ, מֵעֲזֹב אֶת-יְהוָה--לַעֲבֹד, אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים.	16 And the people answered and said: 'Far be it from us that we should forsake the LORD, to serve other gods;
24.17 יז  כִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הוּא הַמַּעֲלֶה אֹתָנוּ וְאֶת-אֲבוֹתֵינוּ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים; וַאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְעֵינֵינוּ, אֶת-הָאֹתוֹת הַגְּדֹלוֹת הָאֵלֶּה, וַיִּשְׁמְרֵנוּ בְּכָל-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר הָלַכְנוּ בָהּ, וּבְכֹל הָעַמִּים אֲשֶׁר עָבַרְנוּ בְּקִרְבָּם.	17 for the LORD our God, He it is that brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and that did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all the peoples through the midst of whom we passed;
24.18 יח  וַיְגָרֶשׁ יְהוָה אֶת-כָּל-הָעַמִּים, וְאֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי יֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ--מִפָּנֵינוּ; גַּם-אֲנַחְנוּ נַעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה, כִּי-הוּא אֱלֹהֵינוּ.	18 and the LORD drove out from before us all the peoples, even the Amorites that dwelt in the land; therefore we also will serve the LORD; for He is our God.'
24.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הָעָם, לֹא תוּכְלוּ לַעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה--כִּי-אֱלֹהִים קְדֹשִׁים, הוּא:  אֵל-קַנּוֹא הוּא, לֹא-יִשָּׂא לְפִשְׁעֲכֶם וּלְחַטֹּאותֵיכֶם.	19 And Joshua said unto the people: 'Ye cannot serve the LORD; for He is a holy God; He is a jealous God; He will not forgive your transgression nor your sins.
24.20 כ  כִּי תַעַזְבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וַעֲבַדְתֶּם אֱלֹהֵי נֵכָר; וְשָׁב וְהֵרַע לָכֶם וְכִלָּה אֶתְכֶם, אַחֲרֵי אֲשֶׁר-הֵיטִיב לָכֶם.	20 If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange gods, then He will turn and do you evil, and consume you, after that He hath done you good.'
24.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר הָעָם, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ:  לֹא, כִּי אֶת-יְהוָה נַעֲבֹד.	21 And the people said unto Joshua: 'Nay; but we will serve the LORD.'
24.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-הָעָם, עֵדִים אַתֶּם בָּכֶם, כִּי-אַתֶּם בְּחַרְתֶּם לָכֶם אֶת-יְהוָה, לַעֲבֹד אוֹתוֹ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, עֵדִים.	22 And Joshua said unto the people: 'Ye are witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve Him.--And they said: 'We are witnesses.'--
24.23 כג  וְעַתָּה, הָסִירוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הַנֵּכָר אֲשֶׁר בְּקִרְבְּכֶם; וְהַטּוּ, אֶת-לְבַבְכֶם, אֶל-יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 Now therefore put away the strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD, the God of Israel.'
24.24 כד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הָעָם, אֶל-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ:  אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ נַעֲבֹד, וּבְקוֹלוֹ נִשְׁמָע.	24 And the people said unto Joshua: 'The LORD our God will we serve, and unto His voice will we hearken.'
24.25 כה  וַיִּכְרֹת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בְּרִית לָעָם, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיָּשֶׂם לוֹ חֹק וּמִשְׁפָּט, בִּשְׁכֶם.	25 So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.
24.26 כו  וַיִּכְתֹּב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּסֵפֶר תּוֹרַת אֱלֹהִים; וַיִּקַּח, אֶבֶן גְּדוֹלָה, וַיְקִימֶהָ שָּׁם, תַּחַת הָאַלָּה אֲשֶׁר בְּמִקְדַּשׁ יְהוָה.  {פ}	26 And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God; and he took a great stone, and set it up there under the oak that was by the sanctuary of the LORD. {P}
24.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם, הִנֵּה הָאֶבֶן הַזֹּאת תִּהְיֶה-בָּנוּ לְעֵדָה--כִּי-הִיא שָׁמְעָה אֵת כָּל-אִמְרֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר עִמָּנוּ; וְהָיְתָה בָכֶם לְעֵדָה, פֶּן-תְּכַחֲשׁוּן בֵּאלֹהֵיכֶם.	27 And Joshua said unto all the people: 'Behold, this stone shall be a witness against us; for it hath heard all the words of the LORD which He spoke unto us; it shall be therefore a witness against you, lest ye deny your God.'
24.28 כח  וַיְשַׁלַּח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶת-הָעָם, אִישׁ לְנַחֲלָתוֹ.  {פ}	28 So Joshua sent the people away, every man unto his inheritance. {P}
24.29 כט  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, וַיָּמָת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, עֶבֶד יְהוָה--בֶּן-מֵאָה וָעֶשֶׂר, שָׁנִים.	29 And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
24.30 ל  וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ בִּגְבוּל נַחֲלָתוֹ, בְּתִמְנַת-סֶרַח אֲשֶׁר בְּהַר-אֶפְרָיִם, מִצְּפוֹן, לְהַר-גָּעַשׁ.	30 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-serah, which is in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
24.31 לא  וַיַּעֲבֹד יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-יְהוָה, כֹּל יְמֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וְכֹל יְמֵי הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר הֶאֱרִיכוּ יָמִים אַחֲרֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַאֲשֶׁר יָדְעוּ אֵת כָּל-מַעֲשֵׂה יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	31 And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, and had known all the work of the LORD, that He had wrought for Israel.
24.32 לב  וְאֶת-עַצְמוֹת יוֹסֵף אֲשֶׁר-הֶעֱלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִמִּצְרַיִם, קָבְרוּ בִשְׁכֶם, בְּחֶלְקַת הַשָּׂדֶה אֲשֶׁר קָנָה יַעֲקֹב מֵאֵת בְּנֵי-חֲמוֹר אֲבִי-שְׁכֶם, בְּמֵאָה קְשִׂיטָה; וַיִּהְיוּ לִבְנֵי-יוֹסֵף, לְנַחֲלָה.	32 And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in the parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for a hundred pieces of money; and they became the inheritance of the children of Joseph.
24.33 לג  וְאֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן, מֵת; וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אֹתוֹ, בְּגִבְעַת פִּינְחָס בְּנוֹ, אֲשֶׁר נִתַּן-לוֹ, בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם.  {ש}	33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in the Hill of Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim. {P}
