1.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּיהוָה לֵאמֹר:  מִי יַעֲלֶה-לָּנוּ אֶל-הַכְּנַעֲנִי בַּתְּחִלָּה, לְהִלָּחֶם בּוֹ.	1 And it came to pass after the death of Joshua, that the children of Israel asked the LORD, saying: 'Who shall go up for us first against the Canaanites, to fight against them?'
1.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, יְהוּדָה יַעֲלֶה:  הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, בְּיָדוֹ.	2 And LORD said: 'Judah shall go up; behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.'
1.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוּדָה לְשִׁמְעוֹן אָחִיו עֲלֵה אִתִּי בְגֹרָלִי, וְנִלָּחֲמָה בַּכְּנַעֲנִי, וְהָלַכְתִּי גַם-אֲנִי אִתְּךָ, בְּגוֹרָלֶךָ; וַיֵּלֶךְ אִתּוֹ, שִׁמְעוֹן.	3 And Judah said unto Simeon his brother: 'Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot.' So Simeon went with him.
1.4 ד  וַיַּעַל יְהוּדָה, וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי בְּיָדָם; וַיַּכּוּם בְּבֶזֶק, עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ.	4 And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand; and they smote of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
1.5 ה  וַיִּמְצְאוּ אֶת-אֲדֹנִי בֶזֶק, בְּבֶזֶק, וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ, בּוֹ; וַיַּכּוּ, אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְאֶת-הַפְּרִזִּי.	5 And they found Adoni-bezek in Bezek; and they fought against him, and they smote the Canaanites and the Perizzites.
1.6 ו  וַיָּנָס אֲדֹנִי בֶזֶק, וַיִּרְדְּפוּ אַחֲרָיו; וַיֹּאחֲזוּ אוֹתוֹ--וַיְקַצְּצוּ, אֶת-בְּהֹנוֹת יָדָיו וְרַגְלָיו.	6 But Adoni-bezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.
1.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲדֹנִי-בֶזֶק, שִׁבְעִים מְלָכִים בְּהֹנוֹת יְדֵיהֶם וְרַגְלֵיהֶם מְקֻצָּצִים הָיוּ מְלַקְּטִים תַּחַת שֻׁלְחָנִי--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי, כֵּן שִׁלַּם-לִי אֱלֹהִים; וַיְבִיאֻהוּ יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וַיָּמָת שָׁם.  {פ}	7 And Adoni-bezek said: 'Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered food under my table; as I have done, so God hath requited me.' And they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there. {P}
1.8 ח  וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אוֹתָהּ, וַיַּכּוּהָ לְפִי-חָרֶב; וְאֶת-הָעִיר, שִׁלְּחוּ בָאֵשׁ.	8 And the children of Judah fought against Jerusalem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire.
1.9 ט  וְאַחַר, יָרְדוּ בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, לְהִלָּחֵם, בַּכְּנַעֲנִי--יוֹשֵׁב הָהָר, וְהַנֶּגֶב וְהַשְּׁפֵלָה.	9 And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites that dwelt in the hill-country, and in the South, and in the Lowland.
1.10 י  וַיֵּלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, אֶל-הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּחֶבְרוֹן, וְשֵׁם-חֶבְרוֹן לְפָנִים, קִרְיַת אַרְבַּע; וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-שֵׁשַׁי וְאֶת-אֲחִימַן, וְאֶת-תַּלְמָי.	10 And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron--now the name of Hebron beforetime was Kiriath-arba--and they smote Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.
1.11 יא  וַיֵּלֶךְ מִשָּׁם, אֶל-יוֹשְׁבֵי דְּבִיר; וְשֵׁם-דְּבִיר לְפָנִים, קִרְיַת-סֵפֶר.	11 And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir--now the name of Debir beforetime was Kiriath-sepher.
1.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר כָּלֵב, אֲשֶׁר-יַכֶּה אֶת-קִרְיַת-סֵפֶר וּלְכָדָהּ--וְנָתַתִּי לוֹ אֶת-עַכְסָה בִתִּי, לְאִשָּׁה.	12 And Caleb said: 'He that smiteth Kiriath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.'
1.13 יג  וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ עָתְנִיאֵל בֶּן-קְנַז, אֲחִי כָלֵב הַקָּטֹן מִמֶּנּוּ; וַיִּתֶּן-לוֹ אֶת-עַכְסָה בִתּוֹ, לְאִשָּׁה.	13 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it; and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
1.14 יד  וַיְהִי בְּבוֹאָהּ, וַתְּסִיתֵהוּ לִשְׁאֹל מֵאֵת-אָבִיהָ הַשָּׂדֶה, וַתִּצְנַח, מֵעַל הַחֲמוֹר; וַיֹּאמֶר-לָהּ כָּלֵב, מַה-לָּךְ.	14 And it came to pass, when she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field; and she alighted from off her ass; and Caleb said unto her: 'What wouldest thou?'
1.15 טו  וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ הָבָה-לִּי בְרָכָה, כִּי אֶרֶץ הַנֶּגֶב נְתַתָּנִי, וְנָתַתָּה לִי, גֻּלֹּת מָיִם; וַיִּתֶּן-לָהּ כָּלֵב, אֵת גֻּלֹּת עִלִּית, וְאֵת, גֻּלֹּת תַּחְתִּית.  {פ}	15 And she said unto him: 'Give me a blessing; for that thou hast set me in the Southland, give me therefore springs of water.' And Caleb gave her the Upper Springs and the Nether Springs. {P}
1.16 טז  וּבְנֵי קֵינִי חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה עָלוּ מֵעִיר הַתְּמָרִים, אֶת-בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, מִדְבַּר יְהוּדָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּנֶגֶב עֲרָד; וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיֵּשֶׁב אֶת-הָעָם.	16 And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father-in-law, went up out of the city of palm-trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which is in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt with the people.
1.17 יז  וַיֵּלֶךְ יְהוּדָה, אֶת-שִׁמְעוֹן אָחִיו, וַיַּכּוּ, אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי יוֹשֵׁב צְפַת; וַיַּחֲרִימוּ אוֹתָהּ, וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שֵׁם-הָעִיר חָרְמָה.	17 And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they smote the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.
1.18 יח  וַיִּלְכֹּד יְהוּדָה אֶת-עַזָּה וְאֶת-גְּבוּלָהּ, וְאֶת-אַשְׁקְלוֹן וְאֶת-גְּבוּלָהּ, וְאֶת-עֶקְרוֹן, וְאֶת-גְּבוּלָהּ.	18 Also Judah took Gaza with the border thereof, and Ashkelon with the border thereof, and Ekron with the border thereof.
1.19 יט  וַיְהִי יְהוָה אֶת-יְהוּדָה, וַיֹּרֶשׁ אֶת-הָהָר:  כִּי לֹא לְהוֹרִישׁ אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי הָעֵמֶק, כִּי-רֶכֶב בַּרְזֶל לָהֶם.	19 And the LORD was with Judah; and he drove out the inhabitants of the hill-country; for he could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron.
1.20 כ  וַיִּתְּנוּ לְכָלֵב אֶת-חֶבְרוֹן, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר מֹשֶׁה; וַיּוֹרֶשׁ מִשָּׁם, אֶת-שְׁלֹשָׁה בְּנֵי הָעֲנָק.	20 And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses had spoken; and he drove out thence the three sons of Anak.
1.21 כא  וְאֶת-הַיְבוּסִי יֹשֵׁב יְרוּשָׁלִַם, לֹא הוֹרִישׁוּ בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן; וַיֵּשֶׁב הַיְבוּסִי אֶת-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwelt with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem, unto this day. {P}
1.22 כב  וַיַּעֲלוּ בֵית-יוֹסֵף גַּם-הֵם, בֵּית-אֵל; וַיהוָה, עִמָּם.	22 And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Beth-el; and the LORD was with them.
1.23 כג  וַיָּתִירוּ בֵית-יוֹסֵף, בְּבֵית-אֵל; וְשֵׁם-הָעִיר לְפָנִים, לוּז.	23 And the house of Joseph sent to spy out Beth-el--now the name of the city beforetime was Luz.
1.24 כד  וַיִּרְאוּ, הַשֹּׁמְרִים, אִישׁ, יוֹצֵא מִן-הָעִיר; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ, הַרְאֵנוּ נָא אֶת-מְבוֹא הָעִיר, וְעָשִׂינוּ עִמְּךָ, חָסֶד.	24 And the watchers saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him: 'Show us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will deal kindly with thee.'
1.25 כה  וַיַּרְאֵם אֶת-מְבוֹא הָעִיר, וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-הָעִיר לְפִי-חָרֶב; וְאֶת-הָאִישׁ וְאֶת-כָּל-מִשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ, שִׁלֵּחוּ.	25 And he showed them the entrance into the city, and they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let the man go and all his family.
1.26 כו  וַיֵּלֶךְ הָאִישׁ, אֶרֶץ הַחִתִּים; וַיִּבֶן עִיר, וַיִּקְרָא שְׁמָהּ לוּז--הוּא שְׁמָהּ, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.  {פ}	26 And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz, which is the name thereof unto this day. {P}
1.27 כז  וְלֹא-הוֹרִישׁ מְנַשֶּׁה, אֶת-בֵּית-שְׁאָן וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֶיהָ וְאֶת-תַּעְנַךְ וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֶיהָ, וְאֶת-יושב (יוֹשְׁבֵי) דוֹר וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֶיהָ וְאֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי יִבְלְעָם וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֶיהָ, וְאֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי מְגִדּוֹ וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֶיהָ; וַיּוֹאֶל, הַכְּנַעֲנִי, לָשֶׁבֶת, בָּאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת.	27 And Manasseh did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shean and its towns, nor of Taanach and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns; but the Canaanites were resolved to dwell in that land.
1.28 כח  וַיְהִי כִּי-חָזַק יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי לָמַס; וְהוֹרֵישׁ, לֹא הוֹרִישׁוֹ.  {ס}	28 And it came to pass, when Israel was waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to task-work, but did in no wise drive them out. {S}
1.29 כט  וְאֶפְרַיִם לֹא הוֹרִישׁ, אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַיּוֹשֵׁב בְּגָזֶר; וַיֵּשֶׁב הַכְּנַעֲנִי בְּקִרְבּוֹ, בְּגָזֶר.  {ס}	29 And Ephraim drove not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them. {S}
1.30 ל  זְבוּלֻן, לֹא הוֹרִישׁ אֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי קִטְרוֹן, וְאֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי, נַהֲלֹל; וַיֵּשֶׁב הַכְּנַעֲנִי בְּקִרְבּוֹ, וַיִּהְיוּ לָמַס.  {ס}	30 Zebulun drove not out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributary. {S}
1.31 לא  אָשֵׁר, לֹא הוֹרִישׁ אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי עַכּוֹ, וְאֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי, צִידוֹן; וְאֶת-אַחְלָב וְאֶת-אַכְזִיב וְאֶת-חֶלְבָּה, וְאֶת-אֲפִיק וְאֶת-רְחֹב.	31 Asher drove not out the inhabitants of Acco, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob;
1.32 לב  וַיֵּשֶׁב, הָאָשֵׁרִי, בְּקֶרֶב הַכְּנַעֲנִי, יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי, לֹא הוֹרִישׁוֹ.  {ס}	32 but the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; for they did not drive them out. {S}
1.33 לג  נַפְתָּלִי, לֹא-הוֹרִישׁ אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי בֵית-שֶׁמֶשׁ וְאֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי בֵית-עֲנָת, וַיֵּשֶׁב, בְּקֶרֶב הַכְּנַעֲנִי יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ; וְיֹשְׁבֵי בֵית-שֶׁמֶשׁ וּבֵית עֲנָת, הָיוּ לָהֶם לָמַס.	33 Naphtali drove not out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the inhabitants of Beth-anath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became tributary unto them.
1.34 לד  וַיִּלְחֲצוּ הָאֱמֹרִי אֶת-בְּנֵי-דָן, הָהָרָה:  כִּי-לֹא נְתָנוֹ, לָרֶדֶת לָעֵמֶק.	34 And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the hill-country; for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley.
1.35 לה  וַיּוֹאֶל הָאֱמֹרִי לָשֶׁבֶת בְּהַר-חֶרֶס, בְּאַיָּלוֹן וּבְשַׁעַלְבִים; וַתִּכְבַּד יַד בֵּית-יוֹסֵף, וַיִּהְיוּ לָמַס.	35 But the Amorites were resolved to dwell in Harheres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributary.
1.36 לו  וּגְבוּל, הָאֱמֹרִי, מִמַּעֲלֵה, עַקְרַבִּים--מֵהַסֶּלַע, וָמָעְלָה.  {פ}	36 And the border of the Amorites was from the ascent of Akrabbim, from Sela, and upward. {P}
2.1 א  וַיַּעַל מַלְאַךְ-יְהוָה מִן-הַגִּלְגָּל, אֶל-הַבֹּכִים;  {פ} וַיֹּאמֶר אַעֲלֶה אֶתְכֶם מִמִּצְרַיִם, וָאָבִיא אֶתְכֶם אֶל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי לַאֲבֹתֵיכֶם, וָאֹמַר, לֹא-אָפֵר בְּרִיתִי אִתְּכֶם לְעוֹלָם.	1 And the angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim. {P} And he said: '... I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I swore unto your fathers; and I said: I will never break My covenant with you;
2.2 ב  וְאַתֶּם, לֹא-תִכְרְתוּ בְרִית לְיוֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת--מִזְבְּחוֹתֵיהֶם, תִּתֹּצוּן; וְלֹא-שְׁמַעְתֶּם בְּקוֹלִי, מַה-זֹּאת עֲשִׂיתֶם.	2 and ye shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall break down their altars; but ye have not hearkened unto My voice; what is this ye have done?
2.3 ג  וְגַם אָמַרְתִּי, לֹא-אֲגָרֵשׁ אוֹתָם מִפְּנֵיכֶם; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם, לְצִדִּים, וֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, יִהְיוּ לָכֶם לְמוֹקֵשׁ.	3 Wherefore I also said: I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be unto you as snares, and their gods shall be a trap unto you.'
2.4 ד  וַיְהִי, כְּדַבֵּר מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֶל-כָּל-בְּנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּשְׂאוּ הָעָם אֶת-קוֹלָם, וַיִּבְכּוּ.	4 And it came to pass, when the angel of the LORD spoke these words unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
2.5 ה  וַיִּקְרְאוּ שֵׁם-הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, בֹּכִים; וַיִּזְבְּחוּ-שָׁם, לַיהוָה.  {פ}	5 And they called the name of that place Bochim; and they sacrificed there unto the LORD. {P}
2.6 ו  וַיְשַׁלַּח יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, אֶת-הָעָם; וַיֵּלְכוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אִישׁ לְנַחֲלָתוֹ, לָרֶשֶׁת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	6 Now when Joshua had sent the people away, the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.
2.7 ז  וַיַּעַבְדוּ הָעָם אֶת-יְהוָה, כֹּל יְמֵי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ; וְכֹל יְמֵי הַזְּקֵנִים, אֲשֶׁר הֶאֱרִיכוּ יָמִים אַחֲרֵי יְהוֹשׁוּעַ, אֲשֶׁר רָאוּ אֵת כָּל-מַעֲשֵׂה יְהוָה הַגָּדוֹל, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great work of the LORD, that He had wrought for Israel.
2.8 ח  וַיָּמָת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, עֶבֶד יְהוָה, בֶּן-מֵאָה וָעֶשֶׂר, שָׁנִים.	8 And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
2.9 ט  וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אוֹתוֹ בִּגְבוּל נַחֲלָתוֹ, בְּתִמְנַת-חֶרֶס בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם, מִצְּפוֹן, לְהַר-גָּעַשׁ.	9 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
2.10 י  וְגַם כָּל-הַדּוֹר הַהוּא, נֶאֶסְפוּ אֶל-אֲבוֹתָיו; וַיָּקָם דּוֹר אַחֵר אַחֲרֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדְעוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וְגַם אֶת-הַמַּעֲשֶׂה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	10 And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers; and there arose another generation after them, that knew not the LORD, nor yet the work which He had wrought for Israel. {P}
2.11 יא  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיַּעַבְדוּ, אֶת-הַבְּעָלִים.	11 And the children of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and served the Baalim.
2.12 יב  וַיַּעַזְבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתָם, הַמּוֹצִיא אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים מֵאֱלֹהֵי הָעַמִּים אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבוֹתֵיהֶם, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם; וַיַּכְעִסוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה.	12 And they forsook the LORD, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the peoples that were round about them, and worshipped them; and they provoked the LORD.
2.13 יג  וַיַּעַזְבוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיַּעַבְדוּ לַבַּעַל, וְלָעַשְׁתָּרוֹת.	13 And they forsook the LORD, and served Baal and the Ashtaroth.
2.14 יד  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּיַד-שֹׁסִים, וַיָּשֹׁסּוּ אוֹתָם; וַיִּמְכְּרֵם בְּיַד אוֹיְבֵיהֶם, מִסָּבִיב, וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ עוֹד, לַעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי אוֹיְבֵיהֶם.	14 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and He gave them over into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
2.15 טו  בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר יָצְאוּ, יַד-יְהוָה הָיְתָה-בָּם לְרָעָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, וְכַאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה לָהֶם; וַיֵּצֶר לָהֶם, מְאֹד.	15 Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against them for evil, as the LORD had spoken, and as the LORD had sworn unto them; and they were sore distressed.
2.16 טז  וַיָּקֶם יְהוָה, שֹׁפְטִים; וַיּוֹשִׁיעוּם, מִיַּד שֹׁסֵיהֶם.	16 And the LORD raised up judges, who saved them out of the hand of those that spoiled them.
2.17 יז  וְגַם אֶל-שֹׁפְטֵיהֶם, לֹא שָׁמֵעוּ--כִּי זָנוּ אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לָהֶם:  סָרוּ מַהֵר, מִן-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר הָלְכוּ אֲבוֹתָם לִשְׁמֹעַ מִצְוֺת-יְהוָה--לֹא-עָשׂוּ כֵן.	17 And yet they hearkened not unto their judges, for they went astray after other gods, and worshipped them; they turned aside quickly out of the way wherein their fathers walked, obeying the commandments of the LORD; they did not so.
2.18 יח  וְכִי-הֵקִים יְהוָה לָהֶם, שֹׁפְטִים, וְהָיָה יְהוָה עִם-הַשֹּׁפֵט, וְהוֹשִׁיעָם מִיַּד אֹיְבֵיהֶם כֹּל יְמֵי הַשּׁוֹפֵט:  כִּי-יִנָּחֵם יְהוָה מִנַּאֲקָתָם, מִפְּנֵי לֹחֲצֵיהֶם וְדֹחֲקֵיהֶם.	18 And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with the judge, and saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for it repented the LORD because of their groaning by reason of them that oppressed them and crushed them.
2.19 יט  וְהָיָה בְּמוֹת הַשּׁוֹפֵט, יָשֻׁבוּ וְהִשְׁחִיתוּ מֵאֲבוֹתָם, לָלֶכֶת אַחֲרֵי אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים, לְעָבְדָם וּלְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת לָהֶם:  לֹא הִפִּילוּ מִמַּעַלְלֵיהֶם, וּמִדַּרְכָּם הַקָּשָׁה.	19 But it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they turned back, and dealt more corruptly than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to worship them; they left nothing undone of their practices, nor of their stubborn way.
2.20 כ  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר, יַעַן אֲשֶׁר עָבְרוּ הַגּוֹי הַזֶּה אֶת-בְּרִיתִי אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי אֶת-אֲבוֹתָם, וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, לְקוֹלִי.	20 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel; and He said: 'Because this nation have transgressed My covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto My voice;
2.21 כא  גַּם-אֲנִי לֹא אוֹסִיף, לְהוֹרִישׁ אִישׁ מִפְּנֵיהֶם, מִן-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-עָזַב יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיָּמֹת.	21 I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations that Joshua left when he died;
2.22 כב  לְמַעַן נַסּוֹת בָּם, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הֲשֹׁמְרִים הֵם אֶת-דֶּרֶךְ יְהוָה לָלֶכֶת בָּם, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמְרוּ אֲבוֹתָם--אִם-לֹא.	22 that by them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the LORD to walk therein, as their fathers did keep it, or not.'
2.23 כג  וַיַּנַּח יְהוָה אֶת-הַגּוֹיִם הָאֵלֶּה, לְבִלְתִּי הוֹרִישָׁם מַהֵר; וְלֹא נְתָנָם, בְּיַד-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ.  {פ}	23 So the LORD left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered He them into the hand of Joshua. {P}
3.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר הִנִּיחַ יְהוָה, לְנַסּוֹת בָּם אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדְעוּ, אֵת כָּל-מִלְחֲמוֹת כְּנָעַן.	1 Now these are the nations which the LORD left, to prove Israel by them, even as many as had not known all the wars of Canaan;
3.2 ב  רַק, לְמַעַן דַּעַת דֹּרוֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְלַמְּדָם, מִלְחָמָה--רַק אֲשֶׁר-לְפָנִים, לֹא יְדָעוּם.	2 only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as beforetime knew nothing thereof;
3.3 ג  חֲמֵשֶׁת סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וְכָל-הַכְּנַעֲנִי וְהַצִּידֹנִי, וְהַחִוִּי, יֹשֵׁב הַר הַלְּבָנוֹן--מֵהַר בַּעַל חֶרְמוֹן, עַד לְבוֹא חֲמָת.	3 namely, the five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Zidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the entrance of Hamath.
3.4 ד  וַיִּהְיוּ, לְנַסּוֹת בָּם אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--לָדַעַת, הֲיִשְׁמְעוּ אֶת-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה אֶת-אֲבוֹתָם, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	4 And they were there, to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the LORD, which He commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.
3.5 ה  וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יָשְׁבוּ בְּקֶרֶב הַכְּנַעֲנִי, הַחִתִּי וְהָאֱמֹרִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי, וְהַחִוִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי.	5 And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites;
3.6 ו  וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיהֶם לָהֶם לְנָשִׁים, וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיהֶם נָתְנוּ לִבְנֵיהֶם; וַיַּעַבְדוּ, אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.  {פ}	6 and they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their own daughters to their sons, and served their gods. {P}
3.7 ז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, וַיִּשְׁכְּחוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם; וַיַּעַבְדוּ אֶת-הַבְּעָלִים, וְאֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרוֹת.	7 And the children of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and forgot the LORD their God, and served the Baalim and the Asheroth.
3.8 ח  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּמְכְּרֵם בְּיַד כּוּשַׁן רִשְׁעָתַיִם, מֶלֶךְ אֲרַם נַהֲרָיִם; וַיַּעַבְדוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-כּוּשַׁן רִשְׁעָתַיִם, שְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנִים.	8 Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He gave them over into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram-naharaim; and the children of Israel served Cushan-rishathaim eight years.
3.9 ט  וַיִּזְעֲקוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיָּקֶם יְהוָה מוֹשִׁיעַ לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וַיֹּשִׁיעֵם--אֵת עָתְנִיאֵל בֶּן-קְנַז, אֲחִי כָלֵב הַקָּטֹן מִמֶּנּוּ.	9 And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a saviour to the children of Israel, who saved them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.
3.10 י  וַתְּהִי עָלָיו רוּחַ-יְהוָה, וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֵּצֵא לַמִּלְחָמָה, וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה בְּיָדוֹ אֶת-כּוּשַׁן רִשְׁעָתַיִם מֶלֶךְ אֲרָם; וַתָּעָז יָדוֹ, עַל כּוּשַׁן רִשְׁעָתָיִם.	10 And the spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war, and the LORD delivered Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Cushan-rishathaim.
3.11 יא  וַתִּשְׁקֹט הָאָרֶץ, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה; וַיָּמָת, עָתְנִיאֵל בֶּן-קְנַז.  {פ}	11 And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died. {P}
3.12 יב  וַיֹּסִפוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיְחַזֵּק יְהוָה אֶת-עֶגְלוֹן מֶלֶךְ-מוֹאָב, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל כִּי-עָשׂוּ אֶת-הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.	12 And the children of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.
3.13 יג  וַיֶּאֱסֹף אֵלָיו, אֶת-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן וַעֲמָלֵק; וַיֵּלֶךְ, וַיַּךְ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּירְשׁוּ, אֶת-עִיר הַתְּמָרִים.	13 And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek; and he went and smote Israel, and they possessed the city of palm-trees.
3.14 יד  וַיַּעַבְדוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-עֶגְלוֹן מֶלֶךְ-מוֹאָב, שְׁמוֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה.	14 And the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.
3.15 טו  וַיִּזְעֲקוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיָּקֶם יְהוָה לָהֶם מוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-אֵהוּד בֶּן-גֵּרָא בֶּן-הַיְמִינִי, אִישׁ אִטֵּר יַד-יְמִינוֹ; וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּיָדוֹ מִנְחָה, לְעֶגְלוֹן מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב.	15 But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised them up a saviour, Ehud the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a man left-handed; and the children of Israel sent a present by him unto Eglon the king of Moab.
3.16 טז  וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ אֵהוּד חֶרֶב, וְלָהּ שְׁנֵי פֵיוֹת--גֹּמֶד אָרְכָּהּ; וַיַּחְגֹּר אוֹתָהּ מִתַּחַת לְמַדָּיו, עַל יֶרֶךְ יְמִינוֹ.	16 And Ehud made him a sword which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he girded it under his raiment upon his right thigh.
3.17 יז  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, לְעֶגְלוֹן, מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב; וְעֶגְלוֹן, אִישׁ בָּרִיא מְאֹד.	17 And he offered the present unto Eglon king of Moab--now Eglon was a very fat man.
3.18 יח  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר כִּלָּה, לְהַקְרִיב אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה; וַיְשַׁלַּח, אֶת-הָעָם, נֹשְׂאֵי, הַמִּנְחָה.	18 And when he had made an end of offering the present, he sent away the people that bore the present.
3.19 יט  וְהוּא שָׁב, מִן-הַפְּסִילִים אֲשֶׁר אֶת-הַגִּלְגָּל, וַיֹּאמֶר, דְּבַר-סֵתֶר לִי אֵלֶיךָ הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר הָס--וַיֵּצְאוּ מֵעָלָיו, כָּל-הָעֹמְדִים עָלָיו.	19 But he himself turned back from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said: 'I have a secret errand unto thee, O king.' And he said: 'Keep silence.' And all that stood by him went out from him.
3.20 כ  וְאֵהוּד בָּא אֵלָיו, וְהוּא-יֹשֵׁב בַּעֲלִיַּת הַמְּקֵרָה אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ לְבַדּוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵהוּד, דְּבַר-אֱלֹהִים לִי אֵלֶיךָ; וַיָּקָם, מֵעַל הַכִּסֵּא.	20 And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting by himself alone in his cool upper chamber. And Ehud said: 'I have a message from God unto thee.' And he arose out of his seat.
3.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵהוּד, אֶת-יַד שְׂמֹאלוֹ, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הַחֶרֶב, מֵעַל יֶרֶךְ יְמִינוֹ; וַיִּתְקָעֶהָ, בְּבִטְנוֹ.	21 And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the sword from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly.
3.22 כב  וַיָּבֹא גַם-הַנִּצָּב אַחַר הַלַּהַב, וַיִּסְגֹּר הַחֵלֶב בְּעַד הַלַּהַב--כִּי לֹא שָׁלַף הַחֶרֶב, מִבִּטְנוֹ; וַיֵּצֵא, הַפַּרְשְׁדֹנָה.	22 And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, for he drew not the sword out of his belly; and it came out behind.
3.23 כג  וַיֵּצֵא אֵהוּד, הַמִּסְדְּרוֹנָה; וַיִּסְגֹּר דַּלְתוֹת הָעֲלִיָּה, בַּעֲדוֹ--וְנָעָל.	23 Then Ehud went forth into the porch, and shut the doors of the upper chamber upon him, and locked them.
3.24 כד  וְהוּא יָצָא, וַעֲבָדָיו בָּאוּ, וַיִּרְאוּ, וְהִנֵּה דַּלְתוֹת הָעֲלִיָּה נְעֻלוֹת; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אַךְ מֵסִיךְ הוּא אֶת-רַגְלָיו בַּחֲדַר הַמְּקֵרָה.	24 Now when he was gone out, his servants came; and they saw, and, behold, the doors of the upper chamber were locked; and they said: 'Surely he is covering his feet in the cabinet of the cool chamber.'
3.25 כה  וַיָּחִילוּ עַד-בּוֹשׁ, וְהִנֵּה אֵינֶנּוּ פֹתֵחַ דַּלְתוֹת הָעֲלִיָּה; וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-הַמַּפְתֵּחַ, וַיִּפְתָּחוּ, וְהִנֵּה אֲדֹנֵיהֶם, נֹפֵל אַרְצָה מֵת.	25 And they tarried till they were ashamed; and, behold, he opened not the doors of the upper chamber; therefore they took the key, and opened them; and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.
3.26 כו  וְאֵהוּד נִמְלַט, עַד הִתְמַהְמְהָם; וְהוּא עָבַר אֶת-הַפְּסִילִים, וַיִּמָּלֵט הַשְּׂעִירָתָה.	26 And Ehud escaped while they lingered, having passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirah.
3.27 כז  וַיְהִי בְּבוֹאוֹ, וַיִּתְקַע בַּשּׁוֹפָר בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וַיֵּרְדוּ עִמּוֹ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִן-הָהָר, וְהוּא לִפְנֵיהֶם.	27 And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a horn in the hill-country of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the hill-country, and he before them.
3.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם רִדְפוּ אַחֲרַי, כִּי-נָתַן יְהוָה אֶת-אֹיְבֵיכֶם אֶת-מוֹאָב בְּיֶדְכֶם; וַיֵּרְדוּ אַחֲרָיו, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אֶת-מַעְבְּרוֹת הַיַּרְדֵּן לְמוֹאָב, וְלֹא-נָתְנוּ אִישׁ, לַעֲבֹר.	28 And he said unto them: 'Follow after me; for the LORD hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand.' And they went down after him, and took the fords of the Jordan against the Moabites, and suffered not a man to pass over.
3.29 כט  וַיַּכּוּ אֶת-מוֹאָב בָּעֵת הַהִיא, כַּעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ--כָּל-שָׁמֵן, וְכָל-אִישׁ חָיִל; וְלֹא נִמְלַט, אִישׁ.	29 And they smote of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, every lusty man, and every man of valour; and there escaped not a man.
3.30 ל  וַתִּכָּנַע מוֹאָב בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, תַּחַת יַד יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַתִּשְׁקֹט הָאָרֶץ, שְׁמוֹנִים שָׁנָה.  {פ}	30 So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years. {P}
3.31 לא  וְאַחֲרָיו הָיָה, שַׁמְגַּר בֶּן-עֲנָת, וַיַּךְ אֶת-פְּלִשְׁתִּים שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, בְּמַלְמַד הַבָּקָר; וַיּוֹשַׁע גַּם-הוּא, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	31 And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, who smote of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox-goad; and he also saved Israel. {P}
4.1 א  וַיֹּסִפוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וְאֵהוּד, מֵת.	1 And the children of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, when Ehud was dead.
4.2 ב  וַיִּמְכְּרֵם יְהוָה, בְּיַד יָבִין מֶלֶךְ-כְּנַעַן, אֲשֶׁר מָלַךְ, בְּחָצוֹר; וְשַׂר-צְבָאוֹ, סִיסְרָא, וְהוּא יוֹשֵׁב, בַּחֲרֹשֶׁת הַגּוֹיִם.	2 And the LORD gave them over into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, who dwelt in Harosheth-goiim.
4.3 ג  וַיִּצְעֲקוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה:  כִּי תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת רֶכֶב-בַּרְזֶל, לוֹ, וְהוּא לָחַץ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּחָזְקָה, עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה.  {פ}	3 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD; for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel. {P}
4.4 ד  וּדְבוֹרָה אִשָּׁה נְבִיאָה, אֵשֶׁת לַפִּידוֹת--הִיא שֹׁפְטָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּעֵת הַהִיא.	4 Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
4.5 ה  וְהִיא יוֹשֶׁבֶת תַּחַת-תֹּמֶר דְּבוֹרָה, בֵּין הָרָמָה וּבֵין בֵּית-אֵל--בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם; וַיַּעֲלוּ אֵלֶיהָ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַמִּשְׁפָּט.	5 And she sat under the palm-tree of Deborah between Ramah and Beth-el in the hill-country of Ephraim; and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.
4.6 ו  וַתִּשְׁלַח, וַתִּקְרָא לְבָרָק בֶּן-אֲבִינֹעַם, מִקֶּדֶשׁ, נַפְתָּלִי; וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו הֲלֹא צִוָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵךְ וּמָשַׁכְתָּ בְּהַר תָּבוֹר, וְלָקַחְתָּ עִמְּךָ עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ, מִבְּנֵי נַפְתָּלִי וּמִבְּנֵי זְבֻלוּן.	6 And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh-naphtali, and said unto him: 'Hath not the LORD, the God of Israel, commanded, saying: Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun?
4.7 ז  וּמָשַׁכְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ אֶל-נַחַל קִישׁוֹן, אֶת-סִיסְרָא שַׂר-צְבָא יָבִין, וְאֶת-רִכְבּוֹ, וְאֶת-הֲמוֹנוֹ; וּנְתַתִּיהוּ, בְּיָדֶךָ.	7 And I will draw unto thee to the brook Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thy hand.
4.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ בָּרָק, אִם-תֵּלְכִי עִמִּי וְהָלָכְתִּי; וְאִם-לֹא תֵלְכִי עִמִּי, לֹא אֵלֵךְ.	8 And Barak said unto her: 'If thou wilt go with me, then I will go; but if thou wilt not go with me, I will not go.'
4.9 ט  וַתֹּאמֶר הָלֹךְ אֵלֵךְ עִמָּךְ, אֶפֶס כִּי לֹא תִהְיֶה תִּפְאַרְתְּךָ עַל-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה הוֹלֵךְ--כִּי בְיַד-אִשָּׁה, יִמְכֹּר יְהוָה אֶת-סִיסְרָא; וַתָּקָם דְּבוֹרָה וַתֵּלֶךְ עִם-בָּרָק, קֶדְשָׁה.	9 And she said: 'I will surely go with thee; notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thy honour; for the LORD will give Sisera over into the hand of a woman.' And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.
4.10 י  וַיַּזְעֵק בָּרָק אֶת-זְבוּלֻן וְאֶת-נַפְתָּלִי, קֶדְשָׁה, וַיַּעַל בְּרַגְלָיו, עֲשֶׂרֶת אַלְפֵי אִישׁ; וַתַּעַל עִמּוֹ, דְּבוֹרָה.	10 And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali together to Kedesh; and there went up ten thousand men at his feet; and Deborah went up with him.
4.11 יא  וְחֶבֶר הַקֵּינִי נִפְרָד מִקַּיִן, מִבְּנֵי חֹבָב חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה; וַיֵּט אָהֳלוֹ, עַד-אֵילוֹן בצענים (בְּצַעֲנַנִּים) אֲשֶׁר אֶת-קֶדֶשׁ.	11 Now Heber the Kenite had severed himself from the Kenites, even from the children of Hobab the father-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent as far as Elon-bezaanannim, which is by Kedesh.
4.12 יב  וַיַּגִּדוּ, לְסִיסְרָא:  כִּי עָלָה בָּרָק בֶּן-אֲבִינֹעַם, הַר-תָּבוֹר.	12 And they told Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.
4.13 יג  וַיַּזְעֵק סִיסְרָא אֶת-כָּל-רִכְבּוֹ, תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת רֶכֶב בַּרְזֶל, וְאֶת-כָּל-הָעָם, אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ--מֵחֲרֹשֶׁת הַגּוֹיִם, אֶל-נַחַל קִישׁוֹן.	13 And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth-goiim, unto the brook Kishon.
4.14 יד  וַתֹּאמֶר דְּבֹרָה אֶל-בָּרָק קוּם, כִּי זֶה הַיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר נָתַן יְהוָה אֶת-סִיסְרָא בְּיָדֶךָ--הֲלֹא יְהוָה, יָצָא לְפָנֶיךָ; וַיֵּרֶד בָּרָק מֵהַר תָּבוֹר, וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ אַחֲרָיו.	14 And Deborah said unto Barak: 'Up; for this is the day in which the LORD hath delivered Sisera into thy hand; is not the LORD gone out before thee?' So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.
4.15 טו  וַיָּהָם יְהוָה אֶת-סִיסְרָא וְאֶת-כָּל-הָרֶכֶב וְאֶת-כָּל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, לְפִי-חֶרֶב--לִפְנֵי בָרָק; וַיֵּרֶד סִיסְרָא מֵעַל הַמֶּרְכָּבָה, וַיָּנָס בְּרַגְלָיו.	15 And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; and Sisera alighted from his chariot, and fled away on his feet.
4.16 טז  וּבָרָק, רָדַף אַחֲרֵי הָרֶכֶב וְאַחֲרֵי הַמַּחֲנֶה, עַד, חֲרֹשֶׁת הַגּוֹיִם; וַיִּפֹּל כָּל-מַחֲנֵה סִיסְרָא, לְפִי-חֶרֶב--לֹא נִשְׁאַר, עַד-אֶחָד.	16 But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth-goiim; and all the host of Sisera fell by the edge of the sword; there was not a man left.
4.17 יז  וְסִיסְרָא, נָס בְּרַגְלָיו, אֶל-אֹהֶל יָעֵל, אֵשֶׁת חֶבֶר הַקֵּינִי:  כִּי שָׁלוֹם, בֵּין יָבִין מֶלֶךְ-חָצוֹר, וּבֵין, בֵּית חֶבֶר הַקֵּינִי.	17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite; for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.
4.18 יח  וַתֵּצֵא יָעֵל, לִקְרַאת סִיסְרָא, וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו סוּרָה אֲדֹנִי סוּרָה אֵלַי, אַל-תִּירָא; וַיָּסַר אֵלֶיהָ הָאֹהֱלָה, וַתְּכַסֵּהוּ בַּשְּׂמִיכָה.	18 And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him: 'Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not.' And he turned in unto her into the tent, and she covered him with a rug.
4.19 יט  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ הַשְׁקִינִי-נָא מְעַט-מַיִם, כִּי צָמֵאתִי; וַתִּפְתַּח אֶת-נֹאוד הֶחָלָב, וַתַּשְׁקֵהוּ--וַתְּכַסֵּהוּ.	19 And he said unto her: 'Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty.' And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.
4.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ, עֲמֹד פֶּתַח הָאֹהֶל; וְהָיָה אִם-אִישׁ יָבֹא וּשְׁאֵלֵךְ, וְאָמַר הֲיֵשׁ-פֹּה אִישׁ--וְאָמַרְתְּ אָיִן.	20 And he said unto her: 'Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and inquire of thee, and say: Is there any man here? that thou shalt say: No.'
4.21 כא  וַתִּקַּח יָעֵל אֵשֶׁת-חֶבֶר אֶת-יְתַד הָאֹהֶל וַתָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַמַּקֶּבֶת בְּיָדָהּ, וַתָּבוֹא אֵלָיו בַּלָּאט, וַתִּתְקַע אֶת-הַיָּתֵד בְּרַקָּתוֹ, וַתִּצְנַח בָּאָרֶץ; וְהוּא-נִרְדָּם וַיָּעַף, וַיָּמֹת.	21 Then Jael Heber's wife took a tent-pin, and took a hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the pin into his temples, and it pierced through into the ground; for he was in a deep sleep; so he swooned and died.
4.22 כב  וְהִנֵּה בָרָק, רֹדֵף אֶת-סִיסְרָא, וַתֵּצֵא יָעֵל לִקְרָאתוֹ, וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ לֵךְ וְאַרְאֶךָּ אֶת-הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-אַתָּה מְבַקֵּשׁ; וַיָּבֹא אֵלֶיהָ--וְהִנֵּה סִיסְרָא נֹפֵל מֵת, וְהַיָּתֵד בְּרַקָּתוֹ.	22 And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him: 'Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seekest.' And he came unto her; and, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the tent-pin was in his temples.
4.23 כג  וַיַּכְנַע אֱלֹהִים בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אֵת יָבִין מֶלֶךְ-כְּנָעַן, לִפְנֵי, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.
4.24 כד  וַתֵּלֶךְ יַד בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָלוֹךְ וְקָשָׁה, עַל, יָבִין מֶלֶךְ-כְּנָעַן--עַד אֲשֶׁר הִכְרִיתוּ, אֵת יָבִין מֶלֶךְ-כְּנָעַן.  {ש}	24 And the hand of the children of Israel prevailed more and more against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan. {P}
5.1 א  וַתָּשַׁר דְּבוֹרָה, וּבָרָק בֶּן-אֲבִינֹעַם,  {ס}  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא,  {ר}  לֵאמֹר.  {ס}	1 Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying:
5.2 ב  בִּפְרֹעַ פְּרָעוֹת בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל,  {ס}  בְּהִתְנַדֵּב  {ר}  עָם, בָּרְכוּ, יְהוָה.  {ס}	2 When men let grow their hair in Israel, when the people offer themselves willingly, bless ye the LORD.
5.3 ג  שִׁמְעוּ מְלָכִים, הַאֲזִינוּ  {ר}  רֹזְנִים:  {ס}  אָנֹכִי, לַיהוָה אָנֹכִי אָשִׁירָה,  {ס}  אֲזַמֵּר,  {ר}  לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	3 Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, unto the LORD will I sing; I will sing praise to the LORD, the God of Israel.
5.4 ד  יְהוָה, בְּצֵאתְךָ  {ר}  מִשֵּׂעִיר  {ס}  בְּצַעְדְּךָ מִשְּׂדֵה אֱדוֹם,  {ס}  אֶרֶץ  {ר}  רָעָשָׁה, גַּם-שָׁמַיִם נָטָפוּ;  {ס}  גַּם-עָבִים, נָטְפוּ  {ר}  מָיִם.  {ס}	4 LORD, when Thou didst go forth out of Seir, when Thou didst march out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, the heavens also dropped, yea, the clouds dropped water.
5.5 ה  הָרִים נָזְלוּ, מִפְּנֵי יְהוָה:  {ס}  זֶה  {ר}  סִינַי--מִפְּנֵי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	5 The mountains quaked at the presence of the LORD, even yon Sinai at the presence of the LORD, the God of Israel.
5.6 ו  בִּימֵי שַׁמְגַּר בֶּן-  {ר}  עֲנָת,  {ס}  בִּימֵי יָעֵל, חָדְלוּ, אֳרָחוֹת;  {ס}  וְהֹלְכֵי  {ר}  נְתִיבוֹת--יֵלְכוּ, אֳרָחוֹת עֲקַלְקַלּוֹת.  {ס}	6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways ceased, and the travellers walked through byways.
5.7 ז  חָדְלוּ פְרָזוֹן בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל,  {ר}  חָדֵלּוּ--  {ס}  עַד שַׁקַּמְתִּי דְּבוֹרָה, שַׁקַּמְתִּי אֵם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	7 The rulers ceased in Israel, they ceased, until that thou didst arise, Deborah, that thou didst arise a mother in Israel.
5.8 ח  יִבְחַר  {ר}  אֱלֹהִים חֲדָשִׁים, אָז לָחֶם שְׁעָרִים;  {ס}  מָגֵן אִם-יֵרָאֶה  {ר}  וָרֹמַח,  {ס}  בְּאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates; was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?
5.9 ט  לִבִּי  {ר}  לְחוֹקְקֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל,  {ס}  הַמִּתְנַדְּבִים בָּעָם; בָּרְכוּ,  {ר}  יְהוָה.  {ס}	9 My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the LORD.
5.10 י  רֹכְבֵי אֲתֹנוֹת צְחֹרוֹת  {ס}  יֹשְׁבֵי  {ר}  עַל-מִדִּין, וְהֹלְכֵי עַל-דֶּרֶךְ--שִׂיחוּ.  {ס}	10 Ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit on rich cloths, and ye that walk by the way, tell of it;
5.11 יא  מִקּוֹל מְחַצְצִים, בֵּין  {ר}  מַשְׁאַבִּים,  {ס}  שָׁם יְתַנּוּ צִדְקוֹת יְהוָה,  {ס}  צִדְקֹת  {ר}  פִּרְזוֹנוֹ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל;  {ס}  אָז יָרְדוּ לַשְּׁעָרִים, עַם-  {ר}  יְהוָה.  {ס}	11 Louder than the voice of archers, by the watering-troughs! there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the LORD, even the righteous acts of His rulers in Israel. Then the people of the LORD went down to the gates.
5.12 יב  עוּרִי עוּרִי דְּבוֹרָה,  {ס}  עוּרִי  {ר}  עוּרִי דַּבְּרִי-שִׁיר;  {ס}  קוּם בָּרָק וּשְׁבֵה שֶׁבְיְךָ, בֶּן-  {ר}  אֲבִינֹעַם.  {ס}	12 Awake, awake, Deborah; awake, awake, utter a song; arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.
5.13 יג  אָז יְרַד שָׂרִיד, לְאַדִּירִים עָם;  {ס}  יְהוָה,  {ר}  יְרַד-לִי בַּגִּבּוֹרִים.  {ס}	13 Then made He a remnant to have dominion over the nobles and the people; the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty.
5.14 יד  מִנִּי אֶפְרַיִם, שָׁרְשָׁם  {ר}  בַּעֲמָלֵק,  {ס}  אַחֲרֶיךָ בִנְיָמִין, בַּעֲמָמֶיךָ;  {ס}  מִנִּי  {ר}  מָכִיר, יָרְדוּ מְחֹקְקִים,  {ס}  וּמִזְּבוּלֻן, מֹשְׁכִים בְּשֵׁבֶט  {ר}  סֹפֵר.  {ס}	14 Out of Ephraim came they whose root is in Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among thy peoples; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the marshal's staff.
5.15 טו  וְשָׂרַי בְּיִשָּׂשכָר, עִם-דְּבֹרָה,  {ס}  וְיִשָּׂשכָר  {ר}  כֵּן בָּרָק, בָּעֵמֶק שֻׁלַּח בְּרַגְלָיו;  {ס}  בִּפְלַגּוֹת רְאוּבֵן, גְּדֹלִים חִקְקֵי-  {ר}  לֵב.  {ס}	15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; as was Issachar, so was Barak; into the valley they rushed forth at his feet. Among the divisions of Reuben there were great resolves of heart.
5.16 טז  לָמָּה יָשַׁבְתָּ, בֵּין הַמִּשְׁפְּתַיִם,  {ס}  לִשְׁמֹעַ,  {ר}  שְׁרִקוֹת עֲדָרִים;  {ס}  לִפְלַגּוֹת רְאוּבֵן, גְּדוֹלִים חִקְרֵי-  {ר}  לֵב.  {ס}	16 Why sattest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the pipings for the flocks? At the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
5.17 יז  גִּלְעָד, בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן שָׁכֵן,  {ס}  וְדָן,  {ר}  לָמָּה יָגוּר אֳנִיּוֹת;  {ס}  אָשֵׁר, יָשַׁב לְחוֹף  {ר}  יַמִּים,  {ס}  וְעַל מִפְרָצָיו, יִשְׁכּוֹן.  {ס}	17 Gilead abode beyond the Jordan; and Dan, why doth he sojourn by the ships? Asher dwelt at the shore of the sea, and abideth by its bays.
5.18 יח  זְבֻלוּן,  {ר}  עַם חֵרֵף נַפְשׁוֹ לָמוּת--  {ס}  וְנַפְתָּלִי:  עַל, מְרוֹמֵי  {ר}  שָׂדֶה.  {ס}	18 Zebulun is a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death, and Naphtali, upon the high places of the field.
5.19 יט  בָּאוּ מְלָכִים, נִלְחָמוּ,  {ס}  אָז  {ר}  נִלְחֲמוּ מַלְכֵי כְנַעַן,  {ס}  בְּתַעְנַךְ עַל-מֵי  {ר}  מְגִדּוֹ;  {ס}  בֶּצַע כֶּסֶף, לֹא לָקָחוּ.  {ס}	19 The kings came, they fought; then fought the kings of Canaan, in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.
5.20 כ  מִן-  {ר}  שָׁמַיִם, נִלְחָמוּ;  {ס}  הַכּוֹכָבִים, מִמְּסִלּוֹתָם, נִלְחֲמוּ, עִם-  {ר}  סִיסְרָא.  {ס}	20 They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
5.21 כא  נַחַל קִישׁוֹן גְּרָפָם,  {ס}  נַחַל  {ר}  קְדוּמִים נַחַל קִישׁוֹן;  {ס}  תִּדְרְכִי נַפְשִׁי,  {ר}  עֹז.  {ס}	21 The brook Kishon swept them away, that ancient brook, the brook Kishon. O my soul, tread them down with strength.
5.22 כב  אָז הָלְמוּ, עִקְּבֵי-סוּס,  {ס}  מִדַּהֲרוֹת,  {ר}  דַּהֲרוֹת אַבִּירָיו.  {ס}	22 Then did the horsehoofs stamp by reason of the prancings, the prancings of their mighty ones.
5.23 כג  אוֹרוּ מֵרוֹז, אָמַר מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה--אֹרוּ אָרוֹר,  {ר}  יֹשְׁבֶיהָ:  {ס}  כִּי לֹא-בָאוּ לְעֶזְרַת יְהוָה,  {ס}  לְעֶזְרַת  {ר}  יְהוָה בַּגִּבּוֹרִים.  {ס}	23 'Curse ye Meroz', said the angel of the LORD, 'Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help of the LORD against the mighty.'
5.24 כד  תְּבֹרַךְ, מִנָּשִׁים--יָעֵל, אֵשֶׁת חֶבֶר  {ר}  הַקֵּינִי:  {ס}  מִנָּשִׁים בָּאֹהֶל, תְּבֹרָךְ.  {ס}	24 Blessed above women shall Jael be, the wife of Heber the Kenite, above women in the tent shall she be blessed.
5.25 כה  מַיִם  {ר}  שָׁאַל, חָלָב נָתָנָה;  {ס}  בְּסֵפֶל אַדִּירִים, הִקְרִיבָה  {ר}  חֶמְאָה.  {ס}	25 Water he asked, milk she gave him; in a lordly bowl she brought him curd.
5.26 כו  יָדָהּ לַיָּתֵד תִּשְׁלַחְנָה,  {ס}  וִימִינָהּ  {ר}  לְהַלְמוּת עֲמֵלִים;  {ס}  וְהָלְמָה סִיסְרָא מָחֲקָה  {ר}  רֹאשׁוֹ,  {ס}  וּמָחֲצָה וְחָלְפָה רַקָּתוֹ.  {ס}	26 Her hand she put to the tent-pin, and her right hand to the workmen's hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote through his head, yea, she pierced and struck through his temples.
5.27 כז  בֵּין  {ר}  רַגְלֶיהָ, כָּרַע נָפַל שָׁכָב:  {ס}  בֵּין רַגְלֶיהָ, כָּרַע  {ר}  נָפָל,  {ס}  בַּאֲשֶׁר כָּרַע, שָׁם נָפַל שָׁדוּד.  {ס}	27 At her feet he sunk, he fell, he lay; at her feet he sunk, he fell; where he sunk, there he fell down dead.
5.28 כח  בְּעַד  {ר}  הַחַלּוֹן נִשְׁקְפָה וַתְּיַבֵּב אֵם סִיסְרָא, בְּעַד הָאֶשְׁנָב:  {ס}  מַדּוּעַ, בֹּשֵׁשׁ רִכְבּוֹ  {ר}  לָבוֹא--  {ס}  מַדּוּעַ אֶחֱרוּ, פַּעֲמֵי מַרְכְּבוֹתָיו.  {ס}	28 Through the window she looked forth, and peered, the mother of Sisera, through the lattice: 'Why is his chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariots?
5.29 כט  חַכְמוֹת  {ר}  שָׂרוֹתֶיהָ, תַּעֲנֶינָּה;  {ס}  אַף-הִיא, תָּשִׁיב אֲמָרֶיהָ  {ר}  לָהּ.  {ס}	29 The wisest of her princesses answer her, yea, she returneth answer to herself:
5.30 ל  הֲלֹא יִמְצְאוּ יְחַלְּקוּ שָׁלָל,  {ס}  רַחַם  {ר}  רַחֲמָתַיִם לְרֹאשׁ גֶּבֶר--  {ס}  שְׁלַל צְבָעִים  {ר}  לְסִיסְרָא,  {ס}  שְׁלַל צְבָעִים רִקְמָה:  {ס}  צֶבַע  {ר}  רִקְמָתַיִם, לְצַוְּארֵי שָׁלָל.  {ס}	30 'Are they not finding, are they not dividing the spoil? A damsel, two damsels to every man; to Sisera a spoil of dyed garments, a spoil of dyed garments of embroidery, two dyed garments of broidery for the neck of every spoiler?'
5.31 לא  כֵּן יֹאבְדוּ כָל-אוֹיְבֶיךָ, יְהוָה,  {ר}  וְאֹהֲבָיו, כְּצֵאת הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ בִּגְבֻרָתוֹ;  {ס}  וַתִּשְׁקֹט הָאָרֶץ, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה.  {ר}  {ש}	31 So perish all Thine enemies, O LORD; but they that love Him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years. {P}
6.1 א  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּתְּנֵם יְהוָה בְּיַד-מִדְיָן, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים.	1 And the children of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.
6.2 ב  וַתָּעָז יַד-מִדְיָן, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; מִפְּנֵי מִדְיָן עָשׂוּ לָהֶם בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַמִּנְהָרוֹת אֲשֶׁר בֶּהָרִים, וְאֶת-הַמְּעָרוֹת, וְאֶת-הַמְּצָדוֹת.	2 And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel; and because of Midian the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains, and the caves, and the strongholds.
6.3 ג  וְהָיָה, אִם-זָרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל--וְעָלָה מִדְיָן וַעֲמָלֵק וּבְנֵי-קֶדֶם, וְעָלוּ עָלָיו.	3 And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children of the east; they came up against them;
6.4 ד  וַיַּחֲנוּ עֲלֵיהֶם, וַיַּשְׁחִיתוּ אֶת-יְבוּל הָאָרֶץ, עַד-בּוֹאֲךָ, עַזָּה; וְלֹא-יַשְׁאִירוּ מִחְיָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וְשֶׂה וָשׁוֹר וַחֲמוֹר.	4 and they encamped against them, and destroyed the produce of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.
6.5 ה  כִּי הֵם וּמִקְנֵיהֶם יַעֲלוּ וְאָהֳלֵיהֶם, יבאו (וּבָאוּ) כְדֵי-אַרְבֶּה לָרֹב, וְלָהֶם וְלִגְמַלֵּיהֶם, אֵין מִסְפָּר; וַיָּבֹאוּ בָאָרֶץ, לְשַׁחֲתָהּ.	5 For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came in as locusts for multitude; both they and their camels were without number; and they came into the land to destroy it.
6.6 ו  וַיִּדַּל יִשְׂרָאֵל מְאֹד, מִפְּנֵי מִדְיָן; וַיִּזְעֲקוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה.  {פ}	6 And Israel was brought very low because of Midian; and the children of Israel cried unto the LORD. {P}
6.7 ז  וַיְהִי, כִּי-זָעֲקוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוָה, עַל, אֹדוֹת מִדְיָן.	7 And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD because of Midian,
6.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁלַח יְהוָה אִישׁ נָבִיא, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם כֹּה-אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אָנֹכִי הֶעֱלֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם מִמִּצְרַיִם, וָאֹצִיא אֶתְכֶם, מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים.	8 that the LORD sent a prophet unto the children of Israel; and he said unto them: 'Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage;
6.9 ט  וָאַצִּל אֶתְכֶם מִיַּד מִצְרַיִם, וּמִיַּד כָּל-לֹחֲצֵיכֶם; וָאֲגָרֵשׁ אוֹתָם מִפְּנֵיכֶם, וָאֶתְּנָה לָכֶם אֶת-אַרְצָם.	9 and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drove them out from before you, and gave you their land.
6.10 י  וָאֹמְרָה לָכֶם, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--לֹא תִירְאוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם יוֹשְׁבִים בְּאַרְצָם; וְלֹא שְׁמַעְתֶּם, בְּקוֹלִי.  {פ}	10 And I said unto you: I am the LORD your God; ye shall not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but ye have not hearkened unto My voice.' {P}
6.11 יא  וַיָּבֹא מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, וַיֵּשֶׁב תַּחַת הָאֵלָה אֲשֶׁר בְּעָפְרָה, אֲשֶׁר לְיוֹאָשׁ, אֲבִי הָעֶזְרִי; וְגִדְעוֹן בְּנוֹ, חֹבֵט חִטִּים בַּגַּת, לְהָנִיס, מִפְּנֵי מִדְיָן.	11 And the angel of the LORD came, and sat under the terebinth which was in Ophrah, that belonged unto Joash the Abiezrite; and his son Gideon was beating out wheat in the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.
6.12 יב  וַיֵּרָא אֵלָיו, מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, יְהוָה עִמְּךָ גִּבּוֹר הֶחָיִל.	12 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him: 'The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.'
6.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו גִּדְעוֹן, בִּי אֲדֹנִי, וְיֵשׁ יְהוָה עִמָּנוּ, וְלָמָּה מְצָאַתְנוּ כָּל-זֹאת; וְאַיֵּה כָל-נִפְלְאֹתָיו אֲשֶׁר סִפְּרוּ-לָנוּ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ לֵאמֹר, הֲלֹא מִמִּצְרַיִם הֶעֱלָנוּ יְהוָה, וְעַתָּה נְטָשָׁנוּ יְהוָה, וַיִּתְּנֵנוּ בְּכַף-מִדְיָן.	13 And Gideon said unto him: 'Oh, my lord, if the LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where are all His wondrous works which our fathers told us of, saying: Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now the LORD hath cast us off, and delivered us into the hand of Midian.'
6.14 יד  וַיִּפֶן אֵלָיו, יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמֶר לֵךְ בְּכֹחֲךָ זֶה, וְהוֹשַׁעְתָּ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִכַּף מִדְיָן:  הֲלֹא, שְׁלַחְתִּיךָ.	14 And the LORD turned towards him, and said: 'Go in this thy might, and save Israel from the hand of Midian; have not I sent thee?'
6.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו בִּי אֲדֹנָי, בַּמָּה אוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל; הִנֵּה אַלְפִּי הַדַּל בִּמְנַשֶּׁה, וְאָנֹכִי הַצָּעִיר בְּבֵית אָבִי.	15 And he said unto him: 'Oh, my lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my family is the poorest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.'
6.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו יְהוָה, כִּי אֶהְיֶה עִמָּךְ; וְהִכִּיתָ אֶת-מִדְיָן, כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד.	16 And the LORD said unto him: 'Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.'
6.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אִם-נָא מָצָאתִי חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ; וְעָשִׂיתָ לִּי אוֹת, שָׁאַתָּה מְדַבֵּר עִמִּי.	17 And he said unto him: 'If now I have found favour in thy sight, then show me a sign that it is thou that talkest with me.
6.18 יח  אַל-נָא תָמֻשׁ מִזֶּה, עַד-בֹּאִי אֵלֶיךָ, וְהֹצֵאתִי אֶת-מִנְחָתִי, וְהִנַּחְתִּי לְפָנֶיךָ; וַיֹּאמַר, אָנֹכִי אֵשֵׁב עַד שׁוּבֶךָ.	18 Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and lay it before thee.' And he said: 'I will tarry until thou come back.'
6.19 יט  וְגִדְעוֹן בָּא, וַיַּעַשׂ גְּדִי-עִזִּים וְאֵיפַת-קֶמַח מַצּוֹת, הַבָּשָׂר שָׂם בַּסַּל, וְהַמָּרַק שָׂם בַּפָּרוּר; וַיּוֹצֵא אֵלָיו אֶל-תַּחַת הָאֵלָה, וַיַּגַּשׁ.  {פ}	19 And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of meal; the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the terebinth, and presented it. {P}
6.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו מַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים, קַח אֶת-הַבָּשָׂר וְאֶת-הַמַּצּוֹת וְהַנַּח אֶל-הַסֶּלַע הַלָּז, וְאֶת-הַמָּרַק, שְׁפוֹךְ; וַיַּעַשׂ, כֵּן.	20 And the angel of God said unto him: 'Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.' And he did so.
6.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, אֶת-קְצֵה הַמִּשְׁעֶנֶת אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדוֹ, וַיִּגַּע בַּבָּשָׂר, וּבַמַּצּוֹת; וַתַּעַל הָאֵשׁ מִן-הַצּוּר, וַתֹּאכַל אֶת-הַבָּשָׂר וְאֶת-הַמַּצּוֹת, וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, הָלַךְ מֵעֵינָיו.	21 Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there went up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and the angel of the LORD departed out of his sight.
6.22 כב  וַיַּרְא גִּדְעוֹן, כִּי-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה הוּא; וַיֹּאמֶר גִּדְעוֹן, אֲהָהּ אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה--כִּי-עַל-כֵּן רָאִיתִי מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, פָּנִים אֶל-פָּנִים.	22 And Gideon saw that he was the angel of the LORD; and Gideon said: 'Alas, O Lord GOD! forasmuch as I have seen the angel of the LORD face to face.'
6.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ יְהוָה שָׁלוֹם לְךָ, אַל-תִּירָא:  לֹא, תָּמוּת.	23 And the LORD said unto him: 'Peace be unto thee; fear not; thou shalt not die.'
6.24 כד  וַיִּבֶן שָׁם גִּדְעוֹן מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה, וַיִּקְרָא-לוֹ יְהוָה שָׁלוֹם; עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--עוֹדֶנּוּ, בְּעָפְרָת אֲבִי הָעֶזְרִי.  {ס}	24 Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it 'Adonai-shalom'; unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. {S}
6.25 כה  וַיְהִי, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ יְהוָה קַח אֶת-פַּר-הַשּׁוֹר אֲשֶׁר לְאָבִיךָ, וּפַר הַשֵּׁנִי שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים; וְהָרַסְתָּ, אֶת-מִזְבַּח הַבַּעַל אֲשֶׁר לְאָבִיךָ, וְאֶת-הָאֲשֵׁרָה אֲשֶׁר-עָלָיו, תִּכְרֹת.	25 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him: 'Take thy father's bullock, and the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the Asherah that is by it;
6.26 כו  וּבָנִיתָ מִזְבֵּחַ לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, עַל רֹאשׁ הַמָּעוֹז הַזֶּה--בַּמַּעֲרָכָה; וְלָקַחְתָּ, אֶת-הַפָּר הַשֵּׁנִי, וְהַעֲלִיתָ עוֹלָה, בַּעֲצֵי הָאֲשֵׁרָה אֲשֶׁר תִּכְרֹת.	26 and build an altar unto the LORD thy God upon the top of this stronghold, in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt-offering with the wood of the Asherah which thou shalt cut down.'
6.27 כז  וַיִּקַּח גִּדְעוֹן עֲשָׂרָה אֲנָשִׁים, מֵעֲבָדָיו, וַיַּעַשׂ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר אֵלָיו יְהוָה; וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר יָרֵא אֶת-בֵּית אָבִיו וְאֶת-אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, מֵעֲשׂוֹת יוֹמָם--וַיַּעַשׂ לָיְלָה.	27 Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had spoken unto him; and it came to pass, because he feared his father's household and the men of the city, so that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.
6.28 כח  וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, בַּבֹּקֶר, וְהִנֵּה נֻתַּץ מִזְבַּח הַבַּעַל, וְהָאֲשֵׁרָה אֲשֶׁר-עָלָיו כֹּרָתָה; וְאֵת, הַפָּר הַשֵּׁנִי, הֹעֲלָה, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ הַבָּנוּי.	28 And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken down, and the Asherah was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.
6.29 כט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ, מִי עָשָׂה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה; וַיִּדְרְשׁוּ, וַיְבַקְשׁוּ--וַיֹּאמְרוּ, גִּדְעוֹן בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ עָשָׂה הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	29 And they said one to another: 'Who hath done this thing?' And when they inquired and asked, they said: 'Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing.'
6.30 ל  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר, אֶל-יוֹאָשׁ, הוֹצֵא אֶת-בִּנְךָ, וְיָמֹת:  כִּי נָתַץ אֶת-מִזְבַּח הַבַּעַל, וְכִי כָרַת הָאֲשֵׁרָה אֲשֶׁר-עָלָיו.	30 Then the men of the city said unto Joash: 'Bring out thy son, that he may die; because he hath broken down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the Asherah that was by it.'
6.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר יוֹאָשׁ לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-עָמְדוּ עָלָיו הַאַתֶּם תְּרִיבוּן לַבַּעַל, אִם-אַתֶּם תּוֹשִׁיעוּן אוֹתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יָרִיב לוֹ יוּמַת, עַד-הַבֹּקֶר; אִם-אֱלֹהִים הוּא יָרֶב לוֹ, כִּי נָתַץ אֶת-מִזְבְּחוֹ.	31 And Joash said unto all that stood against him: 'Will ye contend for Baal? or will ye save him? he that will contend for him, shall be put to death before morning; if he be a god, let him contend for himself, because one hath broken down his altar.'
6.32 לב  וַיִּקְרָא-לוֹ בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא, יְרֻבַּעַל לֵאמֹר:  יָרֶב בּוֹ הַבַּעַל, כִּי נָתַץ אֶת-מִזְבְּחוֹ.  {ס}	32 Therefore on that day he was called Jerubbaal, saying: 'Let Baal contend against him, because he hath broken down his altar.' {S}
6.33 לג  וְכָל-מִדְיָן וַעֲמָלֵק וּבְנֵי-קֶדֶם, נֶאֶסְפוּ יַחְדָּו; וַיַּעַבְרוּ וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּעֵמֶק יִזְרְעֶאל.	33 Now all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east assembled themselves together; and they passed over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel.
6.34 לד  וְרוּחַ יְהוָה, לָבְשָׁה אֶת-גִּדְעוֹן; וַיִּתְקַע, בַּשּׁוֹפָר, וַיִּזָּעֵק אֲבִיעֶזֶר, אַחֲרָיו.	34 But the spirit of the LORD clothed Gideon; and he blew a horn; and Abiezer was gathered together after him.
6.35 לה  וּמַלְאָכִים שָׁלַח בְּכָל-מְנַשֶּׁה, וַיִּזָּעֵק גַּם-הוּא אַחֲרָיו; וּמַלְאָכִים שָׁלַח, בְּאָשֵׁר וּבִזְבֻלוּן וּבְנַפְתָּלִי, וַיַּעֲלוּ, לִקְרָאתָם.	35 And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; and they also were gathered together after him; and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.
6.36 לו  וַיֹּאמֶר גִּדְעוֹן, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים:  אִם-יֶשְׁךָ מוֹשִׁיעַ בְּיָדִי, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ.	36 And Gideon said unto God: 'If Thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as Thou hast spoken,
6.37 לז  הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי, מַצִּיג אֶת-גִּזַּת הַצֶּמֶר--בַּגֹּרֶן:  אִם טַל יִהְיֶה עַל-הַגִּזָּה לְבַדָּהּ, וְעַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ חֹרֶב--וְיָדַעְתִּי כִּי-תוֹשִׁיעַ בְּיָדִי אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ.	37 behold, I will put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; if there be dew on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground, then shall I know that Thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as Thou hast spoken.'
6.38 לח  וַיְהִי-כֵן--וַיַּשְׁכֵּם מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיָּזַר אֶת-הַגִּזָּה; וַיִּמֶץ טַל מִן-הַגִּזָּה, מְלוֹא הַסֵּפֶל מָיִם.	38 And it was so; for he rose up early on the morrow, and pressed the fleece together, and wrung dew out of the fleece, a bowlful of water.
6.39 לט  וַיֹּאמֶר גִּדְעוֹן, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, אַל-יִחַר אַפְּךָ בִּי, וַאֲדַבְּרָה אַךְ הַפָּעַם; אֲנַסֶּה נָּא-רַק-הַפַּעַם, בַּגִּזָּה--יְהִי-נָא חֹרֶב אֶל-הַגִּזָּה לְבַדָּהּ, וְעַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ יִהְיֶה-טָּל.	39 And Gideon said unto God: 'Let not Thine anger be kindled against me, and I will speak but this once: let me make trial, I pray Thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.'
6.40 מ  וַיַּעַשׂ אֱלֹהִים כֵּן, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא; וַיְהִי-חֹרֶב אֶל-הַגִּזָּה לְבַדָּהּ, וְעַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ הָיָה טָל.  {פ}	40 And God did so that night; for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground. {P}
7.1 א  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם יְרֻבַּעַל הוּא גִדְעוֹן, וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, וַיַּחֲנוּ, עַל-עֵין חֲרֹד; וּמַחֲנֵה מִדְיָן הָיָה-לוֹ מִצָּפוֹן, מִגִּבְעַת הַמּוֹרֶה בָּעֵמֶק.  {ס}	1 Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside En-harod; and the camp of Midian was on the north side of them, by Gibeath-moreh, in the valley. {S}
7.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-גִּדְעוֹן, רַב הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אִתָּךְ, מִתִּתִּי אֶת-מִדְיָן בְּיָדָם:  פֶּן-יִתְפָּאֵר עָלַי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר, יָדִי הוֹשִׁיעָה לִּי.	2 And the LORD said unto Gideon: 'The people that are with thee are too many for Me to give the Midianites into their hand, lest Israel vaunt themselves against Me, saying: mine own hand hath saved me.
7.3 ג  וְעַתָּה, קְרָא נָא בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם לֵאמֹר, מִי-יָרֵא וְחָרֵד, יָשֹׁב וְיִצְפֹּר מֵהַר הַגִּלְעָד; וַיָּשָׁב מִן-הָעָם, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנַיִם אֶלֶף, וַעֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים, נִשְׁאָרוּ.  {ס}	3 Now therefore make proclamation in the ears of the people, saying: Whosoever is fearful and trembling, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead.' And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand. {S}
7.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-גִּדְעוֹן, עוֹד הָעָם רָב, הוֹרֵד אוֹתָם אֶל-הַמַּיִם, וְאֶצְרְפֶנּוּ לְךָ שָׁם; וְהָיָה אֲשֶׁר אֹמַר אֵלֶיךָ זֶה יֵלֵךְ אִתָּךְ, הוּא יֵלֵךְ אִתָּךְ, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-אֹמַר אֵלֶיךָ זֶה לֹא-יֵלֵךְ עִמָּךְ, הוּא לֹא יֵלֵךְ.	4 And the LORD said unto Gideon: 'The people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there; and it shall be, that of whom I say to thee: This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee: This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.'
7.5 ה  וַיּוֹרֶד אֶת-הָעָם, אֶל-הַמָּיִם; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-גִּדְעוֹן, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יָלֹק בִּלְשׁוֹנוֹ מִן-הַמַּיִם כַּאֲשֶׁר יָלֹק הַכֶּלֶב תַּצִּיג אוֹתוֹ לְבָד, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִכְרַע עַל-בִּרְכָּיו, לִשְׁתּוֹת.	5 So he brought down the people unto the water; and the LORD said unto Gideon: 'Everyone that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.'
7.6 ו  וַיְהִי, מִסְפַּר הַמְלַקְקִים בְּיָדָם אֶל-פִּיהֶם--שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת, אִישׁ; וְכֹל יֶתֶר הָעָם, כָּרְעוּ עַל-בִּרְכֵיהֶם לִשְׁתּוֹת מָיִם.  {ס}	6 And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, was three hundred men; but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water. {S}
7.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-גִּדְעוֹן, בִּשְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת הָאִישׁ הַמְלַקְקִים אוֹשִׁיעַ אֶתְכֶם, וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-מִדְיָן, בְּיָדֶךָ; וְכָל-הָעָם--יֵלְכוּ, אִישׁ לִמְקֹמוֹ.	7 And the LORD said unto Gideon: 'By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thy hand; and let all the people go every man unto his place.'
7.8 ח  וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-צֵדָה הָעָם בְּיָדָם וְאֵת שׁוֹפְרֹתֵיהֶם, וְאֵת כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל שִׁלַּח אִישׁ לְאֹהָלָיו, וּבִשְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת הָאִישׁ, הֶחֱזִיק; וּמַחֲנֵה מִדְיָן, הָיָה לוֹ מִתַּחַת בָּעֵמֶק.  {פ}	8 So they took the victuals of the people in their hand, and their horns; and he sent all the men of Israel every man unto his tent, but retained the three hundred men; and the camp of Midian was beneath him in the valley. {P}
7.9 ט  וַיְהִי, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו יְהוָה, קוּם רֵד בַּמַּחֲנֶה:  כִּי נְתַתִּיו, בְּיָדֶךָ.	9 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him: 'Arise, get thee down upon the camp; for I have delivered it into thy hand.
7.10 י  וְאִם-יָרֵא אַתָּה, לָרֶדֶת--רֵד אַתָּה וּפֻרָה נַעַרְךָ, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה.	10 But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Purah thy servant down to the camp.
7.11 יא  וְשָׁמַעְתָּ, מַה-יְדַבֵּרוּ, וְאַחַר תֶּחֱזַקְנָה יָדֶיךָ, וְיָרַדְתָּ בַּמַּחֲנֶה; וַיֵּרֶד הוּא וּפֻרָה נַעֲרוֹ, אֶל-קְצֵה הַחֲמֻשִׁים אֲשֶׁר בַּמַּחֲנֶה.	11 And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thy hands be strengthened to go down upon the camp.' Then went he down with Purah his servant unto the outermost part of the armed men that were in the camp.
7.12 יב  וּמִדְיָן וַעֲמָלֵק וְכָל-בְּנֵי-קֶדֶם נֹפְלִים בָּעֵמֶק, כָּאַרְבֶּה לָרֹב; וְלִגְמַלֵּיהֶם אֵין מִסְפָּר, כַּחוֹל שֶׁעַל-שְׂפַת הַיָּם לָרֹב.	12 Now the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the valley like locusts for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the sand which is upon the sea-shore for multitude.
7.13 יג  וַיָּבֹא גִדְעוֹן--וְהִנֵּה-אִישׁ, מְסַפֵּר לְרֵעֵהוּ חֲלוֹם; וַיֹּאמֶר הִנֵּה חֲלוֹם חָלַמְתִּי, וְהִנֵּה צְלִיל לֶחֶם שְׂעֹרִים מִתְהַפֵּךְ בְּמַחֲנֵה מִדְיָן, וַיָּבֹא עַד-הָאֹהֶל וַיַּכֵּהוּ וַיִּפֹּל וַיַּהַפְכֵהוּ לְמַעְלָה, וְנָפַל הָאֹהֶל.	13 And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man telling a dream unto his fellow, and saying: 'Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian, and came unto the tent, and smote it that it fell, and turned it upside down, that the tent lay flat.'
7.14 יד  וַיַּעַן רֵעֵהוּ וַיֹּאמֶר, אֵין זֹאת, בִּלְתִּי אִם-חֶרֶב גִּדְעוֹן בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ, אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל:  נָתַן הָאֱלֹהִים בְּיָדוֹ, אֶת-מִדְיָן וְאֶת-כָּל-הַמַּחֲנֶה.  {פ}	14 And his fellow answered and said: 'This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: into his hand God hath delivered Midian, and all the host.' {P}
7.15 טו  וַיְהִי כִשְׁמֹעַ גִּדְעוֹן אֶת-מִסְפַּר הַחֲלוֹם, וְאֶת-שִׁבְרוֹ--וַיִּשְׁתָּחוּ; וַיָּשָׁב, אֶל-מַחֲנֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמֶר קוּמוּ, כִּי-נָתַן יְהוָה בְּיֶדְכֶם אֶת-מַחֲנֵה מִדְיָן.	15 And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped; and he returned into the camp of Israel, and said: 'Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.'
7.16 טז  וַיַּחַץ אֶת-שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת הָאִישׁ, שְׁלֹשָׁה רָאשִׁים; וַיִּתֵּן שׁוֹפָרוֹת בְּיַד-כֻּלָּם וְכַדִּים רֵיקִים, וְלַפִּדִים בְּתוֹךְ הַכַּדִּים.	16 And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put into the hands of all of them horns, and empty pitchers, with torches within the pitchers.
7.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, מִמֶּנִּי תִרְאוּ וְכֵן תַּעֲשׂוּ; וְהִנֵּה אָנֹכִי בָא בִּקְצֵה הַמַּחֲנֶה, וְהָיָה כַאֲשֶׁר-אֶעֱשֶׂה כֵּן תַּעֲשׂוּן.	17 And he said unto them: 'Look on me, and do likewise; and, behold, when I come to the outermost part of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do.
7.18 יח  וְתָקַעְתִּי, בַּשּׁוֹפָר--אָנֹכִי, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר אִתִּי; וּתְקַעְתֶּם בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת גַּם-אַתֶּם, סְבִיבוֹת כָּל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, לַיהוָה וּלְגִדְעוֹן.  {פ}	18 When I blow the horn, I and all that are with me, then blow ye the horns also on every side of all the camp, and say: For the LORD and for Gideon!' {P}
7.19 יט  וַיָּבֹא גִדְעוֹן וּמֵאָה-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ בִּקְצֵה הַמַּחֲנֶה, רֹאשׁ הָאַשְׁמֹרֶת הַתִּיכוֹנָה--אַךְ הָקֵם הֵקִימוּ, אֶת-הַשֹּׁמְרִים; וַיִּתְקְעוּ, בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת, וְנָפוֹץ הַכַּדִּים, אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדָם.	19 So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outermost part of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch, when they had but newly set the watch; and they blew the horns, and broke in pieces the pitchers that were in their hands.
7.20 כ  וַיִּתְקְעוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת הָרָאשִׁים בַּשּׁוֹפָרוֹת, וַיִּשְׁבְּרוּ הַכַּדִּים, וַיַּחֲזִיקוּ בְיַד-שְׂמֹאולָם בַּלַּפִּדִים, וּבְיַד-יְמִינָם הַשּׁוֹפָרוֹת לִתְקוֹעַ; וַיִּקְרְאוּ, חֶרֶב לַיהוָה וּלְגִדְעוֹן.	20 And the three companies blew the horns, and broke the pitchers, and held the torches in their left hands, and the horns in their right hands wherewith to blow; and they cried: 'The sword for the LORD and for Gideon!'
7.21 כא  וַיַּעַמְדוּ אִישׁ תַּחְתָּיו, סָבִיב לַמַּחֲנֶה; וַיָּרָץ כָּל-הַמַּחֲנֶה וַיָּרִיעוּ, ויניסו (וַיָּנוּסוּ).	21 And they stood every man in his place round about the camp; and all the host ran; and they shouted, and fled.
7.22 כב  וַיִּתְקְעוּ, שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת הַשּׁוֹפָרוֹת, וַיָּשֶׂם יְהוָה אֵת חֶרֶב אִישׁ בְּרֵעֵהוּ, וּבְכָל-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וַיָּנָס הַמַּחֲנֶה עַד-בֵּית הַשִּׁטָּה, צְרֵרָתָה--עַד שְׂפַת-אָבֵל מְחוֹלָה, עַל-טַבָּת.	22 And they blew the three hundred horns, and the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host; and the host fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath.
7.23 כג  וַיִּצָּעֵק אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִנַּפְתָּלִי וּמִן-אָשֵׁר, וּמִן-כָּל-מְנַשֶּׁה; וַיִּרְדְּפוּ, אַחֲרֵי מִדְיָן.	23 And the men of Israel were gathered together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after Midian.
7.24 כד  וּמַלְאָכִים שָׁלַח גִּדְעוֹן בְּכָל-הַר אֶפְרַיִם לֵאמֹר, רְדוּ לִקְרַאת מִדְיָן וְלִכְדוּ לָהֶם אֶת-הַמַּיִם, עַד בֵּית בָּרָה, וְאֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן; וַיִּצָּעֵק כָּל-אִישׁ אֶפְרַיִם, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ אֶת-הַמַּיִם, עַד בֵּית בָּרָה, וְאֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן.	24 And Gideon sent messengers throughout all the hill-country of Ephraim, saying: 'Come down against Midian, and take before them the waters, as far as Beth-barah, and also the Jordan.' So all the men of Ephraim were gathered together, and took the waters as far as Beth-barah, and also the Jordan.
7.25 כה  וַיִּלְכְּדוּ שְׁנֵי-שָׂרֵי מִדְיָן אֶת-עֹרֵב וְאֶת-זְאֵב, וַיַּהַרְגוּ אֶת-עוֹרֵב בְּצוּר-עוֹרֵב וְאֶת-זְאֵב הָרְגוּ בְיֶקֶב-זְאֵב, וַיִּרְדְּפוּ, אֶל-מִדְיָן; וְרֹאשׁ-עֹרֵב וּזְאֵב--הֵבִיאוּ אֶל-גִּדְעוֹן, מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן.	25 And they took the two princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb at the Rock of Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the Winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian; and they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon beyond the Jordan.
8.1 א  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו אִישׁ אֶפְרַיִם, מָה-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה עָשִׂיתָ לָּנוּ, לְבִלְתִּי קְרֹאות לָנוּ, כִּי הָלַכְתָּ לְהִלָּחֵם בְּמִדְיָן; וַיְרִיבוּן אִתּוֹ, בְּחָזְקָה.	1 And the men of Ephraim said unto him: 'Why hast thou served us thus, that thou didst not call us when thou wentest to fight with Midian?' And they did chide with him sharply.
8.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, מֶה-עָשִׂיתִי עַתָּה כָּכֶם:  הֲלֹא, טוֹב עֹלְלוֹת אֶפְרַיִם--מִבְצִיר אֲבִיעֶזֶר.	2 And he said unto them: 'What have I now done in comparison with you? Is not the gleaning of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
8.3 ג  בְּיֶדְכֶם נָתַן אֱלֹהִים אֶת-שָׂרֵי מִדְיָן, אֶת-עֹרֵב וְאֶת-זְאֵב, וּמַה-יָּכֹלְתִּי, עֲשׂוֹת כָּכֶם; אָז, רָפְתָה רוּחָם מֵעָלָיו, בְּדַבְּרוֹ, הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה.	3 God hath delivered into your hand the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and what was I able to do in comparison with you?' Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.
8.4 ד  וַיָּבֹא גִדְעוֹן, הַיַּרְדֵּנָה; עֹבֵר הוּא, וּשְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ, עֲיֵפִים, וְרֹדְפִים.	4 And Gideon came to the Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing.
8.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר, לְאַנְשֵׁי סֻכּוֹת, תְּנוּ-נָא כִּכְּרוֹת לֶחֶם, לָעָם אֲשֶׁר בְּרַגְלָי:  כִּי-עֲיֵפִים הֵם--וְאָנֹכִי רֹדֵף אַחֲרֵי זֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע, מַלְכֵי מִדְיָן.	5 And he said unto the men of Succoth: 'Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that follow me; for they are faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.'
8.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, שָׂרֵי סֻכּוֹת, הֲכַף זֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע עַתָּה, בְּיָדֶךָ:  כִּי-נִתֵּן לִצְבָאֲךָ, לָחֶם.	6 And the princes of Succoth said: 'Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy power, that we should give bread unto thine army?'
8.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר גִּדְעוֹן--לָכֵן בְּתֵת יְהוָה אֶת-זֶבַח וְאֶת-צַלְמֻנָּע, בְּיָדִי:  וְדַשְׁתִּי, אֶת-בְּשַׂרְכֶם, אֶת-קוֹצֵי הַמִּדְבָּר, וְאֶת-הַבַּרְקֳנִים.	7 And Gideon said: 'Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.'
8.8 ח  וַיַּעַל מִשָּׁם פְּנוּאֵל, וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם כָּזֹאת; וַיַּעֲנוּ אוֹתוֹ אַנְשֵׁי פְנוּאֵל, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָנוּ אַנְשֵׁי סֻכּוֹת.	8 And he went up thence to Penuel, and spoke unto them in like manner; and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered.
8.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר גַּם-לְאַנְשֵׁי פְנוּאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  בְּשׁוּבִי בְשָׁלוֹם, אֶתֹּץ אֶת-הַמִּגְדָּל הַזֶּה.  {פ}	9 And he spoke also unto the men of Penuel, saying: 'When I come back in peace, I will break down this tower.' {P}
8.10 י  וְזֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע בַּקַּרְקֹר, וּמַחֲנֵיהֶם עִמָּם כַּחֲמֵשֶׁת עָשָׂר אֶלֶף--כֹּל הַנּוֹתָרִים, מִכֹּל מַחֲנֵה בְנֵי-קֶדֶם; וְהַנֹּפְלִים, מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף אִישׁ שֹׁלֵף חָרֶב.	10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the host of the children of the east; for there fell a hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.
8.11 יא  וַיַּעַל גִּדְעוֹן, דֶּרֶךְ הַשְּׁכוּנֵי בָאֳהָלִים, מִקֶּדֶם לְנֹבַח, וְיָגְבְּהָה; וַיַּךְ, אֶת-הַמַּחֲנֶה, וְהַמַּחֲנֶה, הָיָה בֶטַח.	11 And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was secure.
8.12 יב  וַיָּנֻסוּ, זֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע, וַיִּרְדֹּף, אַחֲרֵיהֶם; וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-שְׁנֵי מַלְכֵי מִדְיָן, אֶת-זֶבַח וְאֶת-צַלְמֻנָּע, וְכָל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, הֶחֱרִיד.	12 And Zebah and Zalmunna fled; and he pursued after them; and he took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.
8.13 יג  וַיָּשָׁב גִּדְעוֹן בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ, מִן-הַמִּלְחָמָה, מִלְמַעֲלֵה, הֶחָרֶס.	13 And Gideon the son of Joash returned from the battle from the ascent of Heres.
8.14 יד  וַיִּלְכָּד-נַעַר מֵאַנְשֵׁי סֻכּוֹת, וַיִּשְׁאָלֵהוּ; וַיִּכְתֹּב אֵלָיו אֶת-שָׂרֵי סֻכּוֹת, וְאֶת-זְקֵנֶיהָ--שִׁבְעִים וְשִׁבְעָה, אִישׁ.	14 And he caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and inquired of him; and he wrote down for him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof, seventy and seven men.
8.15 טו  וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי סֻכּוֹת, וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה זֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע:  אֲשֶׁר חֵרַפְתֶּם אוֹתִי לֵאמֹר, הֲכַף זֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע עַתָּה בְּיָדֶךָ, כִּי נִתֵּן לַאֲנָשֶׁיךָ הַיְּעֵפִים, לָחֶם.	15 And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said: 'Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, concerning whom ye did taunt me, saying: Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy power, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary?'
8.16 טז  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-זִקְנֵי הָעִיר, וְאֶת-קוֹצֵי הַמִּדְבָּר וְאֶת-הַבַּרְקֳנִים; וַיֹּדַע בָּהֶם, אֵת אַנְשֵׁי סֻכּוֹת.	16 And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.
8.17 יז  וְאֶת-מִגְדַּל פְּנוּאֵל, נָתָץ; וַיַּהֲרֹג, אֶת-אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר.	17 And he broke down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.
8.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-זֶבַח וְאֶל-צַלְמֻנָּע, אֵיפֹה הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר הֲרַגְתֶּם בְּתָבוֹר; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כָּמוֹךָ כְמוֹהֶם, אֶחָד, כְּתֹאַר בְּנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.	18 Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna: 'Where are the men whom ye slew at Tabor?' And they answered: 'As thou art, so were they; of one form with the children of a king.'
8.19 יט  וַיֹּאמַר, אַחַי בְּנֵי-אִמִּי הֵם; חַי-יְהוָה, לוּ הַחֲיִתֶם אוֹתָם--לֹא הָרַגְתִּי, אֶתְכֶם.	19 And he said: 'They were my brethren, the sons of my mother; as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.'
8.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר לְיֶתֶר בְּכוֹרוֹ, קוּם הֲרֹג אוֹתָם; וְלֹא-שָׁלַף הַנַּעַר חַרְבּוֹ כִּי יָרֵא, כִּי עוֹדֶנּוּ נָעַר.	20 And he said unto Jether his first-born: 'Up, and slay them.' But the youth drew not his sword; for he feared, because he was yet a youth.
8.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר זֶבַח וְצַלְמֻנָּע, קוּם אַתָּה וּפְגַע-בָּנוּ--כִּי כָאִישׁ, גְּבוּרָתוֹ; וַיָּקָם גִּדְעוֹן, וַיַּהֲרֹג אֶת-זֶבַח וְאֶת-צַלְמֻנָּע, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הַשַּׂהֲרֹנִים, אֲשֶׁר בְּצַוְּארֵי גְמַלֵּיהֶם.  {פ}	21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna said: 'Rise thou, and fall upon us; for as the man is, so is his strength.' And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took the crescents that were on their camels' necks. {P}
8.22 כב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-גִּדְעוֹן, מְשָׁל-בָּנוּ גַּם-אַתָּה, גַּם-בִּנְךָ גַּם בֶּן-בְּנֶךָ:  כִּי הוֹשַׁעְתָּנוּ, מִיַּד מִדְיָן.	22 Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon: 'Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also; for thou hast saved us out of the hand of Midian.'
8.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, גִּדְעוֹן, לֹא-אֶמְשֹׁל אֲנִי בָּכֶם, וְלֹא-יִמְשֹׁל בְּנִי בָּכֶם:  יְהוָה, יִמְשֹׁל בָּכֶם.	23 And Gideon said unto them: 'I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you; the LORD shall rule over you.'
8.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם גִּדְעוֹן, אֶשְׁאֲלָה מִכֶּם שְׁאֵלָה, וּתְנוּ-לִי, אִישׁ נֶזֶם שְׁלָלוֹ:  כִּי-נִזְמֵי זָהָב לָהֶם, כִּי יִשְׁמְעֵאלִים הֵם.	24 And Gideon said unto them: 'I would make a request of you, that ye would give me every man the ear-rings of his spoil.'--For they had golden ear-rings, because they were Ishmaelites.
8.25 כה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, נָתוֹן נִתֵּן; וַיִּפְרְשׂוּ, אֶת-הַשִּׂמְלָה, וַיַּשְׁלִיכוּ שָׁמָּה, אִישׁ נֶזֶם שְׁלָלוֹ.	25 And they answered: 'We will willingly give them.' And they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the ear-rings of his spoil.
8.26 כו  וַיְהִי, מִשְׁקַל נִזְמֵי הַזָּהָב אֲשֶׁר שָׁאָל, אֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע-מֵאוֹת, זָהָב--לְבַד מִן-הַשַּׂהֲרֹנִים וְהַנְּטִיפוֹת וּבִגְדֵי הָאַרְגָּמָן, שֶׁעַל מַלְכֵי מִדְיָן, וּלְבַד מִן-הָעֲנָקוֹת, אֲשֶׁר בְּצַוְּארֵי גְמַלֵּיהֶם.	26 And the weight of the golden ear-rings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside the crescents, and the pendants, and the purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels' necks.
8.27 כז  וַיַּעַשׂ אוֹתוֹ גִדְעוֹן לְאֵפוֹד, וַיַּצֵּג אוֹתוֹ בְעִירוֹ בְּעָפְרָה, וַיִּזְנוּ כָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל אַחֲרָיו, שָׁם; וַיְהִי לְגִדְעוֹן וּלְבֵיתוֹ, לְמוֹקֵשׁ.	27 And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah; and all Israel went astray after it there; and it became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.
8.28 כח  וַיִּכָּנַע מִדְיָן, לִפְנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלֹא יָסְפוּ, לָשֵׂאת רֹאשָׁם; וַתִּשְׁקֹט הָאָרֶץ אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, בִּימֵי גִדְעוֹן.  {פ}	28 So Midian was subdued before the children of Israel, and they lifted up their heads no more. And the land had rest forty years in the days of Gideon. {P}
8.29 כט  וַיֵּלֶךְ יְרֻבַּעַל בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ, וַיֵּשֶׁב בְּבֵיתוֹ.	29 And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.
8.30 ל  וּלְגִדְעוֹן, הָיוּ שִׁבְעִים בָּנִים, יֹצְאֵי, יְרֵכוֹ:  כִּי-נָשִׁים רַבּוֹת, הָיוּ לוֹ.	30 And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten; for he had many wives.
8.31 לא  וּפִילַגְשׁוֹ אֲשֶׁר בִּשְׁכֶם, יָלְדָה-לּוֹ גַם-הִיא בֵּן; וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, אֲבִימֶלֶךְ.	31 And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bore him a son, and he called his name Abimelech.
8.32 לב  וַיָּמָת גִּדְעוֹן בֶּן-יוֹאָשׁ, בְּשֵׂיבָה טוֹבָה; וַיִּקָּבֵר, בְּקֶבֶר יוֹאָשׁ אָבִיו, בְּעָפְרָה, אֲבִי הָעֶזְרִי.  {פ}	32 And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. {P}
8.33 לג  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר מֵת גִּדְעוֹן, וַיָּשׁוּבוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּזְנוּ אַחֲרֵי הַבְּעָלִים; וַיָּשִׂימוּ לָהֶם בַּעַל בְּרִית, לֵאלֹהִים.	33 And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel again went astray after the Baalim, and made Baal-berith their god.
8.34 לד  וְלֹא זָכְרוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, הַמַּצִּיל אוֹתָם מִיַּד כָּל-אֹיְבֵיהֶם, מִסָּבִיב.	34 And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who had delivered them out of the hand of all their enemies on every side;
8.35 לה  וְלֹא-עָשׂוּ חֶסֶד, עִם-בֵּית יְרֻבַּעַל גִּדְעוֹן:  כְּכָל-הַטּוֹבָה--אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	35 neither showed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shown unto Israel. {P}
9.1 א  וַיֵּלֶךְ אֲבִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-יְרֻבַּעַל שְׁכֶמָה, אֶל-אֲחֵי אִמּוֹ; וַיְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם, וְאֶל-כָּל-מִשְׁפַּחַת בֵּית-אֲבִי אִמּוֹ לֵאמֹר.	1 And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother's brethren, and spoke with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying:
9.2 ב  דַּבְּרוּ-נָא בְּאָזְנֵי כָל-בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, מַה-טּוֹב לָכֶם--הַמְשֹׁל בָּכֶם שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ כֹּל בְּנֵי יְרֻבַּעַל, אִם-מְשֹׁל בָּכֶם אִישׁ אֶחָד; וּזְכַרְתֶּם, כִּי-עַצְמְכֶם וּבְשַׂרְכֶם אָנִי.	2 'Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem: Which is better for you, that all the sons of Jerubbaal, who are threescore and ten persons, rule over you, or that one rule over you? remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.'
9.3 ג  וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֲחֵי-אִמּוֹ עָלָיו, בְּאָזְנֵי כָּל-בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה; וַיֵּט לִבָּם אַחֲרֵי אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, כִּי אָמְרוּ אָחִינוּ הוּא.	3 And his mother's brethren spoke of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words; and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said: 'He is our brother.'
9.4 ד  וַיִּתְּנוּ-לוֹ שִׁבְעִים כֶּסֶף, מִבֵּית בַּעַל בְּרִית; וַיִּשְׂכֹּר בָּהֶם אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, אֲנָשִׁים רֵיקִים וּפֹחֲזִים, וַיֵּלְכוּ, אַחֲרָיו.	4 And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Baal-berith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light fellows, who followed him.
9.5 ה  וַיָּבֹא בֵית-אָבִיו, עָפְרָתָה, וַיַּהֲרֹג אֶת-אֶחָיו בְּנֵי-יְרֻבַּעַל שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ, עַל-אֶבֶן אֶחָת; וַיִּוָּתֵר יוֹתָם בֶּן-יְרֻבַּעַל, הַקָּטֹן--כִּי נֶחְבָּא.  {ס}	5 And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone; but Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself. {S}
9.6 ו  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ כָּל-בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, וְכָל-בֵּית מִלּוֹא, וַיֵּלְכוּ, וַיַּמְלִיכוּ אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ לְמֶלֶךְ--עִם-אֵלוֹן מֻצָּב, אֲשֶׁר בִּשְׁכֶם.	6 And all the men of Shechem assembled themselves together, and all Beth-millo, and went and made Abimelech king, by the terebinth of the pillar that was in Shechem.
9.7 ז  וַיַּגִּדוּ לְיוֹתָם, וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיַּעֲמֹד בְּרֹאשׁ הַר-גְּרִזִים, וַיִּשָּׂא קוֹלוֹ, וַיִּקְרָא; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, שִׁמְעוּ אֵלַי בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, וְיִשְׁמַע אֲלֵיכֶם, אֱלֹהִים.	7 And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them: 'Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.
9.8 ח  הָלוֹךְ הָלְכוּ הָעֵצִים, לִמְשֹׁחַ עֲלֵיהֶם מֶלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לַזַּיִת, מלוכה (מָלְכָה) עָלֵינוּ.	8 The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive-tree: Reign thou over us.
9.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, הַזַּיִת, הֶחֳדַלְתִּי אֶת-דִּשְׁנִי, אֲשֶׁר-בִּי יְכַבְּדוּ אֱלֹהִים וַאֲנָשִׁים; וְהָלַכְתִּי, לָנוּעַ עַל-הָעֵצִים.	9 But the olive-tree said unto them: Should I leave my fatness, seeing that by me they honour God and man, and go to hold sway over the trees?
9.10 י  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הָעֵצִים, לַתְּאֵנָה:  לְכִי-אַתְּ, מָלְכִי עָלֵינוּ.	10 And the trees said to the fig-tree: Come thou, and reign over us.
9.11 יא  וַתֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, הַתְּאֵנָה, הֶחֳדַלְתִּי אֶת-מָתְקִי, וְאֶת-תְּנוּבָתִי הַטּוֹבָה; וְהָלַכְתִּי, לָנוּעַ עַל-הָעֵצִים.	11 But the fig-tree said unto them: Should I leave my sweetness, and my good fruitage, and go to hold sway over the trees?
9.12 יב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הָעֵצִים, לַגָּפֶן:  לְכִי-אַתְּ, מלוכי (מָלְכִי) עָלֵינוּ.	12 And the trees said unto the vine: Come thou, and reign over us.
9.13 יג  וַתֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, הַגֶּפֶן, הֶחֳדַלְתִּי אֶת-תִּירוֹשִׁי, הַמְשַׂמֵּחַ אֱלֹהִים וַאֲנָשִׁים; וְהָלַכְתִּי, לָנוּעַ עַל-הָעֵצִים.	13 And the vine said unto them: Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to hold sway over the trees?
9.14 יד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הָעֵצִים, אֶל-הָאָטָד:  לֵךְ אַתָּה, מְלָךְ-עָלֵינוּ.	14 Then said all the trees unto the bramble: Come thou, and reign over us.
9.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר הָאָטָד, אֶל-הָעֵצִים, אִם בֶּאֱמֶת אַתֶּם מֹשְׁחִים אֹתִי לְמֶלֶךְ עֲלֵיכֶם, בֹּאוּ חֲסוּ בְצִלִּי; וְאִם-אַיִן--תֵּצֵא אֵשׁ מִן-הָאָטָד, וְתֹאכַל אֶת-אַרְזֵי הַלְּבָנוֹן.	15 And the bramble said unto the trees: If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and take refuge in my shadow; and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.
9.16 טז  וְעַתָּה, אִם-בֶּאֱמֶת וּבְתָמִים עֲשִׂיתֶם, וַתַּמְלִיכוּ, אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ; וְאִם-טוֹבָה עֲשִׂיתֶם עִם-יְרֻבַּעַל וְעִם-בֵּיתוֹ, וְאִם-כִּגְמוּל יָדָיו עֲשִׂיתֶם לוֹ.	16 Now therefore, if ye have dealt truly and uprightly, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands--
9.17 יז  אֲשֶׁר-נִלְחַם אָבִי, עֲלֵיכֶם; וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ אֶת-נַפְשׁוֹ מִנֶּגֶד, וַיַּצֵּל אֶתְכֶם מִיַּד מִדְיָן.	17 for my father fought for you, and adventured his life, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian;
9.18 יח  וְאַתֶּם קַמְתֶּם עַל-בֵּית אָבִי, הַיּוֹם, וַתַּהַרְגוּ אֶת-בָּנָיו שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ, עַל-אֶבֶן אֶחָת; וַתַּמְלִיכוּ אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ בֶּן-אֲמָתוֹ, עַל-בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, כִּי אֲחִיכֶם, הוּא.	18 and ye are risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maid-servant, king over the men of Shechem, because he is your brother--
9.19 יט  וְאִם-בֶּאֱמֶת וּבְתָמִים עֲשִׂיתֶם עִם-יְרֻבַּעַל וְעִם-בֵּיתוֹ, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--שִׂמְחוּ, בַּאֲבִימֶלֶךְ, וְיִשְׂמַח גַּם-הוּא, בָּכֶם.	19 if ye then have dealt truly and uprightly with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you.
9.20 כ  וְאִם-אַיִן--תֵּצֵא אֵשׁ מֵאֲבִימֶלֶךְ, וְתֹאכַל אֶת-בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם וְאֶת-בֵּית מִלּוֹא; וְתֵצֵא אֵשׁ מִבַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, וּמִבֵּית מִלּוֹא, וְתֹאכַל, אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ.	20 But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and Beth-millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from Beth-millo, and devour Abimelech.'
9.21 כא  וַיָּנָס יוֹתָם, וַיִּבְרַח וַיֵּלֶךְ בְּאֵרָה; וַיֵּשֶׁב שָׁם, מִפְּנֵי אֲבִימֶלֶךְ אָחִיו.  {פ}	21 And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother. {P}
9.22 כב  וַיָּשַׂר אֲבִימֶלֶךְ עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים.	22 And Abimelech was prince over Israel three years.
9.23 כג  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֱלֹהִים, רוּחַ רָעָה, בֵּין אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, וּבֵין בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם; וַיִּבְגְּדוּ בַעֲלֵי-שְׁכֶם, בַּאֲבִימֶלֶךְ.	23 And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech;
9.24 כד  לָבוֹא, חֲמַס שִׁבְעִים בְּנֵי-יְרֻבָּעַל; וְדָמָם, לָשׂוּם עַל-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ אֲחִיהֶם אֲשֶׁר הָרַג אוֹתָם, וְעַל בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-חִזְּקוּ אֶת-יָדָיו לַהֲרֹג אֶת-אֶחָיו.	24 that the violence done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and that their blood might be laid upon Abimelech their brother, who slew them, and upon the men of Shechem, who strengthened his hands to slay his brethren.
9.25 כה  וַיָּשִׂימוּ לוֹ בַעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם מְאָרְבִים, עַל רָאשֵׁי הֶהָרִים, וַיִּגְזְלוּ, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲבֹר עֲלֵיהֶם בַּדָּרֶךְ; וַיֻּגַּד, לַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ.  {פ}	25 And the men of Shechem set liers-in-wait for him on the tops of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them; and it was told Abimelech. {P}
9.26 כו  וַיָּבֹא גַּעַל בֶּן-עֶבֶד, וְאֶחָיו, וַיַּעַבְרוּ, בִּשְׁכֶם; וַיִּבְטְחוּ-בוֹ, בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם.	26 And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went on to Shechem; and the men of Shechem put their trust in him.
9.27 כז  וַיֵּצְאוּ הַשָּׂדֶה וַיִּבְצְרוּ אֶת-כַּרְמֵיהֶם, וַיִּדְרְכוּ, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, הִלּוּלִים; וַיָּבֹאוּ, בֵּית אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׁתּוּ, וַיְקַלְלוּ אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ.	27 And they went out into the field, and gathered their vineyards, and trod the grapes, and held festival, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.
9.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר גַּעַל בֶּן-עֶבֶד, מִי-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ וּמִי-שְׁכֶם כִּי נַעַבְדֶנּוּ--הֲלֹא בֶן-יְרֻבַּעַל, וּזְבֻל פְּקִידוֹ; עִבְדוּ, אֶת-אַנְשֵׁי חֲמוֹר אֲבִי שְׁכֶם, וּמַדּוּעַ, נַעַבְדֶנּוּ אֲנָחְנוּ.	28 And Gaal the son of Ebed said: 'Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve ye the men of Hamor the father of Shechem; but why should we serve him?
9.29 כט  וּמִי יִתֵּן אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, בְּיָדִי, וְאָסִירָה, אֶת-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ; וַיֹּאמֶר, לַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ, רַבֶּה צְבָאֲךָ, וָצֵאָה.	29 And would that this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech.' And he said to Abimelech: 'Increase thine army, and come out.'
9.30 ל  וַיִּשְׁמַע, זְבֻל שַׂר-הָעִיר, אֶת-דִּבְרֵי, גַּעַל בֶּן-עָבֶד; וַיִּחַר, אַפּוֹ.	30 And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.
9.31 לא  וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אֶל-אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, בְּתָרְמָה לֵאמֹר:  הִנֵּה גַעַל בֶּן-עֶבֶד וְאֶחָיו בָּאִים שְׁכֶמָה, וְהִנָּם צָרִים אֶת-הָעִיר עָלֶיךָ.	31 And he sent messengers unto Abimelech in Tormah, saying: 'Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren are come to Shechem; and, behold, they will incite the city against thee.
9.32 לב  וְעַתָּה קוּם לַיְלָה, אַתָּה וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתָּךְ; וֶאֱרֹב, בַּשָּׂדֶה.	32 Now therefore, up by night, thou and the people that are with thee, and lie in wait in the field.
9.33 לג  וְהָיָה בַבֹּקֶר כִּזְרֹחַ הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, תַּשְׁכִּים וּפָשַׁטְתָּ עַל-הָעִיר; וְהִנֵּה-הוּא וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, יֹצְאִים אֵלֶיךָ, וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר תִּמְצָא יָדֶךָ.	33 And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city; and, behold, when he and the people that are with him come out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt be able.'
9.34 לד  וַיָּקָם אֲבִימֶלֶךְ וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ, לָיְלָה; וַיֶּאֶרְבוּ עַל-שְׁכֶם, אַרְבָּעָה רָאשִׁים.	34 And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by night, and they lay in wait against Shechem in four companies.
9.35 לה  וַיֵּצֵא, גַּעַל בֶּן-עֶבֶד, וַיַּעֲמֹד, פֶּתַח שַׁעַר הָעִיר; וַיָּקָם אֲבִימֶלֶךְ וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, מִן-הַמַּאְרָב.	35 And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entrance of the gate of the city; and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from the ambushment.
9.36 לו  וַיַּרְא-גַּעַל, אֶת-הָעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-זְבֻל, הִנֵּה-עָם יוֹרֵד מֵרָאשֵׁי הֶהָרִים; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו זְבֻל, אֵת צֵל הֶהָרִים אַתָּה רֹאֶה כָּאֲנָשִׁים.	36 And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul: 'Behold, there come people down from the tops of the mountains.' And Zebul said unto him: 'Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.'
9.37 לז  וַיֹּסֶף עוֹד גַּעַל, לְדַבֵּר, וַיֹּאמֶר, הִנֵּה-עָם יוֹרְדִים מֵעִם טַבּוּר הָאָרֶץ; וְרֹאשׁ-אֶחָד בָּא, מִדֶּרֶךְ אֵלוֹן מְעוֹנְנִים.	37 And Gaal spoke again and said: 'See, there come people down by the middle of the land, and one company cometh by the way of Elon-meonenim.'
9.38 לח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו זְבֻל, אַיֵּה אֵפוֹא פִיךָ אֲשֶׁר תֹּאמַר, מִי אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, כִּי נַעַבְדֶנּוּ:  הֲלֹא זֶה הָעָם אֲשֶׁר מָאַסְתָּה בּוֹ, צֵא-נָא עַתָּה וְהִלָּחֶם בּוֹ.	38 Then said Zebul unto him: 'Where is now thy mouth, that thou saidst: Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the people that thou hast despised? go out now, I pray, and fight with them.'
9.39 לט  וַיֵּצֵא גַעַל, לִפְנֵי בַּעֲלֵי שְׁכֶם; וַיִּלָּחֶם, בַּאֲבִימֶלֶךְ.	39 And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.
9.40 מ  וַיִּרְדְּפֵהוּ אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, וַיָּנָס מִפָּנָיו; וַיִּפְּלוּ חֲלָלִים רַבִּים, עַד-פֶּתַח הַשָּׁעַר.	40 And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and there fell many wounded, even unto the entrance of the gate.
9.41 מא  וַיֵּשֶׁב אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, בָּארוּמָה; וַיְגָרֶשׁ זְבֻל אֶת-גַּעַל וְאֶת-אֶחָיו, מִשֶּׁבֶת בִּשְׁכֶם.  {ס}	41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah; and Zebul drove out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem. {S}
9.42 מב  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיֵּצֵא הָעָם, הַשָּׂדֶה; וַיַּגִּדוּ, לַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ.	42 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field; and it was told Abimelech.
9.43 מג  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הָעָם, וַיֶּחֱצֵם לִשְׁלֹשָׁה רָאשִׁים, וַיֶּאֱרֹב, בַּשָּׂדֶה; וַיַּרְא, וְהִנֵּה הָעָם יֹצֵא מִן-הָעִיר, וַיָּקָם עֲלֵיהֶם, וַיַּכֵּם.	43 And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and lay in wait in the field; and he looked, and, behold, the people were coming forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them.
9.44 מד  וַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ, וְהָרָאשִׁים אֲשֶׁר עִמּוֹ, פָּשְׁטוּ, וַיַּעַמְדוּ פֶּתַח שַׁעַר הָעִיר; וּשְׁנֵי הָרָאשִׁים, פָּשְׁטוּ עַל-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה--וַיַּכּוּם.	44 And Abimelech, and the companies that were with him, rushed forward, and stood in the entrance of the gate of the city; and the two companies rushed upon all that were in the field, and smote them.
9.45 מה  וַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ נִלְחָם בָּעִיר, כֹּל הַיּוֹם הַהוּא, וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-הָעִיר, וְאֶת-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ הָרָג; וַיִּתֹּץ, אֶת-הָעִיר, וַיִּזְרָעֶהָ, מֶלַח.  {פ}	45 And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the city, and slew the people that were therein; and he beat down the city, and sowed it with salt. {P}
9.46 מו  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ, כָּל-בַּעֲלֵי מִגְדַּל-שְׁכֶם; וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-צְרִיחַ, בֵּית אֵל בְּרִית.	46 And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard thereof, they entered into the hold of the house of El-berith.
9.47 מז  וַיֻּגַּד, לַאֲבִימֶלֶךְ:  כִּי הִתְקַבְּצוּ, כָּל-בַּעֲלֵי מִגְדַּל-שְׁכֶם.	47 And it was told Abimelech that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.
9.48 מח  וַיַּעַל אֲבִימֶלֶךְ הַר-צַלְמוֹן, הוּא וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-אִתּוֹ, וַיִּקַּח אֲבִימֶלֶךְ אֶת-הַקַּרְדֻּמּוֹת בְּיָדוֹ וַיִּכְרֹת שׂוֹכַת עֵצִים, וַיִּשָּׂאֶהָ וַיָּשֶׂם עַל-שִׁכְמוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-עִמּוֹ, מָה רְאִיתֶם עָשִׂיתִי--מַהֲרוּ, עֲשׂוּ כָמוֹנִי.	48 And Abimelech got him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it up, and laid it on his shoulder; and he said unto the people that were with him: 'What ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done.'
9.49 מט  וַיִּכְרְתוּ גַם-כָּל-הָעָם אִישׁ שׂוֹכֹה, וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרֵי אֲבִימֶלֶךְ וַיָּשִׂימוּ עַל-הַצְּרִיחַ, וַיַּצִּיתוּ עֲלֵיהֶם אֶת-הַצְּרִיחַ, בָּאֵשׁ; וַיָּמֻתוּ גַּם כָּל-אַנְשֵׁי מִגְדַּל-שְׁכֶם, כְּאֶלֶף--אִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה.  {פ}	49 And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women. {P}
9.50 נ  וַיֵּלֶךְ אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, אֶל-תֵּבֵץ; וַיִּחַן בְּתֵבֵץ, וַיִּלְכְּדָהּ.	50 Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it.
9.51 נא  וּמִגְדַּל-עֹז, הָיָה בְתוֹךְ-הָעִיר, וַיָּנֻסוּ שָׁמָּה כָּל-הָאֲנָשִׁים וְהַנָּשִׁים וְכֹל בַּעֲלֵי הָעִיר, וַיִּסְגְּרוּ בַּעֲדָם; וַיַּעֲלוּ, עַל-גַּג הַמִּגְדָּל.	51 But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men and women, even all they of the city, and shut themselves in, and got them up to the roof of the tower.
9.52 נב  וַיָּבֹא אֲבִימֶלֶךְ עַד-הַמִּגְדָּל, וַיִּלָּחֶם בּוֹ; וַיִּגַּשׁ עַד-פֶּתַח הַמִּגְדָּל, לְשָׂרְפוֹ בָאֵשׁ.	52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went close unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.
9.53 נג  וַתַּשְׁלֵךְ אִשָּׁה אַחַת, פֶּלַח רֶכֶב--עַל-רֹאשׁ אֲבִימֶלֶךְ; וַתָּרִץ, אֶת-גֻּלְגָּלְתּוֹ.	53 And a certain woman cast an upper millstone upon Abimelech's head, and broke his skull.
9.54 נד  וַיִּקְרָא מְהֵרָה אֶל-הַנַּעַר נֹשֵׂא כֵלָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ שְׁלֹף חַרְבְּךָ וּמוֹתְתֵנִי--פֶּן-יֹאמְרוּ לִי, אִשָּׁה הֲרָגָתְהוּ; וַיִּדְקְרֵהוּ נַעֲרוֹ, וַיָּמֹת.	54 Then he called hastily unto the young man his armour-bearer, and said unto him: 'Draw thy sword, and kill me, that men say not of me: A woman slew him.' And his young man thrust him through, and he died.
9.55 נה  וַיִּרְאוּ אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי מֵת אֲבִימֶלֶךְ; וַיֵּלְכוּ, אִישׁ לִמְקֹמוֹ.	55 And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place.
9.56 נו  וַיָּשֶׁב אֱלֹהִים, אֵת רָעַת אֲבִימֶלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְאָבִיו, לַהֲרֹג אֶת-שִׁבְעִים אֶחָיו.	56 Thus God requited the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren;
9.57 נז  וְאֵת, כָּל-רָעַת אַנְשֵׁי שְׁכֶם, הֵשִׁיב אֱלֹהִים, בְּרֹאשָׁם; וַתָּבֹא אֲלֵיהֶם, קִלְלַת יוֹתָם בֶּן-יְרֻבָּעַל.  {פ}	57 and all the wickedness of the men of Shechem did God requite upon their heads; and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal. {P}
10.1 א  וַיָּקָם אַחֲרֵי אֲבִימֶלֶךְ לְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, תּוֹלָע בֶּן-פּוּאָה בֶּן-דּוֹדוֹ--אִישׁ יִשָּׂשכָר; וְהוּא-יֹשֵׁב בְּשָׁמִיר, בְּהַר אֶפְרָיִם.	1 And after Abimelech there arose to save Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in the hill-country of Ephraim.
10.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֶשְׂרִים וְשָׁלֹשׁ, שָׁנָה; וַיָּמָת, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּשָׁמִיר.  {פ}	2 And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir. {P}
10.3 ג  וַיָּקָם אַחֲרָיו, יָאִיר הַגִּלְעָדִי; וַיִּשְׁפֹּט, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁתַּיִם, שָׁנָה.	3 And after him arose Jair, the Gileadite; and he judged Israel twenty and two years.
10.4 ד  וַיְהִי-לוֹ שְׁלֹשִׁים בָּנִים, רֹכְבִים עַל-שְׁלֹשִׁים עֲיָרִים, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים עֲיָרִים, לָהֶם; לָהֶם יִקְרְאוּ חַוֺּת יָאִיר, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, אֲשֶׁר, בְּאֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד.	4 And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havvoth-jair unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead.
10.5 ה  וַיָּמָת יָאִיר, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּקָמוֹן.  {פ}	5 And Jair died, and was buried in Kamon. {P}
10.6 ו  וַיֹּסִיפוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה, וַיַּעַבְדוּ אֶת-הַבְּעָלִים וְאֶת-הָעַשְׁתָּרוֹת וְאֶת-אֱלֹהֵי אֲרָם וְאֶת-אֱלֹהֵי צִידוֹן וְאֵת אֱלֹהֵי מוֹאָב וְאֵת אֱלֹהֵי בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן, וְאֵת אֱלֹהֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּעַזְבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וְלֹא עֲבָדוּהוּ.	6 And the children of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, and served the Baalim, and the Ashtaroth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines; and they forsook the LORD, and served Him not.
10.7 ז  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּמְכְּרֵם, בְּיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּבְיַד, בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	7 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He gave them over into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the children of Ammon.
10.8 ח  וַיִּרְעֲצוּ וַיְרֹצְצוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּשָּׁנָה הַהִיא:  שְׁמֹנֶה עֶשְׂרֵה שָׁנָה, אֶת-כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר בְּעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן--בְּאֶרֶץ הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר בַּגִּלְעָד.	8 And they oppressed and crushed the children of Israel that year; eighteen years [oppressed they] all the children of Israel that were beyond the Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.
10.9 ט  וַיַּעַבְרוּ בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, לְהִלָּחֵם גַּם-בִּיהוּדָה וּבְבִנְיָמִין וּבְבֵית אֶפְרָיִם; וַתֵּצֶר לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, מְאֹד.	9 And the children of Ammon passed over the Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was sore distressed.
10.10 י  וַיִּזְעֲקוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר:  חָטָאנוּ לָךְ--וְכִי עָזַבְנוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וַנַּעֲבֹד אֶת-הַבְּעָלִים.  {פ}	10 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying: 'We have sinned against Thee, in that we have forsaken our God, and have served the Baalim.' {P}
10.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הֲלֹא מִמִּצְרַיִם וּמִן-הָאֱמֹרִי, וּמִן-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן וּמִן-פְּלִשְׁתִּים.	11 And the LORD said unto the children of Israel: 'Did not I save you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines?
10.12 יב  וְצִידוֹנִים וַעֲמָלֵק וּמָעוֹן, לָחֲצוּ אֶתְכֶם; וַתִּצְעֲקוּ אֵלַי, וָאוֹשִׁיעָה אֶתְכֶם מִיָּדָם.	12 The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried unto Me, and I saved you out of their hand.
10.13 יג  וְאַתֶּם עֲזַבְתֶּם אוֹתִי, וַתַּעַבְדוּ אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים; לָכֵן לֹא-אוֹסִיף, לְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֶתְכֶם.	13 Yet ye have forsaken Me, and served other gods; wherefore I will save you no more.
10.14 יד  לְכוּ, וְזַעֲקוּ אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר בְּחַרְתֶּם, בָּם:  הֵמָּה יוֹשִׁיעוּ לָכֶם, בְּעֵת צָרַתְכֶם.	14 Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them save you in the time of your distress.'
10.15 טו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-יְהוָה, חָטָאנוּ--עֲשֵׂה-אַתָּה לָנוּ, כְּכָל-הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֶיךָ:  אַךְ הַצִּילֵנוּ נָא, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	15 And the children of Israel said unto the LORD: 'We have sinned; do Thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto Thee; only deliver us, we pray Thee, this day.'
10.16 טז  וַיָּסִירוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵי הַנֵּכָר, מִקִּרְבָּם, וַיַּעַבְדוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה; וַתִּקְצַר נַפְשׁוֹ, בַּעֲמַל יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	16 And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the LORD; and His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. {P}
10.17 יז  וַיִּצָּעֲקוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וַיַּחֲנוּ בַּגִּלְעָד; וַיֵּאָסְפוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּחֲנוּ בַּמִּצְפָּה.	17 Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpah.
10.18 יח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הָעָם שָׂרֵי גִלְעָד, אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ, מִי הָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יָחֵל לְהִלָּחֵם בִּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן--יִהְיֶה לְרֹאשׁ, לְכֹל יֹשְׁבֵי גִלְעָד.  {פ}	18 And the people, the princes of Gilead, said one to another: 'What man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.' {P}
11.1 א  וְיִפְתָּח הַגִּלְעָדִי, הָיָה גִּבּוֹר חַיִל, וְהוּא, בֶּן-אִשָּׁה זוֹנָה; וַיּוֹלֶד גִּלְעָד, אֶת-יִפְתָּח.	1 Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was the son of a harlot; and Gilead begot Jephthah.
11.2 ב  וַתֵּלֶד אֵשֶׁת-גִּלְעָד לוֹ, בָּנִים; וַיִּגְדְּלוּ בְנֵי-הָאִשָּׁה וַיְגָרְשׁוּ אֶת-יִפְתָּח, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ לֹא-תִנְחַל בְּבֵית-אָבִינוּ--כִּי בֶּן-אִשָּׁה אַחֶרֶת, אָתָּה.	2 And Gilead's wife bore him sons; and when his wife's sons grew up, they drove out Jephthah, and said unto him: 'Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house; for thou art the son of another woman.'
11.3 ג  וַיִּבְרַח יִפְתָּח מִפְּנֵי אֶחָיו, וַיֵּשֶׁב בְּאֶרֶץ טוֹב; וַיִּתְלַקְּטוּ אֶל-יִפְתָּח אֲנָשִׁים רֵיקִים, וַיֵּצְאוּ עִמּוֹ.  {פ}	3 Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; and there were gathered vain fellows to Jephthah, and they went out with him. {P}
11.4 ד  וַיְהִי, מִיָּמִים; וַיִּלָּחֲמוּ בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן, עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 And it came to pass after a while, that the children of Ammon made war against Israel.
11.5 ה  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר-נִלְחֲמוּ בְנֵי-עַמּוֹן עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֵּלְכוּ זִקְנֵי גִלְעָד, לָקַחַת אֶת-יִפְתָּח מֵאֶרֶץ טוֹב.	5 And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob.
11.6 ו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לְיִפְתָּח--לְכָה, וְהָיִיתָה לָּנוּ לְקָצִין; וְנִלָּחֲמָה, בִּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן.	6 And they said unto Jephthah: 'Come and be our chief, that we may fight with the children of Ammon.'
11.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר יִפְתָּח, לְזִקְנֵי גִלְעָד, הֲלֹא אַתֶּם שְׂנֵאתֶם אוֹתִי, וַתְּגָרְשׁוּנִי מִבֵּית אָבִי; וּמַדּוּעַ בָּאתֶם אֵלַי, עַתָּה, כַּאֲשֶׁר, צַר לָכֶם.	7 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead: 'Did not ye hate me, and drive me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?'
11.8 ח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ זִקְנֵי גִלְעָד אֶל-יִפְתָּח, לָכֵן עַתָּה שַׁבְנוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וְהָלַכְתָּ עִמָּנוּ, וְנִלְחַמְתָּ בִּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן; וְהָיִיתָ לָּנוּ לְרֹאשׁ, לְכֹל יֹשְׁבֵי גִלְעָד.	8 And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah: 'Therefore are we returned to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight with the children of Ammon, and thou shalt be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.'
11.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר יִפְתָּח אֶל-זִקְנֵי גִלְעָד, אִם-מְשִׁיבִים אַתֶּם אוֹתִי לְהִלָּחֵם בִּבְנֵי עַמּוֹן, וְנָתַן יְהוָה אוֹתָם, לְפָנָי--אָנֹכִי, אֶהְיֶה לָכֶם לְרֹאשׁ.	9 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead: 'If ye bring me back home to fight with the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver them before me, I will be your head.'
11.10 י  וַיֹּאמְרוּ זִקְנֵי-גִלְעָד, אֶל-יִפְתָּח:  יְהוָה, יִהְיֶה שֹׁמֵעַ בֵּינוֹתֵינוּ--אִם-לֹא כִדְבָרְךָ, כֵּן נַעֲשֶׂה.	10 And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah: 'The LORD shall be witness between us; surely according to thy word so will we do.'
11.11 יא  וַיֵּלֶךְ יִפְתָּח עִם-זִקְנֵי גִלְעָד, וַיָּשִׂימוּ הָעָם אוֹתוֹ עֲלֵיהֶם לְרֹאשׁ וּלְקָצִין; וַיְדַבֵּר יִפְתָּח אֶת-כָּל-דְּבָרָיו לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בַּמִּצְפָּה.  {פ}	11 Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and chief over them; and Jephthah spoke all his words before the LORD in Mizpah. {P}
11.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁלַח יִפְתָּח מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן לֵאמֹר:  מַה-לִּי וָלָךְ, כִּי-בָאתָ אֵלַי לְהִלָּחֵם בְּאַרְצִי.	12 And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying: 'What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come unto me to fight against my land?'
11.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹן אֶל-מַלְאֲכֵי יִפְתָּח, כִּי-לָקַח יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-אַרְצִי בַּעֲלוֹתוֹ מִמִּצְרַיִם, מֵאַרְנוֹן וְעַד-הַיַּבֹּק, וְעַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן; וְעַתָּה, הָשִׁיבָה אֶתְהֶן בְּשָׁלוֹם.	13 And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah: 'Because Israel took away my land, when he came up out of Egypt, from the Arnon even unto the Jabbok, and unto the Jordan; now therefore restore those cities peaceably.'
11.14 יד  וַיּוֹסֶף עוֹד, יִפְתָּח; וַיִּשְׁלַח, מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ, בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	14 And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon;
11.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ, כֹּה אָמַר יִפְתָּח:  לֹא-לָקַח יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-אֶרֶץ מוֹאָב, וְאֶת-אֶרֶץ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	15 and he said unto him: 'Thus saith Jephthah: Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon.
11.16 טז  כִּי, בַּעֲלוֹתָם מִמִּצְרָיִם; וַיֵּלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּמִּדְבָּר עַד-יַם-סוּף, וַיָּבֹא קָדֵשָׁה.	16 But when they came up from Egypt, and Israel walked through the wilderness unto the Red Sea, and came to Kadesh;
11.17 יז  וַיִּשְׁלַח יִשְׂרָאֵל מַלְאָכִים אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם לֵאמֹר אֶעְבְּרָה-נָּא בְאַרְצֶךָ, וְלֹא שָׁמַע מֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם, וְגַם אֶל-מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב שָׁלַח, וְלֹא אָבָה; וַיֵּשֶׁב יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּקָדֵשׁ.	17 then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying: Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land; but the king of Edom hearkened not. And in like manner he sent unto the king of Moab; but he would not; and Israel abode in Kadesh.
11.18 יח  וַיֵּלֶךְ בַּמִּדְבָּר, וַיָּסָב אֶת-אֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם וְאֶת-אֶרֶץ מוֹאָב, וַיָּבֹא מִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ לְאֶרֶץ מוֹאָב, וַיַּחֲנוּן בְּעֵבֶר אַרְנוֹן; וְלֹא-בָאוּ בִּגְבוּל מוֹאָב, כִּי אַרְנוֹן גְּבוּל מוֹאָב.	18 Then he walked through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and they pitched on the other side of the Arnon; but they came not within the border of Moab, for the Arnon was the border of Moab.
11.19 יט  וַיִּשְׁלַח יִשְׂרָאֵל מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-סִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ-הָאֱמֹרִי מֶלֶךְ חֶשְׁבּוֹן; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל, נַעְבְּרָה-נָּא בְאַרְצְךָ עַד-מְקוֹמִי.	19 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him: Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land unto my place.
11.20 כ  וְלֹא-הֶאֱמִין סִיחוֹן אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲבֹר בִּגְבֻלוֹ, וַיֶּאֱסֹף סִיחוֹן אֶת-כָּל-עַמּוֹ, וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּיָהְצָה; וַיִּלָּחֶם, עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	20 But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his border; but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
11.21 כא  וַיִּתֵּן יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-סִיחוֹן וְאֶת-כָּל-עַמּוֹ, בְּיַד יִשְׂרָאֵל--וַיַּכּוּם; וַיִּירַשׁ, יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵת כָּל-אֶרֶץ הָאֱמֹרִי, יוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ הַהִיא.	21 And the LORD, the God of Israel, delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them; so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.
11.22 כב  וַיִּירְשׁוּ, אֵת כָּל-גְּבוּל הָאֱמֹרִי--מֵאַרְנוֹן, וְעַד-הַיַּבֹּק, וּמִן-הַמִּדְבָּר, וְעַד-הַיַּרְדֵּן.	22 And they possessed all the border of the Amorites, from the Arnon even unto the Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto the Jordan.
11.23 כג  וְעַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הוֹרִישׁ אֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי, מִפְּנֵי, עַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאַתָּה, תִּירָשֶׁנּוּ.	23 So now the LORD, the God of Israel, hath dispossessed the Amorites from before His people Israel, and shouldest thou possess them?
11.24 כד  הֲלֹא אֵת אֲשֶׁר יוֹרִישְׁךָ, כְּמוֹשׁ אֱלֹהֶיךָ--אוֹתוֹ תִירָשׁ; וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר הוֹרִישׁ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, מִפָּנֵינוּ--אוֹתוֹ נִירָשׁ.	24 Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the LORD our God hath dispossessed from before us, them will we possess.
11.25 כה  וְעַתָּה, הֲטוֹב טוֹב אַתָּה, מִבָּלָק בֶּן-צִפּוֹר, מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב:  הֲרוֹב רָב עִם-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-נִלְחֹם נִלְחַם בָּם.	25 And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them?
11.26 כו  בְּשֶׁבֶת יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן וּבִבְנוֹתֶיהָ וּבְעַרְעוֹר וּבִבְנוֹתֶיהָ, וּבְכָל-הֶעָרִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-יְדֵי אַרְנוֹן, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת, שָׁנָה--וּמַדּוּעַ לֹא-הִצַּלְתֶּם, בָּעֵת הַהִיא.	26 While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and its towns, and in Aroer and its towns, and in all the cities that are along by the side of the Arnon, three hundred years; wherefore did ye not recover them within that time?
11.27 כז  וְאָנֹכִי, לֹא-חָטָאתִי לָךְ, וְאַתָּה עֹשֶׂה אִתִּי רָעָה, לְהִלָּחֶם בִּי:  יִשְׁפֹּט יְהוָה הַשֹּׁפֵט, הַיּוֹם, בֵּין בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּבֵין בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	27 I therefore have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me; the LORD, the Judge, be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.'
11.28 כח  וְלֹא שָׁמַע, מֶלֶךְ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, אֶל-דִּבְרֵי יִפְתָּח, אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַח אֵלָיו.  {פ}	28 Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him. {P}
11.29 כט  וַתְּהִי עַל-יִפְתָּח רוּחַ יְהוָה, וַיַּעֲבֹר אֶת-הַגִּלְעָד וְאֶת-מְנַשֶּׁה; וַיַּעֲבֹר, אֶת-מִצְפֵּה גִלְעָד, וּמִמִּצְפֵּה גִלְעָד, עָבַר בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	29 Then the spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.
11.30 ל  וַיִּדַּר יִפְתָּח נֶדֶר לַיהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  אִם-נָתוֹן תִּתֵּן אֶת-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, בְּיָדִי.	30 And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said: 'If Thou wilt indeed deliver the children of Ammon into my hand,
11.31 לא  וְהָיָה הַיּוֹצֵא, אֲשֶׁר יֵצֵא מִדַּלְתֵי בֵיתִי לִקְרָאתִי, בְּשׁוּבִי בְשָׁלוֹם, מִבְּנֵי עַמּוֹן--וְהָיָה, לַיהוָה, וְהַעֲלִיתִיהוּ, עֹלָה.  {פ}	31 then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, it shall be the LORD'S, and I will offer it up for a burnt-offering.' {P}
11.32 לב  וַיַּעֲבֹר יִפְתָּח אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, לְהִלָּחֶם בָּם; וַיִּתְּנֵם יְהוָה, בְּיָדוֹ.	32 So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hand.
11.33 לג  וַיַּכֵּם מֵעֲרוֹעֵר וְעַד-בֹּאֲךָ מִנִּית עֶשְׂרִים עִיר, וְעַד אָבֵל כְּרָמִים, מַכָּה, גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד; וַיִּכָּנְעוּ בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	33 And he smote them from Aroer until thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto Abel-cheramim, with a very great slaughter. So the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel. {P}
11.34 לד  וַיָּבֹא יִפְתָּח הַמִּצְפָּה, אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, וְהִנֵּה בִתּוֹ יֹצֵאת לִקְרָאתוֹ, בְּתֻפִּים וּבִמְחֹלוֹת:  וְרַק הִיא יְחִידָה, אֵין-לוֹ מִמֶּנּוּ בֵּן אוֹ-בַת.	34 And Jephthah came to Mizpah unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances; and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.
11.35 לה  וַיְהִי כִרְאוֹתוֹ אוֹתָהּ וַיִּקְרַע אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲהָהּ בִּתִּי הַכְרֵעַ הִכְרַעְתִּנִי, וְאַתְּ, הָיִית בְּעֹכְרָי; וְאָנֹכִי, פָּצִיתִי פִי אֶל-יְהוָה, וְלֹא אוּכַל, לָשׁוּב.	35 And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said: 'Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art become my troubler; for I have opened my mouth unto the LORD, and I cannot go back.'
11.36 לו  וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אָבִי פָּצִיתָה אֶת-פִּיךָ אֶל-יְהוָה--עֲשֵׂה לִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר יָצָא מִפִּיךָ:  אַחֲרֵי אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְךָ יְהוָה נְקָמוֹת, מֵאֹיְבֶיךָ--מִבְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	36 And she said unto him: 'My father, thou hast opened thy mouth unto the LORD; do unto me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.'
11.37 לז  וַתֹּאמֶר, אֶל-אָבִיהָ, יֵעָשֶׂה לִּי, הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה:  הַרְפֵּה מִמֶּנִּי שְׁנַיִם חֳדָשִׁים, וְאֵלְכָה וְיָרַדְתִּי עַל-הֶהָרִים, וְאֶבְכֶּה עַל-בְּתוּלַי, אָנֹכִי ורעיתי (וְרֵעוֹתָי).	37 And she said unto her father: 'Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may depart and go down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my companions.'
11.38 לח  וַיֹּאמֶר לֵכִי, וַיִּשְׁלַח אוֹתָהּ שְׁנֵי חֳדָשִׁים; וַתֵּלֶךְ הִיא וְרֵעוֹתֶיהָ, וַתֵּבְךְּ עַל-בְּתוּלֶיהָ עַל-הֶהָרִים.	38 And he said: 'Go.' And he sent her away for two months; and she departed, she and her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.
11.39 לט  וַיְהִי מִקֵּץ שְׁנַיִם חֳדָשִׁים, וַתָּשָׁב אֶל-אָבִיהָ, וַיַּעַשׂ לָהּ, אֶת-נִדְרוֹ אֲשֶׁר נָדָר; וְהִיא לֹא-יָדְעָה אִישׁ, וַתְּהִי-חֹק בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	39 And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed; and she had not known man. And it was a custom in Israel,
11.40 מ  מִיָּמִים יָמִימָה, תֵּלַכְנָה בְּנוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְתַנּוֹת, לְבַת-יִפְתָּח הַגִּלְעָדִי--אַרְבַּעַת יָמִים, בַּשָּׁנָה.  {פ}	40 that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year. {P}
12.1 א  וַיִּצָּעֵק אִישׁ אֶפְרַיִם, וַיַּעֲבֹר צָפוֹנָה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לְיִפְתָּח מַדּוּעַ עָבַרְתָּ לְהִלָּחֵם בִּבְנֵי-עַמּוֹן, וְלָנוּ לֹא קָרָאתָ לָלֶכֶת עִמָּךְ--בֵּיתְךָ, נִשְׂרֹף עָלֶיךָ בָּאֵשׁ.	1 And the men of Ephraim were gathered together, and passed to Zaphon; and they said unto Jephthah: 'Wherefore didst thou pass over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thy house upon thee with fire.'
12.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יִפְתָּח, אֲלֵיהֶם, אִישׁ רִיב הָיִיתִי אֲנִי וְעַמִּי וּבְנֵי-עַמּוֹן, מְאֹד; וָאֶזְעַק אֶתְכֶם, וְלֹא-הוֹשַׁעְתֶּם אוֹתִי מִיָּדָם.	2 And Jephthah said unto them: 'I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye saved me not out of their hand.
12.3 ג  וָאֶרְאֶה כִּי-אֵינְךָ מוֹשִׁיעַ, וָאָשִׂימָה נַפְשִׁי בְכַפִּי וָאֶעְבְּרָה אֶל-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן, וַיִּתְּנֵם יְהוָה, בְּיָדִי; וְלָמָה עֲלִיתֶם אֵלַי, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--לְהִלָּחֶם בִּי.	3 And when I saw that ye saved me not, I put my life in my hand, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the LORD delivered them into my hand; wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me?'
12.4 ד  וַיִּקְבֹּץ יִפְתָּח אֶת-כָּל-אַנְשֵׁי גִלְעָד, וַיִּלָּחֶם אֶת-אֶפְרָיִם; וַיַּכּוּ אַנְשֵׁי גִלְעָד אֶת-אֶפְרַיִם, כִּי אָמְרוּ פְּלִיטֵי אֶפְרַיִם אַתֶּם--גִּלְעָד, בְּתוֹךְ אֶפְרַיִם בְּתוֹךְ מְנַשֶּׁה.	4 Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim; and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said: 'Ye are fugitives of Ephraim, ye Gileadites, in the midst of Ephraim, and in the midst of Manasseh.'
12.5 ה  וַיִּלְכֹּד גִּלְעָד אֶת-מַעְבְּרוֹת הַיַּרְדֵּן, לְאֶפְרָיִם; וְהָיָה כִּי יֹאמְרוּ פְּלִיטֵי אֶפְרַיִם, אֶעֱבֹרָה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ אַנְשֵׁי-גִלְעָד הַאֶפְרָתִי אַתָּה, וַיֹּאמֶר לֹא.	5 And the Gileadites took the fords of the Jordan against the Ephraimites; and it was so, that when any of the fugitives of Ephraim said: 'Let me go over,' the men of Gilead said unto him: 'Art thou an Ephraimite?' If he said: 'Nay';
12.6 ו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ אֱמָר-נָא שִׁבֹּלֶת וַיֹּאמֶר סִבֹּלֶת, וְלֹא יָכִין לְדַבֵּר כֵּן, וַיֹּאחֲזוּ אוֹתוֹ, וַיִּשְׁחָטוּהוּ אֶל-מַעְבְּרוֹת הַיַּרְדֵּן; וַיִּפֹּל בָּעֵת הַהִיא, מֵאֶפְרַיִם, אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנַיִם, אָלֶף.	6 then said they unto him: 'Say now Shibboleth'; and he said 'Sibboleth'; for he could not frame to pronounce it right; then they laid hold on him, and slew him at the fords of the Jordan; and there fell at that time of Ephraim forty and two thousand.
12.7 ז  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט יִפְתָּח אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים; וַיָּמָת, יִפְתָּח הַגִּלְעָדִי, וַיִּקָּבֵר, בְּעָרֵי גִלְעָד.  {פ}	7 And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead. {P}
12.8 ח  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אַחֲרָיו אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִבְצָן מִבֵּית לָחֶם.	8 And after him Ibzan of Beth-lehem judged Israel.
12.9 ט  וַיְהִי-לוֹ שְׁלֹשִׁים בָּנִים, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים בָּנוֹת שִׁלַּח הַחוּצָה, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים בָּנוֹת, הֵבִיא לְבָנָיו מִן-הַחוּץ; וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים.	9 And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters he sent abroad, and thirty daughters he brought in from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.
12.10 י  וַיָּמָת אִבְצָן, וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּבֵית לָחֶם.  {פ}	10 and Ibzan died, and was buried at Beth-lehem. {P}
12.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אַחֲרָיו אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵילוֹן הַזְּבוּלֹנִי; וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֶשֶׂר שָׁנִים.	11 And after him Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years.
12.12 יב  וַיָּמָת, אֵילוֹן הַזְּבוּלֹנִי; וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּאַיָּלוֹן, בְּאֶרֶץ זְבוּלֻן.  {פ}	12 And Elon the Zebulunite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun. {P}
12.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אַחֲרָיו, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַבְדּוֹן בֶּן-הִלֵּל, הַפִּרְעָתוֹנִי.	13 And after him Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel.
12.14 יד  וַיְהִי-לוֹ אַרְבָּעִים בָּנִים, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים בְּנֵי בָנִים, רֹכְבִים, עַל-שִׁבְעִים עֲיָרִם; וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שְׁמֹנֶה שָׁנִים.	14 And he had forty sons and thirty sons' sons, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts; and he judged Israel eight years.
12.15 טו  וַיָּמָת עַבְדּוֹן בֶּן-הִלֵּל, הַפִּרְעָתוֹנִי; וַיִּקָּבֵר בְּפִרְעָתוֹן בְּאֶרֶץ אֶפְרַיִם, בְּהַר הָעֲמָלֵקִי.  {פ}	15 And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill-country of the Amalekites. {P}
13.1 א  וַיֹּסִיפוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשׂוֹת הָרַע בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּתְּנֵם יְהוָה בְּיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה.  {פ}	1 And the children of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years. {P}
13.2 ב  וַיְהִי אִישׁ אֶחָד מִצָּרְעָה מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת הַדָּנִי, וּשְׁמוֹ מָנוֹחַ; וְאִשְׁתּוֹ עֲקָרָה, וְלֹא יָלָדָה.	2 And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bore not.
13.3 ג  וַיֵּרָא מַלְאַךְ-יְהוָה, אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ, הִנֵּה-נָא אַתְּ-עֲקָרָה וְלֹא יָלַדְתְּ, וְהָרִית, וְיָלַדְתְּ בֵּן.	3 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto the woman, and said unto her: 'Behold now, thou art barren, and hast not borne; but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.
13.4 ד  וְעַתָּה הִשָּׁמְרִי נָא, וְאַל-תִּשְׁתִּי יַיִן וְשֵׁכָר; וְאַל-תֹּאכְלִי, כָּל-טָמֵא.	4 Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing.
13.5 ה  כִּי הִנָּךְ הָרָה וְיֹלַדְתְּ בֵּן, וּמוֹרָה לֹא-יַעֲלֶה עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ--כִּי-נְזִיר אֱלֹהִים יִהְיֶה הַנַּעַר, מִן-הַבָּטֶן; וְהוּא, יָחֵל לְהוֹשִׁיעַ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--מִיַּד פְּלִשְׁתִּים.	5 For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come upon his head; for the child shall be a Nazirite unto God from the womb; and he shall begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.'
13.6 ו  וַתָּבֹא הָאִשָּׁה, וַתֹּאמֶר לְאִישָׁהּ לֵאמֹר, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים בָּא אֵלַי, וּמַרְאֵהוּ כְּמַרְאֵה מַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים נוֹרָא מְאֹד; וְלֹא שְׁאִלְתִּיהוּ אֵי-מִזֶּה הוּא, וְאֶת-שְׁמוֹ לֹא-הִגִּיד לִי.	6 Then the woman came and told her husband, saying: 'A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of the angel of God, very terrible; and I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name;
13.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי, הִנָּךְ הָרָה וְיֹלַדְתְּ בֵּן; וְעַתָּה אַל-תִּשְׁתִּי יַיִן וְשֵׁכָר, וְאַל-תֹּאכְלִי כָּל-טֻמְאָה--כִּי-נְזִיר אֱלֹהִים יִהְיֶה הַנַּעַר, מִן-הַבֶּטֶן עַד-יוֹם מוֹתוֹ.  {פ}	7 but he said unto me: Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing; for the child shall be a Nazirite unto God from the womb to the day of his death.' {P}
13.8 ח  וַיֶּעְתַּר מָנוֹחַ אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  בִּי אֲדוֹנָי--אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים אֲשֶׁר שָׁלַחְתָּ יָבוֹא-נָא עוֹד אֵלֵינוּ, וְיוֹרֵנוּ מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה לַנַּעַר הַיּוּלָּד.	8 Then Manoah entreated the LORD, and said: 'Oh, LORD, I pray Thee, let the man of God whom Thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born.'
13.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁמַע הָאֱלֹהִים, בְּקוֹל מָנוֹחַ; וַיָּבֹא מַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים עוֹד אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה, וְהִיא יוֹשֶׁבֶת בַּשָּׂדֶה, וּמָנוֹחַ אִישָׁהּ, אֵין עִמָּהּ.	9 And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she sat in the field; but Manoah her husband was not with her.
13.10 י  וַתְּמַהֵר, הָאִשָּׁה, וַתָּרָץ, וַתַּגֵּד לְאִישָׁהּ; וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו--הִנֵּה נִרְאָה אֵלַי הָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-בָּא בַיּוֹם אֵלָי.	10 And the woman made haste, and ran, and told her husband, and said unto him: 'Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me that day.'
13.11 יא  וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ מָנוֹחַ, אַחֲרֵי אִשְׁתּוֹ; וַיָּבֹא, אֶל-הָאִישׁ, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ הַאַתָּה הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-דִּבַּרְתָּ אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה, וַיֹּאמֶר אָנִי.	11 And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him: 'Art thou the man that spokest unto the woman?' And he said: 'I am.'
13.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר מָנוֹחַ, עַתָּה יָבֹא דְבָרֶיךָ:  מַה-יִּהְיֶה מִשְׁפַּט-הַנַּעַר, וּמַעֲשֵׂהוּ.	12 And Manoah said: 'Now when thy word cometh to pass, what shall be the rule for the child, and what shall be done with him?'
13.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, אֶל-מָנוֹחַ:  מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-אָמַרְתִּי אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה, תִּשָּׁמֵר.	13 And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah: 'Of all that I said unto the woman let her beware.
13.14 יד  מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא מִגֶּפֶן הַיַּיִן לֹא תֹאכַל, וְיַיִן וְשֵׁכָר אַל-תֵּשְׁתְּ, וְכָל-טֻמְאָה, אַל-תֹּאכַל:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-צִוִּיתִיהָ, תִּשְׁמֹר.  {ס}	14 She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the grapevine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing; all that I commanded her let her observe.' {S}
13.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר מָנוֹחַ, אֶל-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה:  נַעְצְרָה-נָּא אוֹתָךְ, וְנַעֲשֶׂה לְפָנֶיךָ גְּדִי עִזִּים.	15 And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD: 'I pray thee, let us detain thee, that we may make ready a kid for thee.'
13.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה אֶל-מָנוֹחַ, אִם-תַּעְצְרֵנִי לֹא-אֹכַל בְּלַחְמֶךָ, וְאִם-תַּעֲשֶׂה עֹלָה, לַיהוָה תַּעֲלֶנָּה:  כִּי לֹא-יָדַע מָנוֹחַ, כִּי-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה הוּא.	16 And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah: 'Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread; and if thou wilt make ready a burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the LORD.' For Manoah knew not that he was the angel of the LORD.
13.17 יז  וַיֹּאמֶר מָנוֹחַ אֶל-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, מִי שְׁמֶךָ:  כִּי-יָבֹא דבריך (דְבָרְךָ), וְכִבַּדְנוּךָ.	17 And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD: 'What is thy name, that when thy words come to pass we may do thee honour?'
13.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, לָמָּה זֶּה תִּשְׁאַל לִשְׁמִי--וְהוּא-פֶלִאי.  {פ}	18 And the angel of the LORD said unto him: 'Wherefore askest thou after my name, seeing it is hidden?' {P}
13.19 יט  וַיִּקַּח מָנוֹחַ אֶת-גְּדִי הָעִזִּים, וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וַיַּעַל עַל-הַצּוּר, לַיהוָה; וּמַפְלִא לַעֲשׂוֹת, וּמָנוֹחַ וְאִשְׁתּוֹ רֹאִים.	19 So Manoah took the kid with the meal-offering, and offered it upon the rock unto the LORD; and [the angel] did wondrously, and Manoah and his wife looked on.
13.20 כ  וַיְהִי בַעֲלוֹת הַלַּהַב מֵעַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, הַשָּׁמַיְמָה, וַיַּעַל מַלְאַךְ-יְהוָה, בְּלַהַב הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וּמָנוֹחַ וְאִשְׁתּוֹ רֹאִים, וַיִּפְּלוּ עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם אָרְצָה.	20 For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame of the altar; and Manoah and his wife looked on; and they fell on their faces to the ground.
13.21 כא  וְלֹא-יָסַף עוֹד מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, לְהֵרָאֹה אֶל-מָנוֹחַ וְאֶל-אִשְׁתּוֹ; אָז יָדַע מָנוֹחַ, כִּי-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה הוּא.	21 But the angel of the LORD did no more appear to Manoah or to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was the angel of the LORD.
13.22 כב  וַיֹּאמֶר מָנוֹחַ אֶל-אִשְׁתּוֹ, מוֹת נָמוּת:  כִּי אֱלֹהִים, רָאִינוּ.	22 And Manoah said unto his wife: 'We shall surely die, because we have seen God.'
13.23 כג  וַתֹּאמֶר לוֹ אִשְׁתּוֹ, לוּ חָפֵץ יְהוָה לַהֲמִיתֵנוּ לֹא-לָקַח מִיָּדֵנוּ עֹלָה וּמִנְחָה, וְלֹא הֶרְאָנוּ, אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה; וְכָעֵת, לֹא הִשְׁמִיעָנוּ כָּזֹאת.	23 But his wife said unto him: 'If the LORD were pleased to kill us, He would not have received a burnt-offering and a meal-offering at our hand, neither would He have shown us all these things, nor would at this time have told such things as these.'
13.24 כד  וַתֵּלֶד הָאִשָּׁה בֵּן, וַתִּקְרָא אֶת-שְׁמוֹ שִׁמְשׁוֹן; וַיִּגְדַּל הַנַּעַר, וַיְבָרְכֵהוּ יְהוָה.	24 And the woman bore a son, and called his name Samson; and the child grew, and the LORD blessed him.
13.25 כה  וַתָּחֶל רוּחַ יְהוָה, לְפַעֲמוֹ בְּמַחֲנֵה-דָן, בֵּין צָרְעָה, וּבֵין אֶשְׁתָּאֹל.  {פ}	25 And the spirit of the LORD began to move him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol. {P}
14.1 א  וַיֵּרֶד שִׁמְשׁוֹן, תִּמְנָתָה; וַיַּרְא אִשָּׁה בְּתִמְנָתָה, מִבְּנוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים.	1 And Samson went down to Timnah, and saw a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines.
14.2 ב  וַיַּעַל, וַיַּגֵּד לְאָבִיו וּלְאִמּוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר אִשָּׁה רָאִיתִי בְתִמְנָתָה, מִבְּנוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וְעַתָּה, קְחוּ-אוֹתָהּ לִי לְאִשָּׁה.	2 And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said: 'I have seen a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines; now therefore get her for me to wife.'
14.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אָבִיו וְאִמּוֹ, הַאֵין בִּבְנוֹת אַחֶיךָ וּבְכָל-עַמִּי אִשָּׁה--כִּי-אַתָּה הוֹלֵךְ לָקַחַת אִשָּׁה, מִפְּלִשְׁתִּים הָעֲרֵלִים; וַיֹּאמֶר שִׁמְשׁוֹן אֶל-אָבִיו אוֹתָהּ קַח-לִי, כִּי-הִיא יָשְׁרָה בְעֵינָי.	3 Then his father and his mother said unto him: 'Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines?' And Samson said unto his father: 'Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.'
14.4 ד  וְאָבִיו וְאִמּוֹ לֹא יָדְעוּ, כִּי מֵיְהוָה הִיא--כִּי-תֹאֲנָה הוּא-מְבַקֵּשׁ, מִפְּלִשְׁתִּים; וּבָעֵת הַהִיא, פְּלִשְׁתִּים מֹשְׁלִים בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD; for he sought an occasion against the Philistines. Now at that time the Philistines had rule over Israel.
14.5 ה  וַיֵּרֶד שִׁמְשׁוֹן וְאָבִיו וְאִמּוֹ, תִּמְנָתָה; וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-כַּרְמֵי תִמְנָתָה, וְהִנֵּה כְּפִיר אֲרָיוֹת, שֹׁאֵג לִקְרָאתוֹ.	5 Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnah, and came to the vineyards of Timnah; and, behold, a young lion roared against him.
14.6 ו  וַתִּצְלַח עָלָיו רוּחַ יְהוָה, וַיְשַׁסְּעֵהוּ כְּשַׁסַּע הַגְּדִי, וּמְאוּמָה, אֵין בְּיָדוֹ; וְלֹא הִגִּיד לְאָבִיו וּלְאִמּוֹ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה.	6 And the spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he rent him as one would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand; but he told not his father or his mother what he had done.
14.7 ז  וַיֵּרֶד, וַיְדַבֵּר לָאִשָּׁה; וַתִּישַׁר, בְּעֵינֵי שִׁמְשׁוֹן.	7 And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well.
14.8 ח  וַיָּשָׁב מִיָּמִים, לְקַחְתָּהּ, וַיָּסַר לִרְאוֹת, אֵת מַפֶּלֶת הָאַרְיֵה; וְהִנֵּה עֲדַת דְּבוֹרִים בִּגְוִיַּת הָאַרְיֵה, וּדְבָשׁ.	8 And after a while he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcass of the lion; and, behold, there was a swarm of bees in the body of the lion, and honey.
14.9 ט  וַיִּרְדֵּהוּ אֶל-כַּפָּיו, וַיֵּלֶךְ הָלוֹךְ וְאָכֹל, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-אָבִיו וְאֶל-אִמּוֹ, וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם וַיֹּאכֵלוּ; וְלֹא-הִגִּיד לָהֶם, כִּי מִגְּוִיַּת הָאַרְיֵה רָדָה הַדְּבָשׁ.	9 And he scraped it out into his hands, and went on, eating as he went, and he came to his father and mother, and gave unto them, and they did eat; but he told them not that he had scraped the honey out of the body of the lion.
14.10 י  וַיֵּרֶד אָבִיהוּ, אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה; וַיַּעַשׂ שָׁם שִׁמְשׁוֹן מִשְׁתֶּה, כִּי כֵּן יַעֲשׂוּ הַבַּחוּרִים.	10 And his father went down unto the woman; and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do.
14.11 יא  וַיְהִי, כִּרְאוֹתָם אוֹתוֹ; וַיִּקְחוּ שְׁלֹשִׁים מֵרֵעִים, וַיִּהְיוּ אִתּוֹ.	11 And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him.
14.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם שִׁמְשׁוֹן, אָחוּדָה-נָּא לָכֶם חִידָה:  אִם-הַגֵּד תַּגִּידוּ אוֹתָהּ לִי שִׁבְעַת יְמֵי הַמִּשְׁתֶּה, וּמְצָאתֶם--וְנָתַתִּי לָכֶם שְׁלֹשִׁים סְדִינִים, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים חֲלִפֹת בְּגָדִים.	12 And Samson said unto them: 'Let me now put forth a riddle unto you; if ye can declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment;
14.13 יג  וְאִם-לֹא תוּכְלוּ, לְהַגִּיד לִי--וּנְתַתֶּם אַתֶּם לִי שְׁלֹשִׁים סְדִינִים, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים חֲלִיפוֹת בְּגָדִים; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ--חוּדָה חִידָתְךָ, וְנִשְׁמָעֶנָּה.	13 but if ye cannot declare it me, then shall ye give me thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment.' And they said unto him: 'Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.'
14.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, מֵהָאֹכֵל יָצָא מַאֲכָל, וּמֵעַז, יָצָא מָתוֹק; וְלֹא יָכְלוּ לְהַגִּיד הַחִידָה, שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים.	14 And he said unto them: Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days declare the riddle.
14.15 טו  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לְאֵשֶׁת-שִׁמְשׁוֹן פַּתִּי אֶת-אִישֵׁךְ וְיַגֶּד-לָנוּ אֶת-הַחִידָה--פֶּן-נִשְׂרֹף אוֹתָךְ וְאֶת-בֵּית אָבִיךְ, בָּאֵשׁ; הַלְיָרְשֵׁנוּ, קְרָאתֶם לָנוּ הֲלֹא.	15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson's wife: 'Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire; have ye called us hither to impoverish us?'
14.16 טז  וַתֵּבְךְּ אֵשֶׁת שִׁמְשׁוֹן עָלָיו, וַתֹּאמֶר רַק-שְׂנֵאתַנִי וְלֹא אֲהַבְתָּנִי--הַחִידָה חַדְתָּ לִבְנֵי עַמִּי, וְלִי לֹא הִגַּדְתָּה; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ, הִנֵּה לְאָבִי וּלְאִמִּי לֹא הִגַּדְתִּי--וְלָךְ אַגִּיד.	16 And Samson's wife wept before him, and said: 'Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not; thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and wilt thou not tell it me?' And he said unto her: 'Behold, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell thee?'
14.17 יז  וַתֵּבְךְּ עָלָיו שִׁבְעַת הַיָּמִים, אֲשֶׁר-הָיָה לָהֶם הַמִּשְׁתֶּה; וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וַיַּגֶּד-לָהּ כִּי הֱצִיקַתְהוּ, וַתַּגֵּד הַחִידָה, לִבְנֵי עַמָּהּ.	17 And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted; and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she pressed him sore; and she told the riddle to the children of her people.
14.18 יח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, בְּטֶרֶם יָבֹא הַחַרְסָה, מַה-מָּתוֹק מִדְּבַשׁ, וּמֶה עַז מֵאֲרִי; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם--לוּלֵא חֲרַשְׁתֶּם בְּעֶגְלָתִי, לֹא מְצָאתֶם חִידָתִי.	18 And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down: What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said unto them: If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.
14.19 יט  וַתִּצְלַח עָלָיו רוּחַ יְהוָה, וַיֵּרֶד אַשְׁקְלוֹן וַיַּךְ מֵהֶם שְׁלֹשִׁים אִישׁ וַיִּקַּח אֶת-חֲלִיצוֹתָם, וַיִּתֵּן הַחֲלִיפוֹת, לְמַגִּידֵי הַחִידָה; וַיִּחַר אַפּוֹ, וַיַּעַל בֵּית אָבִיהוּ.	19 And the spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and smote thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave the changes of raiment unto them that declared the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.
14.20 כ  וַתְּהִי, אֵשֶׁת שִׁמְשׁוֹן, לְמֵרֵעֵהוּ, אֲשֶׁר רֵעָה לוֹ.  {פ}	20 But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had had for his friend. {P}
15.1 א  וַיְהִי מִיָּמִים בִּימֵי קְצִיר-חִטִּים, וַיִּפְקֹד שִׁמְשׁוֹן אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ בִּגְדִי עִזִּים, וַיֹּאמֶר, אָבֹאָה אֶל-אִשְׁתִּי הֶחָדְרָה; וְלֹא-נְתָנוֹ אָבִיהָ, לָבוֹא.	1 But it came to pass after a while, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said: 'I will go in to my wife into the chamber.' But her father would not suffer him to go in.
15.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אָבִיהָ, אָמֹר אָמַרְתִּי כִּי-שָׂנֹא שְׂנֵאתָהּ, וָאֶתְּנֶנָּה, לְמֵרֵעֶךָ; הֲלֹא אֲחוֹתָהּ הַקְּטַנָּה טוֹבָה מִמֶּנָּה, תְּהִי-נָא לְךָ תַּחְתֶּיהָ.	2 And her father said: 'I verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion; is not her younger sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.'
15.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם שִׁמְשׁוֹן, נִקֵּיתִי הַפַּעַם מִפְּלִשְׁתִּים:  כִּי-עֹשֶׂה אֲנִי עִמָּם, רָעָה.	3 And Samson said unto them: 'This time shall I be quits with the Philistines, when I do them a mischief.'
15.4 ד  וַיֵּלֶךְ שִׁמְשׁוֹן, וַיִּלְכֹּד שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת שׁוּעָלִים; וַיִּקַּח לַפִּדִים, וַיֶּפֶן זָנָב אֶל-זָנָב, וַיָּשֶׂם לַפִּיד אֶחָד בֵּין-שְׁנֵי הַזְּנָבוֹת, בַּתָּוֶךְ.	4 And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took torches, and turned tail to tail, and put a torch in the midst between every two tails.
15.5 ה  וַיַּבְעֶר-אֵשׁ בַּלַּפִּידִים, וַיְשַׁלַּח בְּקָמוֹת פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיַּבְעֵר מִגָּדִישׁ וְעַד-קָמָה, וְעַד-כֶּרֶם זָיִת.	5 And when he had set the torches on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks and the standing corn, and also the oliveyards.
15.6 ו  וַיֹּאמְרוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, מִי עָשָׂה זֹאת, וַיֹּאמְרוּ שִׁמְשׁוֹן חֲתַן הַתִּמְנִי, כִּי לָקַח אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ וַיִּתְּנָהּ לְמֵרֵעֵהוּ; וַיַּעֲלוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיִּשְׂרְפוּ אוֹתָהּ וְאֶת-אָבִיהָ בָּאֵשׁ.	6 Then the Philistines said: 'Who hath done this?' And they said: 'Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he hath taken his wife, and given her to his companion.' And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.
15.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם שִׁמְשׁוֹן, אִם-תַּעֲשׂוּן כָּזֹאת:  כִּי אִם-נִקַּמְתִּי בָכֶם, וְאַחַר אֶחְדָּל.	7 And Samson said unto them: 'If ye do after this manner, surely I will be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.'
15.8 ח  וַיַּךְ אוֹתָם שׁוֹק עַל-יָרֵךְ, מַכָּה גְדוֹלָה; וַיֵּרֶד וַיֵּשֶׁב, בִּסְעִיף סֶלַע עֵיטָם.  {פ}	8 And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter; and he went down and dwelt in the cleft of the rock of Etam. {P}
15.9 ט  וַיַּעֲלוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיַּחֲנוּ בִּיהוּדָה; וַיִּנָּטְשׁוּ, בַּלֶּחִי.	9 Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread themselves against Lehi.
15.10 י  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אִישׁ יְהוּדָה, לָמָה עֲלִיתֶם עָלֵינוּ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֶאֱסוֹר אֶת-שִׁמְשׁוֹן עָלִינוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת לוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לָנוּ.	10 And the men of Judah said: 'Why are ye come up against us?' And they said: 'To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done to us.'
15.11 יא  וַיֵּרְדוּ שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ מִיהוּדָה, אֶל-סְעִיף סֶלַע עֵיטָם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לְשִׁמְשׁוֹן הֲלֹא יָדַעְתָּ כִּי-מֹשְׁלִים בָּנוּ פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וּמַה-זֹּאת עָשִׂיתָ לָּנוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לִי, כֵּן עָשִׂיתִי לָהֶם.	11 Then three thousand men of Judah went down to the cleft of the rock of Etam, and said to Samson: 'Knowest thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? what then is this that thou hast done unto us?' And he said unto them: 'As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.'
15.12 יב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ לֶאֱסָרְךָ יָרַדְנוּ, לְתִתְּךָ בְּיַד-פְּלִשְׁתִּים; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, שִׁמְשׁוֹן, הִשָּׁבְעוּ לִי, פֶּן-תִּפְגְּעוּן בִּי אַתֶּם.	12 And they said unto him: 'We are come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines.' And Samson said unto them: 'Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.'
15.13 יג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ לֵאמֹר, לֹא כִּי-אָסֹר נֶאֱסָרְךָ וּנְתַנּוּךָ בְיָדָם, וְהָמֵת, לֹא נְמִיתֶךָ; וַיַּאַסְרֻהוּ, בִּשְׁנַיִם עֲבֹתִים חֲדָשִׁים, וַיַּעֲלוּהוּ, מִן-הַסָּלַע.	13 And they spoke unto him, saying: 'No; but we will bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand; but surely we will not kill thee.' And they bound him with two new ropes, and brought him up from the rock.
15.14 יד  הוּא-בָא עַד-לֶחִי, וּפְלִשְׁתִּים הֵרִיעוּ לִקְרָאתוֹ; וַתִּצְלַח עָלָיו רוּחַ יְהוָה, וַתִּהְיֶינָה הָעֲבֹתִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-זְרוֹעוֹתָיו כַּפִּשְׁתִּים אֲשֶׁר בָּעֲרוּ בָאֵשׁ, וַיִּמַּסּוּ אֱסוּרָיו, מֵעַל יָדָיו.	14 When he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted as they met him; and the spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and the ropes that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands dropped from off his hands.
15.15 טו  וַיִּמְצָא לְחִי-חֲמוֹר, טְרִיָּה; וַיִּשְׁלַח יָדוֹ וַיִּקָּחֶהָ, וַיַּךְ-בָּהּ אֶלֶף אִישׁ.	15 And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, and smote a thousand men therewith.
15.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר שִׁמְשׁוֹן--בִּלְחִי הַחֲמוֹר, חֲמוֹר חֲמֹרָתָיִם; בִּלְחִי הַחֲמוֹר, הִכֵּיתִי אֶלֶף אִישׁ.	16 And Samson said: With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jawbone of an ass have I smitten a thousand men.
15.17 יז  וַיְהִי כְּכַלֹּתוֹ לְדַבֵּר, וַיַּשְׁלֵךְ הַלְּחִי מִיָּדוֹ; וַיִּקְרָא לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, רָמַת לֶחִי.	17 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand; and that place was called Ramath-lehi.
15.18 יח  וַיִּצְמָא, מְאֹד, וַיִּקְרָא אֶל-יְהוָה וַיֹּאמַר, אַתָּה נָתַתָּ בְיַד-עַבְדְּךָ אֶת-הַתְּשׁוּעָה הַגְּדֹלָה הַזֹּאת; וְעַתָּה אָמוּת בַּצָּמָא, וְנָפַלְתִּי בְּיַד הָעֲרֵלִים.	18 And he was sore athirst, and called on the LORD, and said: 'Thou hast given this great deliverance by the hand of Thy servant; and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?'
15.19 יט  וַיִּבְקַע אֱלֹהִים אֶת-הַמַּכְתֵּשׁ אֲשֶׁר-בַּלֶּחִי, וַיֵּצְאוּ מִמֶּנּוּ מַיִם וַיֵּשְׁתְּ, וַתָּשָׁב רוּחוֹ, וַיֶּחִי; עַל-כֵּן קָרָא שְׁמָהּ, עֵין הַקּוֹרֵא אֲשֶׁר בַּלֶּחִי, עַד, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.	19 But God cleaved the hollow place that is in Lehi, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came back, and he revived; wherefore the name thereof was called En-hakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.
15.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁפֹּט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל בִּימֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה.  {פ}	20 And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years. {P}
16.1 א  וַיֵּלֶךְ שִׁמְשׁוֹן, עַזָּתָה; וַיַּרְא-שָׁם אִשָּׁה זוֹנָה, וַיָּבֹא אֵלֶיהָ.	1 And Samson went to Gaza, and saw there a harlot, and went in unto her.
16.2 ב  לַעַזָּתִים לֵאמֹר, בָּא שִׁמְשׁוֹן הֵנָּה, וַיָּסֹבּוּ וַיֶּאֶרְבוּ-לוֹ כָל-הַלַּיְלָה, בְּשַׁעַר הָעִיר; וַיִּתְחָרְשׁוּ כָל-הַלַּיְלָה לֵאמֹר, עַד-אוֹר הַבֹּקֶר וַהֲרַגְנֻהוּ.	2 [And it was told] the Gazites, saying: 'Samson is come hither.' And they compassed him in, and lay in wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying: 'Let be till morning light, then we will kill him.'
16.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁכַּב שִׁמְשׁוֹן, עַד-חֲצִי הַלַּיְלָה, וַיָּקָם בַּחֲצִי הַלַּיְלָה וַיֶּאֱחֹז בְּדַלְתוֹת שַׁעַר-הָעִיר וּבִשְׁתֵּי הַמְּזֻזוֹת, וַיִּסָּעֵם עִם-הַבְּרִיחַ וַיָּשֶׂם עַל-כְּתֵפָיו; וַיַּעֲלֵם אֶל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי חֶבְרוֹן.  {פ}	3 And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and laid hold of the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and plucked them up, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of the mountain that is before Hebron. {P}
16.4 ד  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי-כֵן, וַיֶּאֱהַב אִשָּׁה, בְּנַחַל שֹׂרֵק; וּשְׁמָהּ, דְּלִילָה.	4 And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.
16.5 ה  וַיַּעֲלוּ אֵלֶיהָ סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָהּ פַּתִּי אוֹתוֹ וּרְאִי בַּמֶּה כֹּחוֹ גָדוֹל, וּבַמֶּה נוּכַל לוֹ, וַאֲסַרְנוּהוּ לְעַנּוֹתוֹ; וַאֲנַחְנוּ, נִתַּן-לָךְ, אִישׁ, אֶלֶף וּמֵאָה כָּסֶף.	5 And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her: 'Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him; and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.'
16.6 ו  וַתֹּאמֶר דְּלִילָה, אֶל-שִׁמְשׁוֹן, הַגִּידָה-נָּא לִי, בַּמֶּה כֹּחֲךָ גָדוֹל; וּבַמֶּה תֵאָסֵר, לְעַנּוֹתֶךָ.	6 And Delilah said to Samson: 'Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.'
16.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ, שִׁמְשׁוֹן, אִם-יַאַסְרֻנִי בְּשִׁבְעָה יְתָרִים לַחִים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-חֹרָבוּ--וְחָלִיתִי וְהָיִיתִי, כְּאַחַד הָאָדָם.	7 And Samson said unto her: 'If they bind me with seven fresh bowstrings that were never dried, then shall I become weak, and be as any other man.'
16.8 ח  וַיַּעֲלוּ-לָהּ סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, שִׁבְעָה יְתָרִים לַחִים--אֲשֶׁר לֹא-חֹרָבוּ; וַתַּאַסְרֵהוּ, בָּהֶם.	8 Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven fresh bowstrings which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.
16.9 ט  וְהָאֹרֵב, יֹשֵׁב לָהּ בַּחֶדֶר, וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, פְּלִשְׁתִּים עָלֶיךָ שִׁמְשׁוֹן; וַיְנַתֵּק, אֶת-הַיְתָרִים, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִנָּתֵק פְּתִיל-הַנְּעֹרֶת בַּהֲרִיחוֹ אֵשׁ, וְלֹא נוֹדַע כֹּחוֹ.	9 Now she had liers-in-wait abiding in the inner chamber. And she said unto him: 'The Philistines are upon thee, Samson.' And he broke the bowstrings as a string of tow is broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known.
16.10 י  וַתֹּאמֶר דְּלִילָה, אֶל-שִׁמְשׁוֹן, הִנֵּה הֵתַלְתָּ בִּי, וַתְּדַבֵּר אֵלַי כְּזָבִים; עַתָּה הַגִּידָה-נָּא לִי, בַּמֶּה תֵּאָסֵר.	10 And Delilah said unto Samson: 'Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me lies; now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound.'
16.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ--אִם-אָסוֹר יַאַסְרוּנִי בַּעֲבֹתִים חֲדָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נַעֲשָׂה בָהֶם מְלָאכָה:  וְחָלִיתִי וְהָיִיתִי, כְּאַחַד הָאָדָם.	11 And he said unto her: 'If they only bind me with new ropes wherewith no work hath been done, then shall I become weak, and be as any other man.'
16.12 יב  וַתִּקַּח דְּלִילָה עֲבֹתִים חֲדָשִׁים וַתַּאַסְרֵהוּ בָהֶם, וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו פְּלִשְׁתִּים עָלֶיךָ שִׁמְשׁוֹן, וְהָאֹרֵב, יֹשֵׁב בֶּחָדֶר; וַיְנַתְּקֵם מֵעַל זְרֹעֹתָיו, כַּחוּט.	12 So Delilah took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him: 'The Philistines are upon thee, Samson.' And the liers-in-wait were abiding in the inner chamber. And he broke them from off his arms like a thread.
16.13 יג  וַתֹּאמֶר דְּלִילָה אֶל-שִׁמְשׁוֹן, עַד-הֵנָּה הֵתַלְתָּ בִּי וַתְּדַבֵּר אֵלַי כְּזָבִים--הַגִּידָה לִּי, בַּמֶּה תֵּאָסֵר; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ--אִם-תַּאַרְגִי אֶת-שֶׁבַע מַחְלְפוֹת רֹאשִׁי, עִם-הַמַּסָּכֶת.	13 And Delilah said unto Samson: 'Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies; tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound.' And he said unto her: 'If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.'
16.14 יד  וַתִּתְקַע, בַּיָּתֵד, וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, פְּלִשְׁתִּים עָלֶיךָ שִׁמְשׁוֹן; וַיִּיקַץ, מִשְּׁנָתוֹ, וַיִּסַּע אֶת-הַיְתַד הָאֶרֶג, וְאֶת-הַמַּסָּכֶת.	14 And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him: 'The Philistines are upon thee, Samson.' And he awoke out of his sleep, and plucked away the pin of the beam, and the web.
16.15 טו  וַתֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אֵיךְ תֹּאמַר אֲהַבְתִּיךְ, וְלִבְּךָ, אֵין אִתִּי:  זֶה שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים, הֵתַלְתָּ בִּי, וְלֹא-הִגַּדְתָּ לִּי, בַּמֶּה כֹּחֲךָ גָדוֹל.	15 And she said unto him: 'How canst thou say: I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.'
16.16 טז  וַיְהִי כִּי-הֵצִיקָה לּוֹ בִדְבָרֶיהָ, כָּל-הַיָּמִים--וַתְּאַלְצֵהוּ; וַתִּקְצַר נַפְשׁוֹ, לָמוּת.	16 And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, that his soul was vexed unto death.
16.17 יז  וַיַּגֶּד-לָהּ אֶת-כָּל-לִבּוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר לָהּ מוֹרָה לֹא-עָלָה עַל-רֹאשִׁי--כִּי-נְזִיר אֱלֹהִים אֲנִי, מִבֶּטֶן אִמִּי; אִם-גֻּלַּחְתִּי וְסָר מִמֶּנִּי כֹחִי, וְחָלִיתִי וְהָיִיתִי כְּכָל-הָאָדָם.	17 And he told her all his heart, and said unto her: 'There hath not come a razor upon my head; for I have been a Nazirite unto God from my mother's womb; if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any other man.'
16.18 יח  וַתֵּרֶא דְלִילָה, כִּי-הִגִּיד לָהּ אֶת-כָּל-לִבּוֹ, וַתִּשְׁלַח וַתִּקְרָא לְסַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים לֵאמֹר עֲלוּ הַפַּעַם, כִּי-הִגִּיד לה (לִי) אֶת-כָּל-לִבּוֹ; וְעָלוּ אֵלֶיהָ סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיַּעֲלוּ הַכֶּסֶף בְּיָדָם.	18 And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying: 'Come up this once, for he hath told me all his heart.' Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and brought the money in their hand.
16.19 יט  וַתְּיַשְּׁנֵהוּ, עַל-בִּרְכֶּיהָ, וַתִּקְרָא לָאִישׁ, וַתְּגַלַּח אֶת-שֶׁבַע מַחְלְפוֹת רֹאשׁוֹ; וַתָּחֶל, לְעַנּוֹתוֹ, וַיָּסַר כֹּחוֹ, מֵעָלָיו.	19 And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man, and had the seven locks of his head shaven off; and she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.
16.20 כ  וַתֹּאמֶר, פְּלִשְׁתִּים עָלֶיךָ שִׁמְשׁוֹן; וַיִּקַץ מִשְּׁנָתוֹ, וַיֹּאמֶר אֵצֵא כְּפַעַם בְּפַעַם וְאִנָּעֵר, וְהוּא לֹא יָדַע, כִּי יְהוָה סָר מֵעָלָיו.	20 And she said: 'The Philistines are upon thee, Samson.' And he awoke out of his sleep, and said: 'I will go out as at other times, and shake myself.' But he knew not that the LORD was departed from him.
16.21 כא  וַיֹּאחֲזוּהוּ פְלִשְׁתִּים, וַיְנַקְּרוּ אֶת-עֵינָיו; וַיּוֹרִידוּ אוֹתוֹ עַזָּתָה, וַיַּאַסְרוּהוּ בַּנְחֻשְׁתַּיִם, וַיְהִי טוֹחֵן, בְּבֵית האסירים (הָאֲסוּרִים).	21 And the Philistines laid hold on him, and put out his eyes; and they brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in the prison-house.
16.22 כב  וַיָּחֶל שְׂעַר-רֹאשׁוֹ לְצַמֵּחַ, כַּאֲשֶׁר גֻּלָּח.  {פ}	22 Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven. {P}
16.23 כג  וְסַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים, נֶאֶסְפוּ לִזְבֹּחַ זֶבַח-גָּדוֹל לְדָגוֹן אֱלֹהֵיהֶם--וּלְשִׂמְחָה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ--נָתַן אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְּיָדֵנוּ, אֵת שִׁמְשׁוֹן אוֹיְבֵנוּ.	23 And the lords of the Philistines gathered them together to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice; for they said: 'Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.'
16.24 כד  וַיִּרְאוּ אֹתוֹ הָעָם, וַיְהַלְלוּ אֶת-אֱלֹהֵיהֶם:  כִּי אָמְרוּ, נָתַן אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְיָדֵנוּ אֶת-אוֹיְבֵנוּ, וְאֵת מַחֲרִיב אַרְצֵנוּ, וַאֲשֶׁר הִרְבָּה אֶת-חֲלָלֵינוּ.	24 And when the people saw him, they praised their god; for they said: 'Our god hath delivered into our hand our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, who hath slain many of us.'
16.25 כה  וַיְהִי, כי טוב (כְּטוֹב) לִבָּם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, קִרְאוּ לְשִׁמְשׁוֹן וִישַׂחֶק-לָנוּ; וַיִּקְרְאוּ לְשִׁמְשׁוֹן מִבֵּית האסירים (הָאֲסוּרִים), וַיְצַחֵק לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַיַּעֲמִידוּ אוֹתוֹ, בֵּין הָעַמּוּדִים.	25 And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said: 'Call for Samson, that he may make us sport.' And they called for Samson out of the prison-house; and he made sport before them; and they set him between the pillars.
16.26 כו  וַיֹּאמֶר שִׁמְשׁוֹן אֶל-הַנַּעַר הַמַּחֲזִיק בְּיָדוֹ, הַנִּיחָה אוֹתִי, והימשני (וַהֲמִישֵׁנִי) אֶת-הָעַמֻּדִים, אֲשֶׁר הַבַּיִת נָכוֹן עֲלֵיהֶם; וְאֶשָּׁעֵן, עֲלֵיהֶם.	26 And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand: 'Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house resteth, that I may lean upon them.'
16.27 כז  וְהַבַּיִת, מָלֵא הָאֲנָשִׁים וְהַנָּשִׁים, וְשָׁמָּה, כֹּל סַרְנֵי פְלִשְׁתִּים; וְעַל-הַגָּג, כִּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ וְאִשָּׁה, הָרֹאִים, בִּשְׂחוֹק שִׁמְשׁוֹן.	27 Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.
16.28 כח  וַיִּקְרָא שִׁמְשׁוֹן אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה זָכְרֵנִי נָא וְחַזְּקֵנִי נָא אַךְ הַפַּעַם הַזֶּה, הָאֱלֹהִים, וְאִנָּקְמָה נְקַם-אַחַת מִשְּׁתֵי עֵינַי, מִפְּלִשְׁתִּים.	28 And Samson called unto the LORD, and said: 'O Lord GOD, remember me, I pray Thee, and strengthen me, I pray Thee, only this once, O God, that I may be this once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.'
16.29 כט  וַיִּלְפֹּת שִׁמְשׁוֹן אֶת-שְׁנֵי עַמּוּדֵי הַתָּוֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר הַבַּיִת נָכוֹן עֲלֵיהֶם, וַיִּסָּמֵךְ, עֲלֵיהֶם--אֶחָד בִּימִינוֹ, וְאֶחָד בִּשְׂמֹאלוֹ.	29 And Samson took fast hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house rested, and leaned upon them, the one with his right hand, and the other with his left.
16.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר שִׁמְשׁוֹן, תָּמוֹת נַפְשִׁי עִם-פְּלִשְׁתִּים, וַיֵּט בְּכֹחַ, וַיִּפֹּל הַבַּיִת עַל-הַסְּרָנִים וְעַל-כָּל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ; וַיִּהְיוּ הַמֵּתִים, אֲשֶׁר הֵמִית בְּמוֹתוֹ, רַבִּים, מֵאֲשֶׁר הֵמִית בְּחַיָּיו.	30 And Samson said: 'Let me die with the Philistines.' And he bent with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and upon all the people that were therein. So the dead that he slew at his death were more than they that he slew in his life.
16.31 לא  וַיֵּרְדוּ אֶחָיו וְכָל-בֵּית אָבִיהוּ, וַיִּשְׂאוּ אֹתוֹ, וַיַּעֲלוּ וַיִּקְבְּרוּ אוֹתוֹ בֵּין צָרְעָה וּבֵין אֶשְׁתָּאֹל, בְּקֶבֶר מָנוֹחַ אָבִיו; וְהוּא שָׁפַט אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה.  {פ}	31 Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the burying-place of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years. {P}
17.1 א  וַיְהִי-אִישׁ מֵהַר-אֶפְרָיִם, וּשְׁמוֹ מִיכָיְהוּ.	1 Now there was a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, whose name was Micah.
17.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר לְאִמּוֹ אֶלֶף וּמֵאָה הַכֶּסֶף אֲשֶׁר לֻקַּח-לָךְ, ואתי (וְאַתְּ) אָלִית וְגַם אָמַרְתְּ בְּאָזְנַי, הִנֵּה-הַכֶּסֶף אִתִּי, אֲנִי לְקַחְתִּיו; וַתֹּאמֶר אִמּוֹ, בָּרוּךְ בְּנִי לַיהוָה.	2 And he said unto his mother: 'The eleven hundred pieces of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou didst utter a curse, and didst also speak it in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it.' And his mother said: 'Blessed be my son of the LORD.'
17.3 ג  וַיָּשֶׁב אֶת-אֶלֶף-וּמֵאָה הַכֶּסֶף, לְאִמּוֹ; וַתֹּאמֶר אִמּוֹ הַקְדֵּשׁ הִקְדַּשְׁתִּי אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף לַיהוָה מִיָּדִי לִבְנִי, לַעֲשׂוֹת פֶּסֶל וּמַסֵּכָה, וְעַתָּה, אֲשִׁיבֶנּוּ לָךְ.	3 And he restored the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother, and his mother said: 'I verily dedicate the silver unto the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten image; now therefore I will restore it unto thee.'
17.4 ד  וַיָּשֶׁב אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף, לְאִמּוֹ; וַתִּקַּח אִמּוֹ מָאתַיִם כֶּסֶף וַתִּתְּנֵהוּ לַצּוֹרֵף, וַיַּעֲשֵׂהוּ פֶּסֶל וּמַסֵּכָה, וַיְהִי, בְּבֵית מִיכָיְהוּ.	4 And when he restored the money unto his mother, his mother took two hundred pieces of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image; and it was in the house of Micah.
17.5 ה  וְהָאִישׁ מִיכָה, לוֹ בֵּית אֱלֹהִים; וַיַּעַשׂ אֵפוֹד, וּתְרָפִים, וַיְמַלֵּא אֶת-יַד אַחַד מִבָּנָיו, וַיְהִי-לוֹ לְכֹהֵן.	5 And the man Micah had a house of God, and he made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.
17.6 ו  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, אֵין מֶלֶךְ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  אִישׁ הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינָיו, יַעֲשֶׂה.  {פ}	6 In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did that which was right in his own eyes. {P}
17.7 ז  וַיְהִי-נַעַר, מִבֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה, מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת, יְהוּדָה; וְהוּא לֵוִי, וְהוּא גָר-שָׁם.	7 And there was a young man out of Beth-lehem in Judah--in the family of Judah--who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.
17.8 ח  וַיֵּלֶךְ הָאִישׁ מֵהָעִיר, מִבֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה, לָגוּר, בַּאֲשֶׁר יִמְצָא; וַיָּבֹא הַר-אֶפְרַיִם עַד-בֵּית מִיכָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת דַּרְכּוֹ.	8 And the man departed out of the city, out of Beth-lehem in Judah, to sojourn where he could find a place; and he came to the hill-country of Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.
17.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר-לוֹ מִיכָה, מֵאַיִן תָּבוֹא; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו לֵוִי אָנֹכִי, מִבֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה, וְאָנֹכִי הֹלֵךְ, לָגוּר בַּאֲשֶׁר אֶמְצָא.	9 And Micah said unto him: 'Whence comest thou?' And he said unto him: 'I am a Levite of Beth-lehem in Judah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a place.'
17.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ מִיכָה שְׁבָה עִמָּדִי, וֶהְיֵה-לִי לְאָב וּלְכֹהֵן, וְאָנֹכִי אֶתֶּן-לְךָ עֲשֶׂרֶת כֶּסֶף לַיָּמִים, וְעֵרֶךְ בְּגָדִים וּמִחְיָתֶךָ; וַיֵּלֶךְ, הַלֵּוִי.	10 And Micah said unto him: 'Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee ten pieces of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals.' So the Levite went in.
17.11 יא  וַיּוֹאֶל הַלֵּוִי, לָשֶׁבֶת אֶת-הָאִישׁ; וַיְהִי הַנַּעַר לוֹ, כְּאַחַד מִבָּנָיו.	11 And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons.
17.12 יב  וַיְמַלֵּא מִיכָה אֶת-יַד הַלֵּוִי, וַיְהִי-לוֹ הַנַּעַר לְכֹהֵן; וַיְהִי, בְּבֵית מִיכָה.	12 And Micah consecrated the Levite, and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah.
17.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר מִיכָה--עַתָּה יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-יֵיטִיב יְהוָה לִי:  כִּי הָיָה-לִי הַלֵּוִי, לְכֹהֵן.  {פ}	13 Then said Micah: 'Now know I that the LORD will do me good, seeing I have a Levite as my priest.' {P}
18.1 א  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, אֵין מֶלֶךְ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבַיָּמִים הָהֵם, שֵׁבֶט הַדָּנִי מְבַקֶּשׁ-לוֹ נַחֲלָה לָשֶׁבֶת--כִּי לֹא-נָפְלָה לּוֹ עַד-הַיּוֹם הַהוּא בְּתוֹךְ-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּנַחֲלָה.  {פ}	1 In those days there was no king in Israel; and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto that day there had nothing been allotted unto them among the tribes of Israel for an inheritance. {P}
18.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ בְנֵי-דָן מִמִּשְׁפַּחְתָּם חֲמִשָּׁה אֲנָשִׁים מִקְצוֹתָם אֲנָשִׁים בְּנֵי-חַיִל מִצָּרְעָה וּמֵאֶשְׁתָּאֹל, לְרַגֵּל אֶת-הָאָרֶץ וּלְחָקְרָהּ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֲלֵהֶם, לְכוּ חִקְרוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וַיָּבֹאוּ הַר-אֶפְרַיִם עַד-בֵּית מִיכָה, וַיָּלִינוּ שָׁם.	2 And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their whole number, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them: 'Go, search the land'; and they came to the hill-country of Ephraim, unto the house of Micah, and lodged there.
18.3 ג  הֵמָּה, עִם-בֵּית מִיכָה, וְהֵמָּה הִכִּירוּ, אֶת-קוֹל הַנַּעַר הַלֵּוִי; וַיָּסוּרוּ שָׁם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ מִי-הֱבִיאֲךָ הֲלֹם, וּמָה-אַתָּה עֹשֶׂה בָּזֶה, וּמַה-לְּךָ פֹה.	3 When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Levite; and they turned aside thither, and said unto him: 'Who brought thee hither? and what doest thou in this place? and what hast thou here?'
18.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם--כָּזֹה וְכָזֶה, עָשָׂה לִי מִיכָה; וַיִּשְׂכְּרֵנִי, וָאֱהִי-לוֹ לְכֹהֵן.	4 And he said unto them: 'Thus and thus hath Micah dealt with me, and he hath hired me, and I am become his priest.'
18.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ, שְׁאַל-נָא בֵאלֹהִים; וְנֵדְעָה--הֲתַצְלִחַ דַּרְכֵּנוּ, אֲשֶׁר אֲנַחְנוּ הֹלְכִים עָלֶיהָ.	5 And they said unto him: 'Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we are going shall be prosperous.'
18.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם הַכֹּהֵן, לְכוּ לְשָׁלוֹם; נֹכַח יְהוָה, דַּרְכְּכֶם אֲשֶׁר תֵּלְכוּ-בָהּ.  {פ}	6 And the priest said unto them: 'Go in peace; before the LORD is your way wherein ye go.' {P}
18.7 ז  וַיֵּלְכוּ חֲמֵשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים, וַיָּבֹאוּ לָיְשָׁה; וַיִּרְאוּ אֶת-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-בְּקִרְבָּהּ יוֹשֶׁבֶת-לָבֶטַח כְּמִשְׁפַּט צִדֹנִים שֹׁקֵט וּבֹטֵחַ, וְאֵין-מַכְלִים דָּבָר בָּאָרֶץ יוֹרֵשׁ עֶצֶר, וּרְחוֹקִים הֵמָּה מִצִּידֹנִים, וְדָבָר אֵין-לָהֶם עִם-אָדָם.	7 Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt in security, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; for there was none in the land, possessing authority, that might put them to shame in any thing, and they were far from the Zidonians, and had no dealings with any man.
18.8 ח  וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-אֲחֵיהֶם, צָרְעָה, וְאֶשְׁתָּאֹל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָהֶם אֲחֵיהֶם, מָה אַתֶּם.	8 And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol; and their brethren said unto them: 'What say ye?'
18.9 ט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, קוּמָה וְנַעֲלֶה עֲלֵיהֶם, כִּי רָאִינוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וְהִנֵּה טוֹבָה מְאֹד; וְאַתֶּם מַחְשִׁים--אַל-תֵּעָצְלוּ, לָלֶכֶת לָבֹא לָרֶשֶׁת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	9 And they said: 'Arise, and let us go up against them; for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is very good; and are ye still? be not slothful to go and to enter in to possess the land.
18.10 י  כְּבֹאֲכֶם תָּבֹאוּ אֶל-עַם בֹּטֵחַ, וְהָאָרֶץ רַחֲבַת יָדַיִם--כִּי-נְתָנָהּ אֱלֹהִים, בְּיֶדְכֶם:  מָקוֹם אֲשֶׁר אֵין-שָׁם מַחְסוֹר, כָּל-דָּבָר אֲשֶׁר בָּאָרֶץ.	10 When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and the land is large; for God hath given it into your hand; a place where there is no want; it hath every thing that is in the earth.'
18.11 יא  וַיִּסְעוּ מִשָּׁם מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת הַדָּנִי, מִצָּרְעָה וּמֵאֶשְׁתָּאֹל, שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, חָגוּר כְּלֵי מִלְחָמָה.	11 And there set forth from thence of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men girt with weapons of war.
18.12 יב  וַיַּעֲלוּ, וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּקִרְיַת יְעָרִים--בִּיהוּדָה; עַל-כֵּן קָרְאוּ לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא מַחֲנֵה-דָן, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--הִנֵּה, אַחֲרֵי קִרְיַת יְעָרִים.	12 And they went up, and encamped in Kiriath-jearim, in Judah; wherefore that place was called Mahaneh-dan unto this day; behold, it is behind Kiriath-jearim.
18.13 יג  וַיַּעַבְרוּ מִשָּׁם, הַר-אֶפְרָיִם; וַיָּבֹאוּ, עַד-בֵּית מִיכָה.	13 And they passed thence unto the hill-country of Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah.
18.14 יד  וַיַּעֲנוּ חֲמֵשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַהֹלְכִים לְרַגֵּל אֶת-הָאָרֶץ לַיִשׁ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-אֲחֵיהֶם, הַיְדַעְתֶּם כִּי יֵשׁ בַּבָּתִּים הָאֵלֶּה אֵפוֹד וּתְרָפִים וּפֶסֶל וּמַסֵּכָה; וְעַתָּה, דְּעוּ מַה-תַּעֲשׂוּ.	14 Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren: 'Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.'
18.15 טו  וַיָּסוּרוּ שָׁמָּה, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-בֵּית-הַנַּעַר הַלֵּוִי בֵּית מִיכָה; וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ-לוֹ, לְשָׁלוֹם.	15 And they turned aside thither, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and asked him of his welfare.
18.16 טז  וְשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אִישׁ, חֲגוּרִים כְּלֵי מִלְחַמְתָּם, נִצָּבִים, פֶּתַח הַשָּׁעַר--אֲשֶׁר, מִבְּנֵי-דָן.	16 And the six hundred men girt with their weapons of war, who were of the children of Dan, stood by the entrance of the gate.
18.17 יז  וַיַּעֲלוּ חֲמֵשֶׁת הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַהֹלְכִים לְרַגֵּל אֶת-הָאָרֶץ--בָּאוּ שָׁמָּה, לָקְחוּ אֶת-הַפֶּסֶל וְאֶת-הָאֵפוֹד וְאֶת-הַתְּרָפִים וְאֶת-הַמַּסֵּכָה; וְהַכֹּהֵן, נִצָּב פֶּתַח הַשַּׁעַר, וְשֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת הָאִישׁ, הֶחָגוּר כְּלֵי הַמִּלְחָמָה.	17 And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image; and the priest stood by the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men girt with weapons of war.
18.18 יח  וְאֵלֶּה, בָּאוּ בֵּית מִיכָה, וַיִּקְחוּ אֶת-פֶּסֶל הָאֵפוֹד, וְאֶת-הַתְּרָפִים וְאֶת-הַמַּסֵּכָה; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם הַכֹּהֵן, מָה אַתֶּם עֹשִׂים.	18 And when these went into Micah's house, and fetched the graven image of the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image, the priest said unto them: 'What do ye?'
18.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ הַחֲרֵשׁ שִׂים-יָדְךָ עַל-פִּיךָ, וְלֵךְ עִמָּנוּ, וֶהְיֵה-לָנוּ, לְאָב וּלְכֹהֵן:  הֲטוֹב הֱיוֹתְךָ כֹהֵן, לְבֵית אִישׁ אֶחָד, אוֹ הֱיוֹתְךָ כֹהֵן, לְשֵׁבֶט וּלְמִשְׁפָּחָה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	19 And they said unto him: 'Hold thy peace, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest; is it better for thee to be priest unto the house of one man, or to be priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel?'
18.20 כ  וַיִּיטַב, לֵב הַכֹּהֵן, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הָאֵפוֹד, וְאֶת-הַתְּרָפִים וְאֶת-הַפָּסֶל; וַיָּבֹא, בְּקֶרֶב הָעָם.	20 And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people.
18.21 כא  וַיִּפְנוּ, וַיֵּלֵכוּ; וַיָּשִׂימוּ אֶת-הַטַּף וְאֶת-הַמִּקְנֶה, וְאֶת-הַכְּבוּדָּה--לִפְנֵיהֶם.	21 So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the goods before them.
18.22 כב  הֵמָּה הִרְחִיקוּ, מִבֵּית מִיכָה; וְהָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר בַּבָּתִּים אֲשֶׁר עִם-בֵּית מִיכָה, נִזְעֲקוּ, וַיַּדְבִּיקוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי-דָן.	22 When they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together, and overtook the children of Dan.
18.23 כג  וַיִּקְרְאוּ, אֶל-בְּנֵי-דָן, וַיַּסֵּבּוּ, פְּנֵיהֶם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לְמִיכָה, מַה-לְּךָ כִּי נִזְעָקְתָּ.	23 And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah: 'What aileth thee, that thou comest with such a company?'
18.24 כד  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶת-אֱלֹהַי אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי לְקַחְתֶּם וְאֶת-הַכֹּהֵן, וַתֵּלְכוּ--וּמַה-לִּי עוֹד; וּמַה-זֶּה תֹּאמְרוּ אֵלַי, מַה-לָּךְ.	24 And he said: 'Ye have taken away my god which I made, and the priest, and are gone away, and what have I more? and how then say ye unto me: What aileth thee?'
18.25 כה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו בְּנֵי-דָן, אַל-תַּשְׁמַע קוֹלְךָ עִמָּנוּ--פֶּן-יִפְגְּעוּ בָכֶם, אֲנָשִׁים מָרֵי נֶפֶשׁ, וְאָסַפְתָּה נַפְשְׁךָ, וְנֶפֶשׁ בֵּיתֶךָ.	25 And the children of Dan said unto him: 'Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows fall upon you, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.'
18.26 כו  וַיֵּלְכוּ בְנֵי-דָן, לְדַרְכָּם; וַיַּרְא מִיכָה, כִּי-חֲזָקִים הֵמָּה מִמֶּנּוּ, וַיִּפֶן, וַיָּשָׁב אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ.	26 And the children of Dan went their way; and when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.
18.27 כז  וְהֵמָּה לָקְחוּ אֵת אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה מִיכָה, וְאֶת-הַכֹּהֵן אֲשֶׁר הָיָה-לוֹ, וַיָּבֹאוּ עַל-לַיִשׁ עַל-עַם שֹׁקֵט וּבֹטֵחַ, וַיַּכּוּ אוֹתָם לְפִי-חָרֶב; וְאֶת-הָעִיר, שָׂרְפוּ בָאֵשׁ.	27 And they took that which Micah had made, and the priest whom he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people quiet and secure, and smote them with the edge of the sword; and they burnt the city with fire.
18.28 כח  וְאֵין מַצִּיל כִּי רְחוֹקָה-הִיא מִצִּידוֹן, וְדָבָר אֵין-לָהֶם עִם-אָדָם, וְהִיא, בָּעֵמֶק אֲשֶׁר לְבֵית-רְחוֹב; וַיִּבְנוּ אֶת-הָעִיר, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָהּ.	28 And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and they had no dealings with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth by Beth-rehob. And they built the city, and dwelt therein.
18.29 כט  וַיִּקְרְאוּ שֵׁם-הָעִיר, דָּן, בְּשֵׁם דָּן אֲבִיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר יוּלַּד לְיִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאוּלָם לַיִשׁ שֵׁם-הָעִיר, לָרִאשֹׁנָה.	29 And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto Israel; howbeit the name of the city was Laish at the first.
18.30 ל  וַיָּקִימוּ לָהֶם בְּנֵי-דָן, אֶת-הַפָּסֶל; וִיהוֹנָתָן בֶּן-גֵּרְשֹׁם בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה הוּא וּבָנָיו, הָיוּ כֹהֲנִים לְשֵׁבֶט הַדָּנִי, עַד-יוֹם, גְּלוֹת הָאָרֶץ.	30 And the children of Dan set up for themselves the graven image; and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of the Danites until the day of the captivity of the land.
18.31 לא  וַיָּשִׂימוּ לָהֶם, אֶת-פֶּסֶל מִיכָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, כָּל-יְמֵי הֱיוֹת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים, בְּשִׁלֹה.  {פ}	31 So they set them up Micah's graven image which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh. {P}
19.1 א  וַיְהִי בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, וּמֶלֶךְ אֵין בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיְהִי אִישׁ לֵוִי, גָּר בְּיַרְכְּתֵי הַר-אֶפְרַיִם, וַיִּקַּח-לוֹ אִשָּׁה פִילֶגֶשׁ, מִבֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה.	1 And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the farther side of the hill-country of Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Beth-lehem in Judah.
19.2 ב  וַתִּזְנֶה עָלָיו, פִּילַגְשׁוֹ, וַתֵּלֶךְ מֵאִתּוֹ אֶל-בֵּית אָבִיהָ, אֶל-בֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה; וַתְּהִי-שָׁם, יָמִים אַרְבָּעָה חֳדָשִׁים.	2 And his concubine played the harlot against him, and went away from him unto her father's house to Beth-lehem in Judah, and was there the space of four months.
19.3 ג  וַיָּקָם אִישָׁהּ וַיֵּלֶךְ אַחֲרֶיהָ, לְדַבֵּר עַל-לִבָּהּ להשיבו (לַהֲשִׁיבָהּ), וְנַעֲרוֹ עִמּוֹ, וְצֶמֶד חֲמֹרִים; וַתְּבִיאֵהוּ, בֵּית אָבִיהָ, וַיִּרְאֵהוּ אֲבִי הַנַּעֲרָה, וַיִּשְׂמַח לִקְרָאתוֹ.	3 And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak kindly unto her, to bring her back, having his servant with him, and a couple of asses; and she brought him into her father's house; and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.
19.4 ד  וַיַּחֲזֶק-בּוֹ חֹתְנוֹ אֲבִי הַנַּעֲרָה, וַיֵּשֶׁב אִתּוֹ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים; וַיֹּאכְלוּ, וַיִּשְׁתּוּ, וַיָּלִינוּ, שָׁם.	4 And his father-in-law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he abode with him three days; so they did eat and drink, and lodged there.
19.5 ה  וַיְהִי בַּיּוֹם הָרְבִיעִי, וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ בַבֹּקֶר וַיָּקָם לָלֶכֶת; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲבִי הַנַּעֲרָה אֶל-חֲתָנוֹ, סְעָד לִבְּךָ פַּת-לֶחֶם--וְאַחַר תֵּלֵכוּ.	5 And it came to pass on the fourth day, that they arose early in the morning, and he rose up to depart; and the damsel's father said unto his son-in-law: 'Stay thy heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward ye shall go your way.'
19.6 ו  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ, וַיֹּאכְלוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם יַחְדָּו--וַיִּשְׁתּוּ; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲבִי הַנַּעֲרָה, אֶל-הָאִישׁ, הוֹאֶל-נָא וְלִין, וְיִיטַב לִבֶּךָ.	6 So they sat down, and did eat and drink, both of them together; and the damsel's father said unto the man: 'Be content, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and let thy heart be merry.'
19.7 ז  וַיָּקָם הָאִישׁ, לָלֶכֶת; וַיִּפְצַר-בּוֹ, חֹתְנוֹ, וַיָּשָׁב, וַיָּלֶן שָׁם.	7 And the man rose up to depart; but his father-in-law urged him, and he lodged there again.
19.8 ח  וַיַּשְׁכֵּם בַּבֹּקֶר בַּיּוֹם הַחֲמִישִׁי, לָלֶכֶת, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲבִי הַנַּעֲרָה סְעָד-נָא לְבָבְךָ, וְהִתְמַהְמְהוּ עַד-נְטוֹת הַיּוֹם; וַיֹּאכְלוּ, שְׁנֵיהֶם.	8 And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and the damsel's father said: 'Stay thy heart, I pray thee, and tarry ye until the day declineth'; and they did eat, both of them.
19.9 ט  וַיָּקָם הָאִישׁ לָלֶכֶת, הוּא וּפִילַגְשׁוֹ וְנַעֲרוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ חֹתְנוֹ אֲבִי הַנַּעֲרָה הִנֵּה נָא רָפָה הַיּוֹם לַעֲרוֹב, לִינוּ-נָא הִנֵּה חֲנוֹת הַיּוֹם לִין פֹּה וְיִיטַב לְבָבֶךָ, וְהִשְׁכַּמְתֶּם מָחָר לְדַרְכְּכֶם, וְהָלַכְתָּ לְאֹהָלֶךָ.	9 And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father-in-law, the damsel's father, said unto him: 'Behold, now the day draweth toward evening; tarry, I pray you, all night; behold, the day groweth to an end; lodge here, that thy heart may be merry; and to-morrow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home.'
19.10 י  וְלֹא-אָבָה הָאִישׁ, לָלוּן, וַיָּקָם וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיָּבֹא עַד-נֹכַח יְבוּס, הִיא יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְעִמּוֹ, צֶמֶד חֲמוֹרִים חֲבוּשִׁים, וּפִילַגְשׁוֹ, עִמּוֹ.	10 But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against Jebus--the same is Jerusalem; and there were with him a couple of asses saddled; his concubine also was with him.
19.11 יא  הֵם עִם-יְבוּס, וְהַיּוֹם רַד מְאֹד; וַיֹּאמֶר הַנַּעַר אֶל-אֲדֹנָיו, לְכָה-נָּא וְנָסוּרָה אֶל-עִיר-הַיְבוּסִי הַזֹּאת--וְנָלִין בָּהּ.	11 When they were by Jebus--the day was far spent--the servant said unto his master: 'Come, I pray thee, and let us turn aside into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.'
19.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אֲדֹנָיו, לֹא נָסוּר אֶל-עִיר נָכְרִי, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל הֵנָּה; וְעָבַרְנוּ, עַד-גִּבְעָה.	12 And his master said unto him: 'We will not turn aside into the city of a foreigner, that is not of the children of Israel; but we will pass over to Gibeah.'
19.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר לְנַעֲרוֹ, לְךָ וְנִקְרְבָה בְּאַחַד הַמְּקֹמוֹת; וְלַנּוּ בַגִּבְעָה, אוֹ בָרָמָה.	13 And he said unto his servant: 'Come and let us draw near to one of these places; and we will lodge in Gibeah, or in Ramah.'
19.14 יד  וַיַּעַבְרוּ, וַיֵּלֵכוּ; וַתָּבֹא לָהֶם הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, אֵצֶל הַגִּבְעָה אֲשֶׁר לְבִנְיָמִן.	14 So they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them near to Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.
19.15 טו  וַיָּסֻרוּ שָׁם, לָבוֹא לָלוּן בַּגִּבְעָה; וַיָּבֹא, וַיֵּשֶׁב בִּרְחוֹב הָעִיר, וְאֵין אִישׁ מְאַסֵּף-אוֹתָם הַבַּיְתָה, לָלוּן.	15 And they turned aside thither, to go in to lodge in Gibeah; and he went in, and sat him down in the broad place of the city; for there was no man that took them into his house to lodge.
19.16 טז  וְהִנֵּה אִישׁ זָקֵן, בָּא מִן-מַעֲשֵׂהוּ מִן-הַשָּׂדֶה בָּעֶרֶב, וְהָאִישׁ מֵהַר אֶפְרַיִם, וְהוּא-גָר בַּגִּבְעָה; וְאַנְשֵׁי הַמָּקוֹם, בְּנֵי יְמִינִי.	16 And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even; now the man was of the hill-country of Ephraim, and he sojourned in Gibeah; but the men of the place were Benjamites.
19.17 יז  וַיִּשָּׂא עֵינָיו, וַיַּרְא אֶת-הָאִישׁ הָאֹרֵחַ--בִּרְחֹב הָעִיר; וַיֹּאמֶר הָאִישׁ הַזָּקֵן אָנָה תֵלֵךְ, וּמֵאַיִן תָּבוֹא.	17 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the wayfaring man in the broad place of the city; and the old man said: 'Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou?'
19.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, עֹבְרִים אֲנַחְנוּ מִבֵּית-לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה עַד-יַרְכְּתֵי הַר-אֶפְרַיִם--מִשָּׁם אָנֹכִי, וָאֵלֵךְ עַד-בֵּית לֶחֶם יְהוּדָה; וְאֶת-בֵּית יְהוָה, אֲנִי הֹלֵךְ, וְאֵין אִישׁ, מְאַסֵּף אוֹתִי הַבָּיְתָה.	18 And he said unto him: 'We are passing from Beth-lehem in Judah unto the farther side of the hill-country of Ephraim; from thence am I, and I went to Beth-lehem in Judah, and I am now going to the house of the LORD; and there is no man that taketh me into his house.
19.19 יט  וְגַם-תֶּבֶן גַּם-מִסְפּוֹא, יֵשׁ לַחֲמוֹרֵינוּ, וְגַם לֶחֶם וָיַיִן יֶשׁ-לִי וְלַאֲמָתֶךָ, וְלַנַּעַר עִם-עֲבָדֶיךָ:  אֵין מַחְסוֹר, כָּל-דָּבָר.	19 Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man that is with thy servants; there is no want of any thing.'
19.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר הָאִישׁ הַזָּקֵן שָׁלוֹם לָךְ, רַק כָּל-מַחְסוֹרְךָ עָלָי; רַק בָּרְחוֹב, אַל-תָּלַן.	20 And the old man said: 'Peace be unto thee; howsoever let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the broad place.'
19.21 כא  וַיְבִיאֵהוּ לְבֵיתוֹ, ויבול (וַיָּבָל) לַחֲמוֹרִים; וַיִּרְחֲצוּ, רַגְלֵיהֶם, וַיֹּאכְלוּ, וַיִּשְׁתּוּ.	21 So he brought him into his house, and gave the asses fodder; and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.
19.22 כב  הֵמָּה, מֵיטִיבִים אֶת-לִבָּם, וְהִנֵּה אַנְשֵׁי הָעִיר אַנְשֵׁי בְנֵי-בְלִיַּעַל נָסַבּוּ אֶת-הַבַּיִת, מִתְדַּפְּקִים עַל-הַדָּלֶת; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-הָאִישׁ בַּעַל הַבַּיִת הַזָּקֵן לֵאמֹר, הוֹצֵא אֶת-הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-בָּא אֶל-בֵּיתְךָ, וְנֵדָעֶנּוּ.	22 As they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain base fellows, beset the house round about, beating at the door; and they spoke to the master of the house, the old man, saying: 'Bring forth the man that came into thy house, that we may know him.'
19.23 כג  וַיֵּצֵא אֲלֵיהֶם, הָאִישׁ בַּעַל הַבַּיִת, וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, אַל-אַחַי אַל-תָּרֵעוּ נָא; אַחֲרֵי אֲשֶׁר-בָּא הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה, אֶל-בֵּיתִי--אַל-תַּעֲשׂוּ, אֶת-הַנְּבָלָה הַזֹּאת.	23 And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them: 'Nay, my brethren, I pray you, do not so wickedly; seeing that this man is come into my house, do not this wanton deed.
19.24 כד  הִנֵּה בִתִּי הַבְּתוּלָה וּפִילַגְשֵׁהוּ, אוֹצִיאָה-נָּא אוֹתָם וְעַנּוּ אוֹתָם, וַעֲשׂוּ לָהֶם, הַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֵיכֶם; וְלָאִישׁ הַזֶּה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ, דְּבַר הַנְּבָלָה הַזֹּאת.	24 Behold, here is my daughter a virgin, and his concubine; I will bring them out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you; but unto this man do not so wanton a thing.'
19.25 כה  וְלֹא-אָבוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, לִשְׁמֹעַ לוֹ, וַיַּחֲזֵק הָאִישׁ בְּפִילַגְשׁוֹ, וַיֹּצֵא אֲלֵיהֶם הַחוּץ; וַיֵּדְעוּ אוֹתָהּ וַיִּתְעַלְּלוּ-בָהּ כָּל-הַלַּיְלָה, עַד-הַבֹּקֶר, וַיְשַׁלְּחוּהָ, בעלות (כַּעֲלוֹת) הַשָּׁחַר.	25 But the men would not hearken to him; so the man laid hold on his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning; and when the day began to spring, they let her go.
19.26 כו  וַתָּבֹא הָאִשָּׁה, לִפְנוֹת הַבֹּקֶר; וַתִּפֹּל פֶּתַח בֵּית-הָאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-אֲדוֹנֶיהָ שָּׁם--עַד-הָאוֹר.	26 Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.
19.27 כז  וַיָּקָם אֲדֹנֶיהָ בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיִּפְתַּח דַּלְתוֹת הַבַּיִת, וַיֵּצֵא, לָלֶכֶת לְדַרְכּוֹ; וְהִנֵּה הָאִשָּׁה פִילַגְשׁוֹ, נֹפֶלֶת פֶּתַח הַבַּיִת, וְיָדֶיהָ, עַל-הַסַּף.	27 And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went out to go his way; and, behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, with her hands upon the threshold.
19.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלֶיהָ קוּמִי וְנֵלֵכָה, וְאֵין עֹנֶה; וַיִּקָּחֶהָ, עַל-הַחֲמוֹר, וַיָּקָם הָאִישׁ, וַיֵּלֶךְ לִמְקֹמוֹ.	28 And he said unto her. 'Up, and let us be going'; but none answered; then he took her up upon the ass; and the man rose up, and got him unto his place.
19.29 כט  וַיָּבֹא אֶל-בֵּיתוֹ, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הַמַּאֲכֶלֶת וַיַּחֲזֵק בְּפִילַגְשׁוֹ, וַיְנַתְּחֶהָ לַעֲצָמֶיהָ, לִשְׁנֵים עָשָׂר נְתָחִים; וַיְשַׁלְּחֶהָ, בְּכֹל גְּבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל.	29 And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, limb by limb, into twelve pieces, and sent her throughout all the borders of Israel.
19.30 ל  וְהָיָה כָל-הָרֹאֶה, וְאָמַר לֹא-נִהְיְתָה וְלֹא-נִרְאֲתָה כָּזֹאת, לְמִיּוֹם עֲלוֹת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה; שִׂימוּ-לָכֶם עָלֶיהָ, עֻצוּ וְדַבֵּרוּ.  {פ}	30 And it was so, that all that saw it said: 'Such a thing hath not happened nor been seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day; consider it, take counsel, and speak.' {P}
20.1 א  וַיֵּצְאוּ, כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַתִּקָּהֵל הָעֵדָה כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד לְמִדָּן וְעַד-בְּאֵר שֶׁבַע, וְאֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד--אֶל-יְהוָה, הַמִּצְפָּה.	1 Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was assembled as one man, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, with the land of Gilead, unto the LORD at Mizpah.
20.2 ב  וַיִּתְיַצְּבוּ פִּנּוֹת כָּל-הָעָם, כֹּל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--בִּקְהַל, עַם הָאֱלֹהִים; אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף אִישׁ רַגְלִי, שֹׁלֵף חָרֶב.  {פ}	2 And the chiefs of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.-- {P}
20.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁמְעוּ בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, כִּי-עָלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמִּצְפָּה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, דַּבְּרוּ, אֵיכָה נִהְיְתָה הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת.	3 Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpah.--And the children of Israel said: 'Tell us, how was this wickedness brought to pass?'
20.4 ד  וַיַּעַן הָאִישׁ הַלֵּוִי, אִישׁ הָאִשָּׁה הַנִּרְצָחָה--וַיֹּאמַר:  הַגִּבְעָתָה אֲשֶׁר לְבִנְיָמִן, בָּאתִי אֲנִי וּפִילַגְשִׁי לָלוּן.	4 And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was murdered, answered and said: 'I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.
20.5 ה  וַיָּקֻמוּ עָלַי בַּעֲלֵי הַגִּבְעָה, וַיָּסֹבּוּ עָלַי אֶת-הַבַּיִת לָיְלָה; אוֹתִי דִּמּוּ לַהֲרֹג, וְאֶת-פִּילַגְשִׁי עִנּוּ וַתָּמֹת.	5 And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me by night; me they thought to have slain, and my concubine they forced, and she is dead.
20.6 ו  וָאֹחֵז בְּפִילַגְשִׁי, וָאֲנַתְּחֶהָ, וָאֲשַׁלְּחֶהָ, בְּכָל-שְׂדֵה נַחֲלַת יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי עָשׂוּ זִמָּה וּנְבָלָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	6 And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel; for they have committed lewdness and wantonness in Israel.
20.7 ז  הִנֵּה כֻלְּכֶם, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--הָבוּ לָכֶם דָּבָר וְעֵצָה, הֲלֹם.	7 Behold, ye are all here, children of Israel, give here your advice and council.'
20.8 ח  וַיָּקָם, כָּל-הָעָם, כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד, לֵאמֹר:  לֹא נֵלֵךְ אִישׁ לְאָהֳלוֹ, וְלֹא נָסוּר אִישׁ לְבֵיתוֹ.	8 And all the people arose as one man, saying: 'We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn unto his house.
20.9 ט  וְעַתָּה--זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר נַעֲשֶׂה לַגִּבְעָה:  עָלֶיהָ, בְּגוֹרָל.	9 But now this is the thing which we will do to Gibeah: we will go up against it by lot;
20.10 י  וְלָקַחְנוּ עֲשָׂרָה אֲנָשִׁים לַמֵּאָה לְכֹל שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמֵאָה לָאֶלֶף וְאֶלֶף לָרְבָבָה, לָקַחַת צֵדָה, לָעָם--לַעֲשׂוֹת, לְבוֹאָם לְגֶבַע בִּנְיָמִן, כְּכָל-הַנְּבָלָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	10 and we will take ten men of a hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victuals for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the wantonness that they have wrought in Israel.'
20.11 יא  וַיֵּאָסֵף כָּל-אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-הָעִיר, כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד, חֲבֵרִים.  {פ}	11 So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man. {P}
20.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲנָשִׁים, בְּכָל-שִׁבְטֵי בִנְיָמִן, לֵאמֹר:  מָה הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר נִהְיְתָה בָּכֶם.	12 And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying: 'What wickedness is this that is come to pass among you?
20.13 יג  וְעַתָּה תְּנוּ אֶת-הָאֲנָשִׁים בְּנֵי-בְלִיַּעַל אֲשֶׁר בַּגִּבְעָה, וּנְמִיתֵם, וּנְבַעֲרָה רָעָה, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא אָבוּ,     (בְּנֵי) בִנְיָמִן, לִשְׁמֹעַ, בְּקוֹל אֲחֵיהֶם בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	13 Now therefore deliver up the men, the base fellows that are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel.' But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel.
20.14 יד  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן מִן-הֶעָרִים, הַגִּבְעָתָה, לָצֵאת לַמִּלְחָמָה, עִם-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	14 And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of their cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel.
20.15 טו  וַיִּתְפָּקְדוּ בְנֵי בִנְיָמִן בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, מֵהֶעָרִים, עֶשְׂרִים וְשִׁשָּׁה אֶלֶף אִישׁ, שֹׁלֵף חָרֶב--לְבַד מִיֹּשְׁבֵי הַגִּבְעָה, הִתְפָּקְדוּ, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת, אִישׁ בָּחוּר.	15 And the children of Benjamin numbered on that day out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, besides the inhabitants of Gibeah, who numbered seven hundred chosen men.
20.16 טז  מִכֹּל הָעָם הַזֶּה, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת אִישׁ בָּחוּר, אִטֵּר, יַד-יְמִינוֹ:  כָּל-זֶה, קֹלֵעַ בָּאֶבֶן אֶל-הַשַּׂעֲרָה--וְלֹא יַחֲטִא.  {פ}	16 All this people, even seven hundred chosen men, were left-handed; every one could sling stones at a hair-breadth, and not miss. {P}
20.17 יז  וְאִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל הִתְפָּקְדוּ, לְבַד מִבִּנְיָמִן, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף אִישׁ, שֹׁלֵף חָרֶב:  כָּל-זֶה, אִישׁ מִלְחָמָה.	17 And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword; all these were men of war.
20.18 יח  וַיָּקֻמוּ וַיַּעֲלוּ בֵית-אֵל, וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ בֵאלֹהִים, וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִי יַעֲלֶה-לָּנוּ בַתְּחִלָּה לַמִּלְחָמָה עִם-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, יְהוּדָה בַתְּחִלָּה.	18 And the children of Israel arose, and went up to Beth-el, and asked counsel of God; and they said: 'Who shall go up for us first to battle against the children of Benjamin?' And the LORD said: 'Judah first.'
20.19 יט  וַיָּקוּמוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּבֹּקֶר; וַיַּחֲנוּ, עַל-הַגִּבְעָה.	19 And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah.
20.20 כ  וַיֵּצֵא אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַמִּלְחָמָה עִם-בִּנְיָמִן; וַיַּעַרְכוּ אִתָּם אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל מִלְחָמָה, אֶל-הַגִּבְעָה.	20 And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and the men of Israel set the battle in array against them at Gibeah.
20.21 כא  וַיֵּצְאוּ בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן, מִן-הַגִּבְעָה; וַיַּשְׁחִיתוּ בְיִשְׂרָאֵל בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, שְׁנַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף אִישׁ--אָרְצָה.	21 And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites on that day twenty and two thousand men.
20.22 כב  וַיִּתְחַזֵּק הָעָם, אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּסִפוּ, לַעֲרֹךְ מִלְחָמָה, בַּמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר-עָרְכוּ שָׁם בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן.	22 And the people, the men of Israel, encouraged themselves, and set the battle again in array in the place where they set themselves in array the first day.
20.23 כג  וַיַּעֲלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּבְכּוּ לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה עַד-הָעֶרֶב, וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ בַיהוָה לֵאמֹר, הַאוֹסִיף לָגֶשֶׁת לַמִּלְחָמָה עִם-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן אָחִי; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, עֲלוּ אֵלָיו.  {פ}	23 And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD until even; and they asked of the LORD, saying: 'Shall I again draw nigh to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother?' And the LORD said: 'Go up against him.' {P}
20.24 כד  וַיִּקְרְבוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, בַּיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי.	24 And the children of Israel came near against the children of Benjamin the second day.
20.25 כה  וַיֵּצֵא בִנְיָמִן לִקְרָאתָם מִן-הַגִּבְעָה, בַּיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי, וַיַּשְׁחִיתוּ בִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל עוֹד שְׁמֹנַת עָשָׂר אֶלֶף אִישׁ, אָרְצָה:  כָּל-אֵלֶּה, שֹׁלְפֵי חָרֶב.	25 And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.
20.26 כו  וַיַּעֲלוּ כָל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וְכָל-הָעָם וַיָּבֹאוּ בֵית-אֵל, וַיִּבְכּוּ וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׁם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַיָּצוּמוּ בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא, עַד-הָעָרֶב; וַיַּעֲלוּ עֹלוֹת וּשְׁלָמִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	26 Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up, and came unto Beth-el, and wept, and sat there before the LORD, and fasted that day until even; and they offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before the LORD.
20.27 כז  וַיִּשְׁאֲלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּיהוָה; וְשָׁם, אֲרוֹן בְּרִית הָאֱלֹהִים, בַּיָּמִים, הָהֵם.	27 And the children of Israel asked of the LORD--for the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days,
20.28 כח  וּפִינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן עֹמֵד לְפָנָיו, בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם לֵאמֹר, הַאוֹסִף עוֹד לָצֵאת לַמִּלְחָמָה עִם-בְּנֵי-בִנְיָמִן אָחִי, אִם-אֶחְדָּל; וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה עֲלוּ, כִּי מָחָר אֶתְּנֶנּוּ בְיָדֶךָ.	28 and Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days--saying: 'Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease?' And the LORD said: 'Go up; for to-morrow I will deliver him into thy hand.'
20.29 כט  וַיָּשֶׂם יִשְׂרָאֵל אֹרְבִים, אֶל-הַגִּבְעָה סָבִיב.  {פ}	29 And Israel set liers-in-wait against Gibeah round about. {P}
20.30 ל  וַיַּעֲלוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי; וַיַּעַרְכוּ אֶל-הַגִּבְעָה, כְּפַעַם בְּפָעַם.	30 And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and set themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times.
20.31 לא  וַיֵּצְאוּ בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן לִקְרַאת הָעָם, הָנְתְּקוּ מִן-הָעִיר; וַיָּחֵלּוּ לְהַכּוֹת מֵהָעָם חֲלָלִים כְּפַעַם בְּפַעַם, בַּמְסִלּוֹת אֲשֶׁר אַחַת עֹלָה בֵית-אֵל וְאַחַת גִּבְעָתָה בַּשָּׂדֶה, כִּשְׁלֹשִׁים אִישׁ, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	31 And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite and kill of the people, as at other times, in the field, in the highways, of which one goeth up to Beth-el, and the other to Gibeah, about thirty men of Israel.
20.32 לב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, נִגָּפִים הֵם לְפָנֵינוּ כְּבָרִאשֹׁנָה; וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אָמְרוּ, נָנוּסָה וּנְתַקְּנוּהוּ, מִן-הָעִיר, אֶל-הַמְסִלּוֹת.	32 And the children of Benjamin said: 'They are smitten down before us, as at the first.' But the children of Israel said: 'Let us flee, and draw them away from the city unto the highways.'
20.33 לג  וְכֹל אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, קָמוּ מִמְּקוֹמוֹ, וַיַּעַרְכוּ, בְּבַעַל תָּמָר; וְאֹרֵב יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵגִיחַ מִמְּקֹמוֹ, מִמַּעֲרֵה-גָבַע.	33 And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and set themselves in array at Baal-tamar; and the liers-in-wait of Israel broke forth out of their place, even out of Maareh-geba.
20.34 לד  וַיָּבֹאוּ מִנֶּגֶד לַגִּבְעָה עֲשֶׂרֶת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ בָּחוּר, מִכָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְהַמִּלְחָמָה, כָּבֵדָה; וְהֵם לֹא יָדְעוּ, כִּי-נֹגַעַת עֲלֵיהֶם הָרָעָה.  {פ}	34 And there came over against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was sore; but they knew not that evil was close upon them. {P}
20.35 לה  וַיִּגֹּף יְהוָה אֶת-בִּנְיָמִן, לִפְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיַּשְׁחִיתוּ בְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּבִנְיָמִן בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, עֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה אֶלֶף וּמֵאָה אִישׁ:  כָּל-אֵלֶּה, שֹׁלֵף חָרֶב.	35 And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel; and the children of Israel destroyed of Benjamin that day twenty and five thousand and a hundred men; all these drew the sword.
20.36 לו  וַיִּרְאוּ בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן, כִּי נִגָּפוּ; וַיִּתְּנוּ אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל מָקוֹם, לְבִנְיָמִן, כִּי בָטְחוּ אֶל-הָאֹרֵב, אֲשֶׁר-שָׂמוּ אֶל-הַגִּבְעָה.	36 So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten. And the men of Israel gave place to Benjamin, because they trusted unto the liers-in-wait whom they had set against Gibeah.--
20.37 לז  וְהָאֹרֵב הֵחִישׁוּ, וַיִּפְשְׁטוּ אֶל-הַגִּבְעָה; וַיִּמְשֹׁךְ, הָאֹרֵב, וַיַּךְ אֶת-כָּל-הָעִיר, לְפִי-חָרֶב.	37 And the liers-in-wait hastened, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers-in-wait drew forth, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.
20.38 לח  וְהַמּוֹעֵד, הָיָה לְאִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל--עִם-הָאֹרֵב; הֶרֶב, לְהַעֲלוֹתָם מַשְׂאַת הֶעָשָׁן מִן-הָעִיר.	38 Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the liers-in-wait, that they should make a great beacon of smoke rise up out of the city.--
20.39 לט  וַיַּהֲפֹךְ אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּמִּלְחָמָה; וּבִנְיָמִן הֵחֵל לְהַכּוֹת חֲלָלִים בְּאִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּשְׁלֹשִׁים אִישׁ--כִּי אָמְרוּ, אַךְ נִגּוֹף נִגָּף הוּא לְפָנֵינוּ כַּמִּלְחָמָה הָרִאשֹׁנָה.	39 And the men of Israel turned in the battle, and Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons; for they said: 'Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.'
20.40 מ  וְהַמַּשְׂאֵת, הֵחֵלָּה לַעֲלוֹת מִן-הָעִיר--עַמּוּד עָשָׁן; וַיִּפֶן בִּנְיָמִן אַחֲרָיו, וְהִנֵּה עָלָה כְלִיל-הָעִיר הַשָּׁמָיְמָה.	40 But when the beacon began to arise up out of the city in a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the whole of the city went up in smoke to heaven.
20.41 מא  וְאִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל הָפַךְ, וַיִּבָּהֵל אִישׁ בִּנְיָמִן:  כִּי רָאָה, כִּי-נָגְעָה עָלָיו הָרָעָה.	41 And the men of Israel turned, and the men of Benjamin were amazed; for they saw that evil was come upon them.
20.42 מב  וַיִּפְנוּ לִפְנֵי אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-דֶּרֶךְ הַמִּדְבָּר, וְהַמִּלְחָמָה, הִדְבִּיקָתְהוּ; וַאֲשֶׁר, מֵהֶעָרִים, מַשְׁחִיתִים אוֹתוֹ, בְּתוֹכוֹ.	42 Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderness; but the battle followed hard after them; and they that came out of the city destroyed them in the midst of the men of Israel.
20.43 מג  כִּתְּרוּ אֶת-בִּנְיָמִן הִרְדִיפֻהוּ, מְנוּחָה הִדְרִיכֻהוּ, עַד נֹכַח הַגִּבְעָה, מִמִּזְרַח-שָׁמֶשׁ.	43 They inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and overtook them at their resting-place, as far as over against Gibeah toward the sunrising.
20.44 מד  וַיִּפְּלוּ, מִבִּנְיָמִן, שְׁמֹנָה-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף, אִישׁ:  אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה, אַנְשֵׁי-חָיִל.	44 And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were men of valour.
20.45 מה  וַיִּפְנוּ וַיָּנֻסוּ הַמִּדְבָּרָה, אֶל-סֶלַע הָרִמּוֹן, וַיְעֹלְלֻהוּ בַּמְסִלּוֹת, חֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים אִישׁ; וַיַּדְבִּיקוּ אַחֲרָיו עַד-גִּדְעֹם, וַיַּכּוּ מִמֶּנּוּ אַלְפַּיִם אִישׁ.	45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon; and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and followed hard after them unto Gidom, and smote of them two thousand men.
20.46 מו  וַיְהִי כָל-הַנֹּפְלִים מִבִּנְיָמִן, עֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה אֶלֶף אִישׁ שֹׁלֵף חֶרֶב--בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא:  אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה, אַנְשֵׁי-חָיִל.	46 So that all who fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.
20.47 מז  וַיִּפְנוּ וַיָּנֻסוּ הַמִּדְבָּרָה, אֶל-סֶלַע הָרִמּוֹן, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, אִישׁ; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בְּסֶלַע רִמּוֹן, אַרְבָּעָה חֳדָשִׁים.	47 But six hundred men turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon, and abode in the rock of Rimmon four months.
20.48 מח  וְאִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל שָׁבוּ אֶל-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, וַיַּכּוּם לְפִי-חֶרֶב, מֵעִיר מְתֹם עַד-בְּהֵמָה, עַד כָּל-הַנִּמְצָא; גַּם כָּל-הֶעָרִים הַנִּמְצָאוֹת, שִׁלְּחוּ בָאֵשׁ.  {פ}	48 And the men of Israel turned back upon the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, both the entire city, and the cattle, and all that they found; moreover all the cities which they found they set on fire. {P}
21.1 א  וְאִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, נִשְׁבַּע בַּמִּצְפָּה לֵאמֹר:  אִישׁ מִמֶּנּוּ, לֹא-יִתֵּן בִּתּוֹ לְבִנְיָמִן לְאִשָּׁה.	1 Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpah, saying: 'There shall not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.'
21.2 ב  וַיָּבֹא הָעָם, בֵּית-אֵל, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׁם עַד-הָעֶרֶב, לִפְנֵי הָאֱלֹהִים; וַיִּשְׂאוּ קוֹלָם, וַיִּבְכּוּ בְּכִי גָדוֹל.	2 And the people came to Beth-el, and sat there till even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore.
21.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ--לָמָה יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הָיְתָה זֹאת בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  לְהִפָּקֵד הַיּוֹם מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, שֵׁבֶט אֶחָד.	3 And they said: 'O LORD, the God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to-day one tribe lacking in Israel?'
21.4 ד  וַיְהִי, מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיַּשְׁכִּימוּ הָעָם, וַיִּבְנוּ-שָׁם מִזְבֵּחַ; וַיַּעֲלוּ עֹלוֹת, וּשְׁלָמִים.  {פ}	4 And it came to pass on the morrow that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. {P}
21.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִי אֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָלָה בַקָּהָל מִכָּל-שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה:  כִּי הַשְּׁבוּעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הָיְתָה, לַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָלָה אֶל-יְהוָה הַמִּצְפָּה לֵאמֹר--מוֹת יוּמָת.	5 And the children of Israel said: 'Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that came not up in the assembly unto the LORD?' For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up unto the LORD to Mizpah, saying: 'He shall surely be put to death.'
21.6 ו  וַיִּנָּחֲמוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-בִּנְיָמִן אָחִיו; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, נִגְדַּע הַיּוֹם שֵׁבֶט אֶחָד מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל.	6 And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said: 'There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.
21.7 ז  מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה לָהֶם לַנּוֹתָרִים, לְנָשִׁים; וַאֲנַחְנוּ נִשְׁבַּעְנוּ בַיהוָה, לְבִלְתִּי תֵּת-לָהֶם מִבְּנוֹתֵינוּ לְנָשִׁים.	7 How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?'
21.8 ח  וַיֹּאמְרוּ--מִי אֶחָד מִשִּׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָלָה אֶל-יְהוָה הַמִּצְפָּה; וְהִנֵּה לֹא בָא-אִישׁ אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, מִיָּבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד--אֶל-הַקָּהָל.	8 And they said: 'What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came not up unto the LORD to Mizpah?' And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabesh-gilead to the assembly.
21.9 ט  וַיִּתְפָּקֵד, הָעָם; וְהִנֵּה אֵין-שָׁם אִישׁ, מִיּוֹשְׁבֵי יָבֵשׁ גִּלְעָד.	9 For when the people were numbered, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there.
21.10 י  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ-שָׁם הָעֵדָה, שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף אִישׁ--מִבְּנֵי הֶחָיִל; וַיְצַוּוּ אוֹתָם לֵאמֹר, לְכוּ וְהִכִּיתֶם אֶת-יוֹשְׁבֵי יָבֵשׁ גִּלְעָד לְפִי-חֶרֶב, וְהַנָּשִׁים, וְהַטָּף.	10 And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and commanded them, saying: 'Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the little ones.
21.11 יא  וְזֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשׂוּ:  כָּל-זָכָר, וְכָל-אִשָּׁה יֹדַעַת מִשְׁכַּב-זָכָר--תַּחֲרִימוּ.	11 And this is the thing that ye shall do: ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.'
21.12 יב  וַיִּמְצְאוּ מִיּוֹשְׁבֵי יָבֵישׁ גִּלְעָד, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת נַעֲרָה בְתוּלָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדְעָה אִישׁ, לְמִשְׁכַּב זָכָר; וַיָּבִאוּ אוֹתָם אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה שִׁלֹה, אֲשֶׁר בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן.  {פ}	12 And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins, that had not known man by lying with him; and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan. {P}
21.13 יג  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ, כָּל-הָעֵדָה, וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֶל-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, אֲשֶׁר בְּסֶלַע רִמּוֹן; וַיִּקְרְאוּ לָהֶם, שָׁלוֹם.	13 And the whole congregation sent and spoke to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock of Rimmon, and proclaimed peace unto them.
21.14 יד  וַיָּשָׁב בִּנְיָמִן, בָּעֵת הַהִיא, וַיִּתְּנוּ לָהֶם הַנָּשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר חִיּוּ מִנְּשֵׁי יָבֵשׁ גִּלְעָד; וְלֹא-מָצְאוּ לָהֶם, כֵּן.	14 And Benjamin returned at that time; and they gave them the women whom they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh-gilead; and yet so they sufficed them not.
21.15 טו  וְהָעָם נִחָם, לְבִנְיָמִן:  כִּי-עָשָׂה יְהוָה פֶּרֶץ, בְּשִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	15 And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.
21.16 טז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ זִקְנֵי הָעֵדָה, מַה-נַּעֲשֶׂה לַנּוֹתָרִים לְנָשִׁים:  כִּי-נִשְׁמְדָה מִבִּנְיָמִן, אִשָּׁה.	16 Then the elders of the congregation said: 'How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?'
21.17 יז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, יְרֻשַּׁת פְּלֵיטָה לְבִנְיָמִן; וְלֹא-יִמָּחֶה שֵׁבֶט, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל.	17 And they said: 'They that are escaped must be as an inheritance for Benjamin, that a tribe be not blotted out from Israel.
21.18 יח  וַאֲנַחְנוּ, לֹא נוּכַל לָתֵת-לָהֶם נָשִׁים--מִבְּנוֹתֵינוּ:  כִּי-נִשְׁבְּעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר, אָרוּר, נֹתֵן אִשָּׁה לְבִנְיָמִן.  {ס}	18 Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters.' For the children of Israel had sworn, saying: 'Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin.' {S}
21.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הִנֵּה חַג-יְהוָה בְּשִׁלוֹ מִיָּמִים יָמִימָה, אֲשֶׁר מִצְּפוֹנָה לְבֵית-אֵל מִזְרְחָה הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, לִמְסִלָּה, הָעֹלָה מִבֵּית-אֵל שְׁכֶמָה--וּמִנֶּגֶב, לִלְבוֹנָה.	19 And they said: 'Behold, there is the feast of the LORD from year to year in Shiloh, which is on the north of Beth-el, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Beth-el to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.'
21.20 כ  ויצו (וַיְצַוּוּ), אֶת-בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן לֵאמֹר:  לְכוּ, וַאֲרַבְתֶּם בַּכְּרָמִים.	20 And they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying: 'Go and lie in wait in the vineyards;
21.21 כא  וּרְאִיתֶם, וְהִנֵּה אִם-יֵצְאוּ בְנוֹת-שִׁילוֹ לָחוּל בַּמְּחֹלוֹת, וִיצָאתֶם מִן-הַכְּרָמִים, וַחֲטַפְתֶּם לָכֶם אִישׁ אִשְׁתּוֹ מִבְּנוֹת שִׁילוֹ; וַהֲלַכְתֶּם, אֶרֶץ בִּנְיָמִן.	21 and see, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in the dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.
21.22 כב  וְהָיָה כִּי-יָבֹאוּ אֲבוֹתָם אוֹ אֲחֵיהֶם לרוב (לָרִיב) אֵלֵינוּ, וְאָמַרְנוּ אֲלֵיהֶם חָנּוּנוּ אוֹתָם--כִּי לֹא לָקַחְנוּ אִישׁ אִשְׁתּוֹ, בַּמִּלְחָמָה:  כִּי לֹא אַתֶּם נְתַתֶּם לָהֶם, כָּעֵת תֶּאְשָׁמוּ.  {ס}	22 And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come to strive with us, that we will say unto them: Grant them graciously unto us; because we took not for each man of them his wife in battle; neither did ye give them unto them, that ye should now be guilty.' {S}
21.23 כג  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן, בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, וַיִּשְׂאוּ נָשִׁים לְמִסְפָּרָם, מִן-הַמְּחֹלְלוֹת אֲשֶׁר גָּזָלוּ; וַיֵּלְכוּ, וַיָּשׁוּבוּ אֶל-נַחֲלָתָם, וַיִּבְנוּ אֶת-הֶעָרִים, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בָּהֶם.	23 And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives, according to their number, of them that danced, whom they carried off; and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and built the cities, and dwelt in them.
21.24 כד  וַיִּתְהַלְּכוּ מִשָּׁם בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בָּעֵת הַהִיא, אִישׁ לְשִׁבְטוֹ וּלְמִשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ; וַיֵּצְאוּ מִשָּׁם, אִישׁ לְנַחֲלָתוֹ.  {פ}	24 And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man to his inheritance. {P}
21.25 כה  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, אֵין מֶלֶךְ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל:  אִישׁ הַיָּשָׁר בְּעֵינָיו, יַעֲשֶׂה.  {ש}	25 In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did that which was right in his own eyes. {P}
