1.1 א  וַיִּקְרָא, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֵלָיו, מֵאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד לֵאמֹר.    1 And the LORD called unto Moses, and spoke unto him out of the tent of meeting, saying:
1.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, אָדָם כִּי-יַקְרִיב מִכֶּם קָרְבָּן, לַיהוָה--מִן-הַבְּהֵמָה, מִן-הַבָּקָר וּמִן-הַצֹּאן, תַּקְרִיבוּ, אֶת-קָרְבַּנְכֶם.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When any man of you bringeth an offering unto the LORD, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd or of the flock.
1.3 ג  אִם-עֹלָה קָרְבָּנוֹ מִן-הַבָּקָר, זָכָר תָּמִים יַקְרִיבֶנּוּ; אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, יַקְרִיב אֹתוֹ, לִרְצֹנוֹ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    3 If his offering be a burnt-offering of the herd, he shall offer it a male without blemish; he shall bring it to the door of the tent of meeting, that he may be accepted before the LORD.
1.4 ד  וְסָמַךְ יָדוֹ, עַל רֹאשׁ הָעֹלָה; וְנִרְצָה לוֹ, לְכַפֵּר עָלָיו.    4 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the burnt-offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.
1.5 ה  וְשָׁחַט אֶת-בֶּן הַבָּקָר, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְהִקְרִיבוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֶת-הַדָּם, וְזָרְקוּ אֶת-הַדָּם עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ סָבִיב, אֲשֶׁר-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    5 And he shall kill the bullock before the LORD; and Aaron's sons, the priests, shall present the blood, and dash the blood round about against the altar that is at the door of the tent of meeting.
1.6 ו  וְהִפְשִׁיט, אֶת-הָעֹלָה; וְנִתַּח אֹתָהּ, לִנְתָחֶיהָ.    6 And he shall flay the burnt-offering, and cut it into its pieces.
1.7 ז  וְנָתְנוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, אֵשׁ--עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְעָרְכוּ עֵצִים, עַל-הָאֵשׁ.    7 And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay wood in order upon the fire.
1.8 ח  וְעָרְכוּ, בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים, אֵת הַנְּתָחִים, אֶת-הָרֹאשׁ וְאֶת-הַפָּדֶר--עַל-הָעֵצִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאֵשׁ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    8 And Aaron's sons, the priests, shall lay the pieces, and the head, and the suet, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar;
1.9 ט  וְקִרְבּוֹ וּכְרָעָיו, יִרְחַץ בַּמָּיִם; וְהִקְטִיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַכֹּל הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עֹלָה אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ-נִיחוֹחַ לַיהוָה.  {ס}    9 but its inwards and its legs shall he wash with water; and the priest shall make the whole smoke on the altar, for a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. {S}
1.10 י  וְאִם-מִן-הַצֹּאן קָרְבָּנוֹ מִן-הַכְּשָׂבִים אוֹ מִן-הָעִזִּים, לְעֹלָה--זָכָר תָּמִים, יַקְרִיבֶנּוּ.    10 And if his offering be of the flock, whether of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt-offering, he shall offer it a male without blemish.
1.11 יא  וְשָׁחַט אֹתוֹ עַל יֶרֶךְ הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, צָפֹנָה--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְזָרְקוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים אֶת-דָּמוֹ, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--סָבִיב.    11 And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the LORD; and Aaron's sons, the priests, shall dash its blood against the altar round about.
1.12 יב  וְנִתַּח אֹתוֹ לִנְתָחָיו, וְאֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ וְאֶת-פִּדְרוֹ; וְעָרַךְ הַכֹּהֵן, אֹתָם, עַל-הָעֵצִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאֵשׁ, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    12 And he shall cut it into its pieces; and the priest shall lay them, with its head and its suet, in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar.
1.13 יג  וְהַקֶּרֶב וְהַכְּרָעַיִם, יִרְחַץ בַּמָּיִם; וְהִקְרִיב הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַכֹּל, וְהִקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה--עֹלָה הוּא אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.  {פ}    13 But the inwards and the legs shall he wash with water; and the priest shall offer the whole, and make it smoke upon the altar; it is a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. {P}
1.14 יד  וְאִם מִן-הָעוֹף עֹלָה קָרְבָּנוֹ, לַיהוָה:  וְהִקְרִיב מִן-הַתֹּרִים, אוֹ מִן-בְּנֵי הַיּוֹנָה--אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ.    14 And if his offering to the LORD be a burnt-offering of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtle-doves, or of young pigeons.
1.15 טו  וְהִקְרִיבוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וּמָלַק אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְהִקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה; וְנִמְצָה דָמוֹ, עַל קִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    15 And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and pinch off its head, and make it smoke on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be drained out on the side of the altar.
1.16 טז  וְהֵסִיר אֶת-מֻרְאָתוֹ, בְּנֹצָתָהּ; וְהִשְׁלִיךְ אֹתָהּ אֵצֶל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, קֵדְמָה--אֶל-מְקוֹם, הַדָּשֶׁן.    16 And he shall take away its crop with the feathers thereof, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, in the place of the ashes.
1.17 יז  וְשִׁסַּע אֹתוֹ בִכְנָפָיו, לֹא יַבְדִּיל, וְהִקְטִיר אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עַל-הָעֵצִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאֵשׁ:  עֹלָה הוּא, אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ--לַיהוָה.  {ס}    17 And he shall rend it by the wings thereof, but shall not divide it asunder; and the priest shall make it smoke upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire; it is a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. {S}
2.1 א  וְנֶפֶשׁ, כִּי-תַקְרִיב קָרְבַּן מִנְחָה לַיהוָה--סֹלֶת, יִהְיֶה קָרְבָּנוֹ; וְיָצַק עָלֶיהָ שֶׁמֶן, וְנָתַן עָלֶיהָ לְבֹנָה.    1 And when any one bringeth a meal-offering unto the LORD, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon.
2.2 ב  וֶהֱבִיאָהּ, אֶל-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים, וְקָמַץ מִשָּׁם מְלֹא קֻמְצוֹ מִסָּלְתָּהּ וּמִשַּׁמְנָהּ, עַל כָּל-לְבֹנָתָהּ; וְהִקְטִיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-אַזְכָּרָתָהּ, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה--אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.    2 And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons the priests; and he shall take thereout his handful of the fine flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, together with all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall make the memorial-part thereof smoke upon the altar, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
2.3 ג  וְהַנּוֹתֶרֶת, מִן-הַמִּנְחָה--לְאַהֲרֹן, וּלְבָנָיו:  קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה.  {ס}    3 But that which is left of the meal-offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'; it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire. {S}
2.4 ד  וְכִי תַקְרִב קָרְבַּן מִנְחָה, מַאֲפֵה תַנּוּר--סֹלֶת חַלּוֹת מַצֹּת בְּלוּלֹת בַּשֶּׁמֶן, וּרְקִיקֵי מַצּוֹת מְשֻׁחִים בַּשָּׁמֶן.  {ס}    4 And when thou bringest a meal-offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers spread with oil. {S}
2.5 ה  וְאִם-מִנְחָה עַל-הַמַּחֲבַת, קָרְבָּנֶךָ--סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, מַצָּה תִהְיֶה.    5 And if thy offering be a meal-offering baked on a griddle, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.
2.6 ו  פָּתוֹת אֹתָהּ פִּתִּים, וְיָצַקְתָּ עָלֶיהָ שָׁמֶן; מִנְחָה, הִוא.  {ס}    6 Thou shalt break it in pieces, and pour oil thereon; it is a meal-offering. {S}
2.7 ז  וְאִם-מִנְחַת מַרְחֶשֶׁת, קָרְבָּנֶךָ--סֹלֶת בַּשֶּׁמֶן, תֵּעָשֶׂה.    7 And if thy offering be a meal-offering of the stewing-pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil.
2.8 ח  וְהֵבֵאתָ אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, אֲשֶׁר יֵעָשֶׂה מֵאֵלֶּה--לַיהוָה; וְהִקְרִיבָהּ, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִגִּישָׁהּ, אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    8 And thou shalt bring the meal-offering that is made of these things unto the LORD; and it shall be presented unto the priest, and he shall bring it unto the altar.
2.9 ט  וְהֵרִים הַכֹּהֵן מִן-הַמִּנְחָה אֶת-אַזְכָּרָתָהּ, וְהִקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה--אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.    9 And the priest shall take off from the meal-offering the memorial-part thereof, and shall make it smoke upon the altar--an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
2.10 י  וְהַנּוֹתֶרֶת, מִן-הַמִּנְחָה--לְאַהֲרֹן, וּלְבָנָיו:  קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה.    10 But that which is left of the meal-offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'; it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.
2.11 יא  כָּל-הַמִּנְחָה, אֲשֶׁר תַּקְרִיבוּ לַיהוָה--לֹא תֵעָשֶׂה, חָמֵץ:  כִּי כָל-שְׂאֹר וְכָל-דְּבַשׁ, לֹא-תַקְטִירוּ מִמֶּנּוּ אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.    11 No meal-offering, which ye shall bring unto the LORD, shall be made with leaven; for ye shall make no leaven, nor any honey, smoke as an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
2.12 יב  קָרְבַּן רֵאשִׁית תַּקְרִיבוּ אֹתָם, לַיהוָה; וְאֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ לֹא-יַעֲלוּ, לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ.    12 As an offering of first-fruits ye may bring them unto the LORD; but they shall not come up for a sweet savour on the altar.
2.13 יג  וְכָל-קָרְבַּן מִנְחָתְךָ, בַּמֶּלַח תִּמְלָח, וְלֹא תַשְׁבִּית מֶלַח בְּרִית אֱלֹהֶיךָ, מֵעַל מִנְחָתֶךָ; עַל כָּל-קָרְבָּנְךָ, תַּקְרִיב מֶלַח.  {ס}    13 And every meal-offering of thine shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meal-offering; with all thy offerings thou shalt offer salt. {S}
2.14 יד  וְאִם-תַּקְרִיב מִנְחַת בִּכּוּרִים, לַיהוָה--אָבִיב קָלוּי בָּאֵשׁ, גֶּרֶשׂ כַּרְמֶל, תַּקְרִיב, אֵת מִנְחַת בִּכּוּרֶיךָ.    14 And if thou bring a meal-offering of first-fruits unto the LORD, thou shalt bring for the meal-offering of thy first-fruits corn in the ear parched with fire, even groats of the fresh ear.
2.15 טו  וְנָתַתָּ עָלֶיהָ שֶׁמֶן, וְשַׂמְתָּ עָלֶיהָ לְבֹנָה; מִנְחָה, הִוא.    15 And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon; it is a meal-offering.
2.16 טז  וְהִקְטִיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-אַזְכָּרָתָהּ, מִגִּרְשָׂהּ וּמִשַּׁמְנָהּ, עַל, כָּל-לְבֹנָתָהּ--אִשֶּׁה, לַיהוָה.  {פ}    16 And the priest shall make the memorial-part of it smoke, even of the groats thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD. {P}
3.1 א  וְאִם-זֶבַח שְׁלָמִים, קָרְבָּנוֹ--אִם מִן-הַבָּקָר, הוּא מַקְרִיב, אִם-זָכָר אִם-נְקֵבָה, תָּמִים יַקְרִיבֶנּוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    1 And if his offering be a sacrifice of peace-offerings: if he offer of the herd, whether male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the LORD.
3.2 ב  וְסָמַךְ יָדוֹ, עַל-רֹאשׁ קָרְבָּנוֹ, וּשְׁחָטוֹ, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְזָרְקוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים אֶת-הַדָּם, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--סָבִיב.    2 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it at the door of the tent of meeting; and Aaron's sons the priests shall dash the blood against the altar round about.
3.3 ג  וְהִקְרִיב מִזֶּבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה--אֶת-הַחֵלֶב, הַמְכַסֶּה אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת כָּל-הַחֵלֶב, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַקֶּרֶב.    3 And he shall present of the sacrifice of peace-offerings an offering made by fire unto the LORD: the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
3.4 ד  וְאֵת, שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵהֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַכְּסָלִים; וְאֶת-הַיֹּתֶרֶת, עַל-הַכָּבֵד, עַל-הַכְּלָיוֹת, יְסִירֶנָּה.    4 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the lobe above the liver, which he shall take away hard by the kidneys.
3.5 ה  וְהִקְטִירוּ אֹתוֹ בְנֵי-אַהֲרֹן, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עַל-הָעֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָעֵצִים אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאֵשׁ--אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.  {פ}    5 And Aaron's sons shall make it smoke on the altar upon the burnt-offering, which is upon the wood that is on the fire; it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. {P}
3.6 ו  וְאִם-מִן-הַצֹּאן קָרְבָּנוֹ לְזֶבַח שְׁלָמִים, לַיהוָה--זָכָר אוֹ נְקֵבָה, תָּמִים יַקְרִיבֶנּוּ.    6 And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the LORD be of the flock, male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.
3.7 ז  אִם-כֶּשֶׂב הוּא-מַקְרִיב, אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ--וְהִקְרִיב אֹתוֹ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    7 If he bring a lamb for his offering, then shall he present it before the LORD.
3.8 ח  וְסָמַךְ אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל-רֹאשׁ קָרְבָּנוֹ, וְשָׁחַט אֹתוֹ, לִפְנֵי אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְזָרְקוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֶת-דָּמוֹ, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--סָבִיב.    8 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it before the tent of meeting; and Aaron's sons shall dash the blood thereof against the altar round about.
3.9 ט  וְהִקְרִיב מִזֶּבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה--חֶלְבּוֹ הָאַלְיָה תְמִימָה, לְעֻמַּת הֶעָצֶה יְסִירֶנָּה; וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב, הַמְכַסֶּה אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת כָּל-הַחֵלֶב, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַקֶּרֶב.    9 And he shall present of the sacrifice of peace-offerings an offering made by fire unto the LORD: the fat thereof, the fat tail entire, which he shall take away hard by the rump-bone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
3.10 י  וְאֵת, שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵהֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַכְּסָלִים; וְאֶת-הַיֹּתֶרֶת, עַל-הַכָּבֵד, עַל-הַכְּלָיֹת, יְסִירֶנָּה.    10 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins, and the lobe above the liver, which he shall take away by the kidneys.
3.11 יא  וְהִקְטִירוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה--לֶחֶם אִשֶּׁה, לַיהוָה.  {פ}    11 And the priest shall make it smoke upon the altar; it is the food of the offering made by fire unto the LORD. {P}
3.12 יב  וְאִם עֵז, קָרְבָּנוֹ--וְהִקְרִיבוֹ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    12 And if his offering be a goat, then he shall present it before the LORD.
3.13 יג  וְסָמַךְ אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ, וְשָׁחַט אֹתוֹ, לִפְנֵי אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְזָרְקוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֶת-דָּמוֹ, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--סָבִיב.    13 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tent of meeting; and the sons of Aaron shall dash the blood thereof against the altar round about.
3.14 יד  וְהִקְרִיב מִמֶּנּוּ קָרְבָּנוֹ, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה--אֶת-הַחֵלֶב, הַמְכַסֶּה אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת כָּל-הַחֵלֶב, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַקֶּרֶב.    14 And he shall present thereof his offering, even an offering made by fire unto the LORD: the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
3.15 טו  וְאֵת, שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵהֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַכְּסָלִים; וְאֶת-הַיֹּתֶרֶת, עַל-הַכָּבֵד, עַל-הַכְּלָיֹת, יְסִירֶנָּה.    15 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins, and the lobe above the liver, which he shall take away by the kidneys.
3.16 טז  וְהִקְטִירָם הַכֹּהֵן, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה--לֶחֶם אִשֶּׁה לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, כָּל-חֵלֶב לַיהוָה.    16 And the priest shall make them smoke upon the altar; it is the food of the offering made by fire, for a sweet savour; all the fat is the LORD'S.
3.17 יז  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, בְּכֹל מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם--כָּל-חֵלֶב וְכָל-דָּם, לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ.  {פ}    17 It shall be a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings, that ye shall eat neither fat nor blood. {P}
4.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
4.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר--נֶפֶשׁ כִּי-תֶחֱטָא בִשְׁגָגָה מִכֹּל מִצְוֺת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא תֵעָשֶׂינָה; וְעָשָׂה, מֵאַחַת מֵהֵנָּה.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: If any one shall sin through error, in any of the things which the LORD hath commanded not to be done, and shall do any one of them:
4.3 ג  אִם הַכֹּהֵן הַמָּשִׁיחַ יֶחֱטָא, לְאַשְׁמַת הָעָם:  וְהִקְרִיב עַל חַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר תָּמִים, לַיהוָה--לְחַטָּאת.    3 if the anointed priest shall sin so as to bring guilt on the people, then let him offer for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the LORD for a sin-offering.
4.4 ד  וְהֵבִיא אֶת-הַפָּר, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְסָמַךְ אֶת-יָדוֹ עַל-רֹאשׁ הַפָּר, וְשָׁחַט אֶת-הַפָּר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    4 And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tent of meeting before the LORD; and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the bullock, and kill the bullock before the LORD.
4.5 ה  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן הַמָּשִׁיחַ, מִדַּם הַפָּר; וְהֵבִיא אֹתוֹ, אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    5 And the anointed priest shall take of the blood of the bullock, and bring it to the tent of meeting.
4.6 ו  וְטָבַל הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-אֶצְבָּעוֹ, בַּדָּם; וְהִזָּה מִן-הַדָּם שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֶת-פְּנֵי, פָּרֹכֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ.    6 And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the LORD, in front of the veil of the sanctuary.
4.7 ז  וְנָתַן הַכֹּהֵן מִן-הַדָּם עַל-קַרְנוֹת מִזְבַּח קְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְאֵת כָּל-דַּם הַפָּר, יִשְׁפֹּךְ אֶל-יְסוֹד מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר-פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    7 And the priest shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the LORD, which is in the tent of meeting; and all the remaining blood of the bullock shall he pour out at the base of the altar of burnt-offering, which is at the door of the tent of meeting.
4.8 ח  וְאֶת-כָּל-חֵלֶב פַּר הַחַטָּאת, יָרִים מִמֶּנּוּ--אֶת-הַחֵלֶב, הַמְכַסֶּה עַל-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת כָּל-הַחֵלֶב, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַקֶּרֶב.    8 And all the fat of the bullock of the sin-offering he shall take off from it; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
4.9 ט  וְאֵת, שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵיהֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַכְּסָלִים; וְאֶת-הַיֹּתֶרֶת, עַל-הַכָּבֵד, עַל-הַכְּלָיוֹת, יְסִירֶנָּה.    9 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins, and the lobe above the liver, which he shall take away by the kidneys,
4.10 י  כַּאֲשֶׁר יוּרַם, מִשּׁוֹר זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים; וְהִקְטִירָם, הַכֹּהֵן, עַל, מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה.    10 as it is taken off from the ox of the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the priest shall make them smoke upon the altar of burnt-offering.
4.11 יא  וְאֶת-עוֹר הַפָּר וְאֶת-כָּל-בְּשָׂרוֹ, עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ וְעַל-כְּרָעָיו; וְקִרְבּוֹ, וּפִרְשׁוֹ.    11 But the skin of the bullock, and all its flesh, with its head, and with its legs, and its inwards, and its dung,
4.12 יב  וְהוֹצִיא אֶת-כָּל-הַפָּר אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה אֶל-מָקוֹם טָהוֹר, אֶל-שֶׁפֶךְ הַדֶּשֶׁן, וְשָׂרַף אֹתוֹ עַל-עֵצִים, בָּאֵשׁ; עַל-שֶׁפֶךְ הַדֶּשֶׁן, יִשָּׂרֵף.  {פ}    12 even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn it on wood with fire; where the ashes are poured out shall it be burnt. {P}
4.13 יג  וְאִם כָּל-עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, יִשְׁגּוּ, וְנֶעְלַם דָּבָר, מֵעֵינֵי הַקָּהָל; וְעָשׂוּ אַחַת מִכָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵעָשֶׂינָה--וְאָשֵׁמוּ.    13 And if the whole congregation of Israel shall err, the thing being hid from the eyes of the assembly, and do any of the things which the LORD hath commanded not to be done, and are guilty:
4.14 יד  וְנוֹדְעָה, הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר חָטְאוּ, עָלֶיהָ--וְהִקְרִיבוּ הַקָּהָל פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר, לְחַטָּאת, וְהֵבִיאוּ אֹתוֹ, לִפְנֵי אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    14 when the sin wherein they have sinned is known, then the assembly shall offer a young bullock for a sin-offering, and bring it before the tent of meeting.
4.15 טו  וְסָמְכוּ זִקְנֵי הָעֵדָה אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל-רֹאשׁ הַפָּר--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְשָׁחַט אֶת-הַפָּר, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    15 And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before the LORD; and the bullock shall be killed before the LORD.
4.16 טז  וְהֵבִיא הַכֹּהֵן הַמָּשִׁיחַ, מִדַּם הַפָּר, אֶל-אֹהֶל, מוֹעֵד.    16 And the anointed priest shall bring of the blood of the bullock to the tent of meeting.
4.17 יז  וְטָבַל הַכֹּהֵן אֶצְבָּעוֹ, מִן-הַדָּם; וְהִזָּה שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֵת, פְּנֵי הַפָּרֹכֶת.    17 And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD, in front of the veil.
4.18 יח  וּמִן-הַדָּם יִתֵּן עַל-קַרְנֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְאֵת כָּל-הַדָּם, יִשְׁפֹּךְ אֶל-יְסוֹד מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר-פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    18 And he shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before the LORD, that is in the tent of meeting, and all the remaining blood shall he pour out at the base of the altar of burnt-offering, which is at the door of the tent of meeting.
4.19 יט  וְאֵת כָּל-חֶלְבּוֹ, יָרִים מִמֶּנּוּ; וְהִקְטִיר, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.    19 And all the fat thereof shall he take off from it, and make it smoke upon the altar.
4.20 כ  וְעָשָׂה לַפָּר--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְפַר הַחַטָּאת, כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה-לּוֹ; וְכִפֶּר עֲלֵהֶם הַכֹּהֵן, וְנִסְלַח לָהֶם.    20 Thus shall he do with the bullock; as he did with the bullock of the sin-offering, so shall he do with this; and the priest shall make atonement for them, and they shall be forgiven.
4.21 כא  וְהוֹצִיא אֶת-הַפָּר, אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, וְשָׂרַף אֹתוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׂרַף אֵת הַפָּר הָרִאשׁוֹן:  חַטַּאת הַקָּהָל, הוּא.  {פ}    21 And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn it as he burned the first bullock; it is the sin-offering for the assembly. {P}
4.22 כב  אֲשֶׁר נָשִׂיא, יֶחֱטָא; וְעָשָׂה אַחַת מִכָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵעָשֶׂינָה, בִּשְׁגָגָה--וְאָשֵׁם.    22 When a ruler sinneth, and doeth through error any one of all the things which the LORD his God hath commanded not to be done, and is guilty:
4.23 כג  אוֹ-הוֹדַע אֵלָיו חַטָּאתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר חָטָא בָּהּ--וְהֵבִיא אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ שְׂעִיר עִזִּים, זָכָר תָּמִים.    23 if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, be known to him, he shall bring for his offering a goat, a male without blemish.
4.24 כד  וְסָמַךְ יָדוֹ, עַל-רֹאשׁ הַשָּׂעִיר, וְשָׁחַט אֹתוֹ בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-יִשְׁחַט אֶת-הָעֹלָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; חַטָּאת, הוּא.    24 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt-offering before the LORD; it is a sin-offering.
4.25 כה  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מִדַּם הַחַטָּאת, בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ, וְנָתַן, עַל-קַרְנֹת מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה; וְאֶת-דָּמוֹ יִשְׁפֹּךְ, אֶל-יְסוֹד מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה.    25 And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering, and the remaining blood thereof shall he pour out at the base of the altar of burnt-offering.
4.26 כו  וְאֶת-כָּל-חֶלְבּוֹ יַקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, כְּחֵלֶב זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן מֵחַטָּאתוֹ, וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.  {פ}    26 And all the fat thereof shall he make smoke upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin, and he shall be forgiven. {P}
4.27 כז  וְאִם-נֶפֶשׁ אַחַת תֶּחֱטָא בִשְׁגָגָה, מֵעַם הָאָרֶץ:  בַּעֲשֹׂתָהּ אַחַת מִמִּצְוֺת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תֵעָשֶׂינָה--וְאָשֵׁם.    27 And if any one of the common people sin through error, in doing any of the things which the LORD hath commanded not to be done, and be guilty:
4.28 כח  אוֹ הוֹדַע אֵלָיו, חַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא--וְהֵבִיא קָרְבָּנוֹ שְׂעִירַת עִזִּים, תְּמִימָה נְקֵבָה, עַל-חַטָּאתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר חָטָא.    28 if his sin, which he hath sinned, be known to him, then he shall bring for his offering a goat, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned.
4.29 כט  וְסָמַךְ, אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל, רֹאשׁ הַחַטָּאת; וְשָׁחַט, אֶת-הַחַטָּאת, בִּמְקוֹם, הָעֹלָה.    29 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin-offering, and kill the sin-offering in the place of burnt-offering.
4.30 ל  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מִדָּמָהּ, בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ, וְנָתַן, עַל-קַרְנֹת מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה; וְאֶת-כָּל-דָּמָהּ יִשְׁפֹּךְ, אֶל-יְסוֹד הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    30 And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering, and all the remaining blood thereof shall he pour out at the base of the altar.
4.31 לא  וְאֶת-כָּל-חֶלְבָּהּ יָסִיר, כַּאֲשֶׁר הוּסַר חֵלֶב מֵעַל זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, וְהִקְטִיר הַכֹּהֵן הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ לַיהוָה; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן, וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.  {פ}    31 And all the fat thereof shall he take away, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the priest shall make it smoke upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD; and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be forgiven. {P}
4.32 לב  וְאִם-כֶּבֶשׂ יָבִיא קָרְבָּנוֹ, לְחַטָּאת--נְקֵבָה תְמִימָה, יְבִיאֶנָּה.    32 And if he bring a lamb as his offering for a sin-offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.
4.33 לג  וְסָמַךְ, אֶת-יָדוֹ, עַל, רֹאשׁ הַחַטָּאת; וְשָׁחַט אֹתָהּ, לְחַטָּאת, בִּמְקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁחַט אֶת-הָעֹלָה.    33 And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin-offering, and kill it for a sin-offering in the place where they kill the burnt-offering.
4.34 לד  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מִדַּם הַחַטָּאת, בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ, וְנָתַן, עַל-קַרְנֹת מִזְבַּח הָעֹלָה; וְאֶת-כָּל-דָּמָהּ יִשְׁפֹּךְ, אֶל-יְסוֹד הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    34 And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt-offering, and all the remaining blood thereof shall he pour out at the base of the altar.
4.35 לה  וְאֶת-כָּל-חֶלְבָּהּ יָסִיר, כַּאֲשֶׁר יוּסַר חֵלֶב-הַכֶּשֶׂב מִזֶּבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, וְהִקְטִיר הַכֹּהֵן אֹתָם הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עַל אִשֵּׁי יְהוָה; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן עַל-חַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-חָטָא, וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.  {פ}    35 And all the fat thereof shall he take away, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the priest shall make them smoke on the altar, upon the offerings of the LORD made by fire; and the priest shall make atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned, and he shall be forgiven. {P}
5.1 א  וְנֶפֶשׁ כִּי-תֶחֱטָא, וְשָׁמְעָה קוֹל אָלָה, וְהוּא עֵד, אוֹ רָאָה אוֹ יָדָע; אִם-לוֹא יַגִּיד, וְנָשָׂא עֲוֺנוֹ.    1 And if any one sin, in that he heareth the voice of adjuration, he being a witness, whether he hath seen or known, if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity;
5.2 ב  אוֹ נֶפֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר תִּגַּע בְּכָל-דָּבָר טָמֵא, אוֹ בְנִבְלַת חַיָּה טְמֵאָה אוֹ בְּנִבְלַת בְּהֵמָה טְמֵאָה, אוֹ בְּנִבְלַת שֶׁרֶץ טָמֵא; וְנֶעְלַם מִמֶּנּוּ, וְהוּא טָמֵא וְאָשֵׁם.    2 or if any one touch any unclean thing, whether it be the carcass of an unclean beast, or the carcass of unclean cattle, or the carcass of unclean swarming things, and be guilty, it being hidden from him that he is unclean;
5.3 ג  אוֹ כִי יִגַּע, בְּטֻמְאַת אָדָם, לְכֹל טֻמְאָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יִטְמָא בָּהּ; וְנֶעְלַם מִמֶּנּוּ, וְהוּא יָדַע וְאָשֵׁם.    3 or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever his uncleanness be wherewith he is unclean, and it be hid from him; and, when he knoweth of it, be guilty;
5.4 ד  אוֹ נֶפֶשׁ כִּי תִשָּׁבַע לְבַטֵּא בִשְׂפָתַיִם לְהָרַע אוֹ לְהֵיטִיב, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר יְבַטֵּא הָאָדָם בִּשְׁבֻעָה--וְנֶעְלַם מִמֶּנּוּ; וְהוּא-יָדַע וְאָשֵׁם, לְאַחַת מֵאֵלֶּה.    4 or if any one swear clearly with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be that a man shall utter clearly with an oath, and it be hid from him; and, when he knoweth of it, be guilty in one of these things;
5.5 ה  וְהָיָה כִי-יֶאְשַׁם, לְאַחַת מֵאֵלֶּה:  וְהִתְוַדָּה--אֲשֶׁר חָטָא, עָלֶיהָ.    5 and it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess that wherein he hath sinned;
5.6 ו  וְהֵבִיא אֶת-אֲשָׁמוֹ לַיהוָה עַל חַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא נְקֵבָה מִן-הַצֹּאן כִּשְׂבָּה, אוֹ-שְׂעִירַת עִזִּים--לְחַטָּאת; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן, מֵחַטָּאתוֹ.    6 and he shall bring his forfeit unto the LORD for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin.
5.7 ז  וְאִם-לֹא תַגִּיעַ יָדוֹ, דֵּי שֶׂה--וְהֵבִיא אֶת-אֲשָׁמוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא שְׁתֵּי תֹרִים אוֹ-שְׁנֵי בְנֵי-יוֹנָה, לַיהוָה:  אֶחָד לְחַטָּאת, וְאֶחָד לְעֹלָה.    7 And if his means suffice not for a lamb, then he shall bring his forfeit for that wherein he hath sinned, two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, unto the LORD: one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering.
5.8 ח  וְהֵבִיא אֹתָם אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִקְרִיב אֶת-אֲשֶׁר לַחַטָּאת רִאשׁוֹנָה; וּמָלַק אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ מִמּוּל עָרְפּוֹ, וְלֹא יַבְדִּיל.    8 And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that which is for the sin-offering first, and pinch off its head close by its neck, but shall not divide it asunder.
5.9 ט  וְהִזָּה מִדַּם הַחַטָּאת, עַל-קִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְהַנִּשְׁאָר בַּדָּם, יִמָּצֵה אֶל-יְסוֹד הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; חַטָּאת, הוּא.    9 And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin-offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar; it is a sin-offering.
5.10 י  וְאֶת-הַשֵּׁנִי יַעֲשֶׂה עֹלָה, כַּמִּשְׁפָּט; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן מֵחַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-חָטָא, וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.  {ס}    10 And he shall prepare the second for a burnt-offering, according to the ordinance; and the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin which he hath sinned, and he shall be forgiven. {S}
5.11 יא  וְאִם-לֹא תַשִּׂיג יָדוֹ לִשְׁתֵּי תֹרִים, אוֹ לִשְׁנֵי בְנֵי-יוֹנָה--וְהֵבִיא אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא עֲשִׂירִת הָאֵפָה סֹלֶת, לְחַטָּאת; לֹא-יָשִׂים עָלֶיהָ שֶׁמֶן, וְלֹא-יִתֵּן עָלֶיהָ לְבֹנָה--כִּי חַטָּאת, הִוא.    11 But if his means suffice not for two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he shall bring his offering for that wherein he hath sinned, the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin-offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon; for it is a sin-offering.
5.12 יב  וֶהֱבִיאָהּ, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, וְקָמַץ הַכֹּהֵן מִמֶּנָּה מְלוֹא קֻמְצוֹ אֶת-אַזְכָּרָתָהּ וְהִקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עַל אִשֵּׁי יְהוָה; חַטָּאת, הִוא.    12 And he shall bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it as the memorial-part thereof, and make it smoke on the altar, upon the offerings of the LORD made by fire; it is a sin-offering.
5.13 יג  וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן עַל-חַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-חָטָא, מֵאַחַת מֵאֵלֶּה--וְנִסְלַח לוֹ; וְהָיְתָה לַכֹּהֵן, כַּמִּנְחָה.  {ס}    13 And the priest shall make atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned in any of these things, and he shall be forgiven; and the remnant shall be the priest's, as the meal-offering. {S}
5.14 יד  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    14 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
5.15 טו  נֶפֶשׁ, כִּי-תִמְעֹל מַעַל, וְחָטְאָה בִּשְׁגָגָה, מִקָּדְשֵׁי יְהוָה:  וְהֵבִיא אֶת-אֲשָׁמוֹ לַיהוָה אַיִל תָּמִים מִן-הַצֹּאן, בְּעֶרְכְּךָ כֶּסֶף-שְׁקָלִים בְּשֶׁקֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ--לְאָשָׁם.    15 If any one commit a trespass, and sin through error, in the holy things of the LORD, then he shall bring his forfeit unto the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy valuation in silver by shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a guilt-offering.
5.16 טז  וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר חָטָא מִן-הַקֹּדֶשׁ יְשַׁלֵּם, וְאֶת-חֲמִישִׁתוֹ יוֹסֵף עָלָיו, וְנָתַן אֹתוֹ, לַכֹּהֵן; וְהַכֹּהֵן, יְכַפֵּר עָלָיו בְּאֵיל הָאָשָׁם--וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.  {פ}    16 And he shall make restitution for that which he hath done amiss in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest; and the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt-offering, and he shall be forgiven. {P}
5.17 יז  וְאִם-נֶפֶשׁ, כִּי תֶחֱטָא, וְעָשְׂתָה אַחַת מִכָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא תֵעָשֶׂינָה; וְלֹא-יָדַע וְאָשֵׁם, וְנָשָׂא עֲוֺנוֹ.    17 And if any one sin, and do any of the things which the LORD hath commanded not to be done, though he know it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.
5.18 יח  וְהֵבִיא אַיִל תָּמִים מִן-הַצֹּאן, בְּעֶרְכְּךָ לְאָשָׁם--אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן עַל שִׁגְגָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר-שָׁגָג, וְהוּא לֹא-יָדַע--וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.    18 And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy valuation, for a guilt-offering, unto the priest; and the priest shall make atonement for him concerning the error which he committed, though he knew it not, and he shall be forgiven.
5.19 יט  אָשָׁם, הוּא:  אָשֹׁם אָשַׁם, לַיהוָה.  {פ}    19 It is a guilt-offering--he is certainly guilty before the LORD. {P}
6.1 כ  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    20 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.2 כא  נֶפֶשׁ כִּי תֶחֱטָא, וּמָעֲלָה מַעַל בַּיהוָה; וְכִחֵשׁ בַּעֲמִיתוֹ בְּפִקָּדוֹן, אוֹ-בִתְשׂוּמֶת יָד אוֹ בְגָזֵל, אוֹ, עָשַׁק אֶת-עֲמִיתוֹ.    21 If any one sin, and commit a trespass against the LORD, and deal falsely with his neighbour in a matter of deposit, or of pledge, or of robbery, or have oppressed his neighbour;
6.3 כב  אוֹ-מָצָא אֲבֵדָה וְכִחֶשׁ בָּהּ, וְנִשְׁבַּע עַל-שָׁקֶר; עַל-אַחַת, מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה הָאָדָם--לַחֲטֹא בָהֵנָּה.    22 or have found that which was lost, and deal falsely therein, and swear to a lie; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein;
6.4 כג  וְהָיָה, כִּי-יֶחֱטָא וְאָשֵׁם--וְהֵשִׁיב אֶת-הַגְּזֵלָה אֲשֶׁר גָּזָל אוֹ אֶת-הָעֹשֶׁק אֲשֶׁר עָשָׁק, אוֹ אֶת-הַפִּקָּדוֹן אֲשֶׁר הָפְקַד אִתּוֹ; אוֹ אֶת-הָאֲבֵדָה, אֲשֶׁר מָצָא.    23 then it shall be, if he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took by robbery, or the thing which he hath gotten by oppression, or the deposit which was deposited with him, or the lost thing which he found,
6.5 כד  אוֹ מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יִשָּׁבַע עָלָיו, לַשֶּׁקֶר--וְשִׁלַּם אֹתוֹ בְּרֹאשׁוֹ, וַחֲמִשִׁתָיו יֹסֵף עָלָיו:  לַאֲשֶׁר הוּא לוֹ יִתְּנֶנּוּ, בְּיוֹם אַשְׁמָתוֹ.    24 or any thing about which he hath sworn falsely, he shall even restore it in full, and shall add the fifth part more thereto; unto him to whom it appertaineth shall he give it, in the day of his being guilty.
6.6 כה  וְאֶת-אֲשָׁמוֹ יָבִיא, לַיהוָה, אַיִל תָּמִים מִן-הַצֹּאן בְּעֶרְכְּךָ לְאָשָׁם, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    25 And he shall bring his forfeit unto the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy valuation, for a guilt-offering, unto the priest.
6.7 כו  וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְנִסְלַח לוֹ, עַל-אַחַת מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה, לְאַשְׁמָה בָהּ.  {פ}    26 And the priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD, and he shall be forgiven, concerning whatsoever he doeth so as to be guilty thereby. {P}
6.8 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.9 ב  צַו אֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו לֵאמֹר, זֹאת תּוֹרַת הָעֹלָה:  הִוא הָעֹלָה עַל מוֹקְדָה עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ כָּל-הַלַּיְלָה, עַד-הַבֹּקֶר, וְאֵשׁ הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, תּוּקַד בּוֹ.    2 Command Aaron and his sons, saying: This is the law of the burnt-offering: it is that which goeth up on its firewood upon the altar all night unto the morning; and the fire of the altar shall be kept burning thereby.
6.10 ג  וְלָבַשׁ הַכֹּהֵן מִדּוֹ בַד, וּמִכְנְסֵי-בַד יִלְבַּשׁ עַל-בְּשָׂרוֹ, וְהֵרִים אֶת-הַדֶּשֶׁן אֲשֶׁר תֹּאכַל הָאֵשׁ אֶת-הָעֹלָה, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְשָׂמוֹ, אֵצֶל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    3 And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh; and he shall take up the ashes whereto the fire hath consumed the burnt-offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.
6.11 ד  וּפָשַׁט, אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וְלָבַשׁ, בְּגָדִים אֲחֵרִים; וְהוֹצִיא אֶת-הַדֶּשֶׁן אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, אֶל-מָקוֹם טָהוֹר.    4 And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.
6.12 ה  וְהָאֵשׁ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ תּוּקַד-בּוֹ לֹא תִכְבֶּה, וּבִעֵר עָלֶיהָ הַכֹּהֵן עֵצִים בַּבֹּקֶר בַּבֹּקֶר; וְעָרַךְ עָלֶיהָ הָעֹלָה, וְהִקְטִיר עָלֶיהָ חֶלְבֵי הַשְּׁלָמִים.    5 And the fire upon the altar shall be kept burning thereby, it shall not go out; and the priest shall kindle wood on it every morning; and he shall lay the burnt-offering in order upon it, and shall make smoke thereon the fat of the peace-offerings.
6.13 ו  אֵשׁ, תָּמִיד תּוּקַד עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--לֹא תִכְבֶּה.  {ס}    6 Fire shall be kept burning upon the altar continually; it shall not go out. {S}
6.14 ז  וְזֹאת תּוֹרַת, הַמִּנְחָה:  הַקְרֵב אֹתָהּ בְּנֵי-אַהֲרֹן לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֶל-פְּנֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    7 And this is the law of the meal-offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, in front of the altar.
6.15 ח  וְהֵרִים מִמֶּנּוּ בְּקֻמְצוֹ, מִסֹּלֶת הַמִּנְחָה וּמִשַּׁמְנָהּ, וְאֵת כָּל-הַלְּבֹנָה, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּנְחָה; וְהִקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ אַזְכָּרָתָהּ--לַיהוָה.    8 And he shall take up therefrom his handful, of the fine flour of the meal-offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is upon the meal-offering, and shall make the memorial-part thereof smoke upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
6.16 ט  וְהַנּוֹתֶרֶת מִמֶּנָּה, יֹאכְלוּ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו; מַצּוֹת תֵּאָכֵל בְּמָקוֹם קָדֹשׁ, בַּחֲצַר אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד יֹאכְלוּהָ.    9 And that which is left thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat; it shall be eaten without leaven in a holy place; in the court of the tent of meeting they shall eat it.
6.17 י  לֹא תֵאָפֶה חָמֵץ, חֶלְקָם נָתַתִּי אֹתָהּ מֵאִשָּׁי; קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים הִוא, כַּחַטָּאת וְכָאָשָׁם.    10 It shall not be baked with leaven. I have given it as their portion of My offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as the sin-offering, and as the guilt-offering.
6.18 יא  כָּל-זָכָר בִּבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן, יֹאכְלֶנָּה--חָק-עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה; כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יִגַּע בָּהֶם, יִקְדָּשׁ.  {פ}    11 Every male among the children of Aaron may eat of it, as a due for ever throughout your generations, from the offerings of the LORD made by fire; whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy. {P}
6.19 יב  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    12 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.20 יג  זֶה קָרְבַּן אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו אֲשֶׁר-יַקְרִיבוּ לַיהוָה, בְּיוֹם הִמָּשַׁח אֹתוֹ--עֲשִׂירִת הָאֵפָה סֹלֶת מִנְחָה, תָּמִיד:  מַחֲצִיתָהּ בַּבֹּקֶר, וּמַחֲצִיתָהּ בָּעָרֶב.    13 This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the LORD in the day when he is anointed: the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering perpetually, half of it in the morning, and half thereof in the evening.
6.21 יד  עַל-מַחֲבַת, בַּשֶּׁמֶן תֵּעָשֶׂה--מֻרְבֶּכֶת תְּבִיאֶנָּה; תֻּפִינֵי מִנְחַת פִּתִּים, תַּקְרִיב רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ לַיהוָה.    14 On a griddle it shall be made with oil; when it is soaked, thou shalt bring it in; in broken pieces shalt thou offer the meal-offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
6.22 טו  וְהַכֹּהֵן הַמָּשִׁיחַ תַּחְתָּיו מִבָּנָיו, יַעֲשֶׂה אֹתָהּ; חָק-עוֹלָם, לַיהוָה כָּלִיל תָּקְטָר.    15 And the anointed priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons shall offer it, it is a due for ever; it shall be wholly made to smoke unto the LORD.
6.23 טז  וְכָל-מִנְחַת כֹּהֵן כָּלִיל תִּהְיֶה, לֹא תֵאָכֵל.  {פ}    16 And every meal-offering of the priest shall be wholly made to smoke; it shall not be eaten. {P}
6.24 יז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    17 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.25 יח  דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו לֵאמֹר, זֹאת תּוֹרַת הַחַטָּאת:  בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר תִּשָּׁחֵט הָעֹלָה תִּשָּׁחֵט הַחַטָּאת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, הִוא.    18 Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying: This is the law of the sin-offering: in the place where the burnt-offering is killed shall the sin-offering be killed before the LORD; it is most holy.
6.26 יט  הַכֹּהֵן הַמְחַטֵּא אֹתָהּ, יֹאכְלֶנָּה; בְּמָקוֹם קָדֹשׁ תֵּאָכֵל, בַּחֲצַר אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    19 The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it; in a holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tent of meeting.
6.27 כ  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יִגַּע בִּבְשָׂרָהּ, יִקְדָּשׁ; וַאֲשֶׁר יִזֶּה מִדָּמָהּ, עַל-הַבֶּגֶד--אֲשֶׁר יִזֶּה עָלֶיהָ, תְּכַבֵּס בְּמָקוֹם קָדֹשׁ.    20 Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy; and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in a holy place.
6.28 כא  וּכְלִי-חֶרֶשׂ אֲשֶׁר תְּבֻשַּׁל-בּוֹ, יִשָּׁבֵר; וְאִם-בִּכְלִי נְחֹשֶׁת בֻּשָּׁלָה, וּמֹרַק וְשֻׁטַּף בַּמָּיִם.    21 But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken; and if it be sodden in a brazen vessel, it shall be scoured, and rinsed in water.
6.29 כב  כָּל-זָכָר בַּכֹּהֲנִים, יֹאכַל אֹתָהּ; קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, הִוא.    22 Every male among the priests may eat thereof; it is most holy.
6.30 כג  וְכָל-חַטָּאת אֲשֶׁר יוּבָא מִדָּמָהּ אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לְכַפֵּר בַּקֹּדֶשׁ--לֹא תֵאָכֵל; בָּאֵשׁ, תִּשָּׂרֵף.  {פ}    23 And no sin-offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the holy place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire. {P}
7.1 א  וְזֹאת תּוֹרַת, הָאָשָׁם:  קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, הוּא.    1 And this is the law of the guilt-offering: it is most holy.
7.2 ב  בִּמְקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁחֲטוּ אֶת-הָעֹלָה, יִשְׁחֲטוּ, אֶת-הָאָשָׁם; וְאֶת-דָּמוֹ יִזְרֹק עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.    2 In the place where they kill the burnt-offering shall they kill the guilt-offering: and the blood thereof shall be dashed against the altar round about.
7.3 ג  וְאֵת כָּל-חֶלְבּוֹ, יַקְרִיב מִמֶּנּוּ--אֵת, הָאַלְיָה, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב, הַמְכַסֶּה אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב.    3 And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof: the fat tail, and the fat that covereth the inwards,
7.4 ד  וְאֵת, שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עֲלֵיהֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַכְּסָלִים; וְאֶת-הַיֹּתֶרֶת, עַל-הַכָּבֵד, עַל-הַכְּלָיֹת, יְסִירֶנָּה.    4 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the lobe above the liver, which he shall take away by the kidneys.
7.5 ה  וְהִקְטִיר אֹתָם הַכֹּהֵן הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה; אָשָׁם, הוּא.    5 And the priest shall make them smoke upon the altar for an offering made by fire unto the LORD; it is a guilt-offering.
7.6 ו  כָּל-זָכָר בַּכֹּהֲנִים, יֹאכְלֶנּוּ; בְּמָקוֹם קָדוֹשׁ יֵאָכֵל, קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים הוּא.    6 Every male among the priests may eat thereof; it shall be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy.
7.7 ז  כַּחַטָּאת, כָּאָשָׁם--תּוֹרָה אַחַת, לָהֶם; הַכֹּהֵן אֲשֶׁר יְכַפֶּר-בּוֹ, לוֹ יִהְיֶה.    7 As is the sin-offering, so is the guilt-offering; there is one law for them; the priest that maketh atonement therewith, he shall have it.
7.8 ח  וְהַכֹּהֵן--הַמַּקְרִיב, אֶת-עֹלַת אִישׁ:  עוֹר הָעֹלָה אֲשֶׁר הִקְרִיב, לַכֹּהֵן לוֹ יִהְיֶה.    8 And the priest that offereth any man's burnt-offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt-offering which he hath offered.
7.9 ט  וְכָל-מִנְחָה, אֲשֶׁר תֵּאָפֶה בַּתַּנּוּר, וְכָל-נַעֲשָׂה בַמַּרְחֶשֶׁת, וְעַל-מַחֲבַת--לַכֹּהֵן הַמַּקְרִיב אֹתָהּ, לוֹ תִהְיֶה.    9 And every meal-offering that is baked in the oven, and all that is dressed in the stewing-pan, and on the griddle, shall be the priest's that offereth it.
7.10 י  וְכָל-מִנְחָה בְלוּלָה-בַשֶּׁמֶן, וַחֲרֵבָה--לְכָל-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן תִּהְיֶה, אִישׁ כְּאָחִיו.  {פ}    10 And every meal-offering, mingled with oil, or dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one as well as another. {P}
7.11 יא  וְזֹאת תּוֹרַת, זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, אֲשֶׁר יַקְרִיב, לַיהוָה.    11 And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which one may offer unto the LORD.
7.12 יב  אִם עַל-תּוֹדָה, יַקְרִיבֶנּוּ--וְהִקְרִיב עַל-זֶבַח הַתּוֹדָה חַלּוֹת מַצּוֹת בְּלוּלֹת בַּשֶּׁמֶן, וּרְקִיקֵי מַצּוֹת מְשֻׁחִים בַּשָּׁמֶן; וְסֹלֶת מֻרְבֶּכֶת, חַלֹּת בְּלוּלֹת בַּשָּׁמֶן.    12 If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour soaked.
7.13 יג  עַל-חַלֹּת לֶחֶם חָמֵץ, יַקְרִיב קָרְבָּנוֹ, עַל-זֶבַח, תּוֹדַת שְׁלָמָיו.    13 With cakes of leavened bread he shall present his offering with the sacrifice of his peace-offerings for thanksgiving.
7.14 יד  וְהִקְרִיב מִמֶּנּוּ אֶחָד מִכָּל-קָרְבָּן, תְּרוּמָה לַיהוָה; לַכֹּהֵן, הַזֹּרֵק אֶת-דַּם הַשְּׁלָמִים--לוֹ יִהְיֶה.    14 And of it he shall present one out of each offering for a gift unto the LORD; it shall be the priest's that dasheth the blood of the peace-offerings against the altar.
7.15 טו  וּבְשַׂר, זֶבַח תּוֹדַת שְׁלָמָיו--בְּיוֹם קָרְבָּנוֹ, יֵאָכֵל:  לֹא-יַנִּיחַ מִמֶּנּוּ, עַד-בֹּקֶר.    15 And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten on the day of his offering; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.
7.16 טז  וְאִם-נֶדֶר אוֹ נְדָבָה, זֶבַח קָרְבָּנוֹ--בְּיוֹם הַקְרִיבוֹ אֶת-זִבְחוֹ, יֵאָכֵל; וּמִמָּחֳרָת, וְהַנּוֹתָר מִמֶּנּוּ יֵאָכֵל.    16 But if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a freewill-offering, it shall be eaten on the day that he offereth his sacrifice; and on the morrow that which remaineth of it may be eaten.
7.17 יז  וְהַנּוֹתָר, מִבְּשַׂר הַזָּבַח--בַּיּוֹם, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, בָּאֵשׁ, יִשָּׂרֵף.    17 But that which remaineth of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.
7.18 יח  וְאִם הֵאָכֹל יֵאָכֵל מִבְּשַׂר-זֶבַח שְׁלָמָיו בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, לֹא יֵרָצֶה--הַמַּקְרִיב אֹתוֹ לֹא יֵחָשֵׁב לוֹ, פִּגּוּל יִהְיֶה; וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ הָאֹכֶלֶת מִמֶּנּוּ, עֲוֺנָהּ תִּשָּׂא.    18 And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings be at all eaten on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it; it shall be an abhorred thing, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.
7.19 יט  וְהַבָּשָׂר אֲשֶׁר-יִגַּע בְּכָל-טָמֵא, לֹא יֵאָכֵל--בָּאֵשׁ, יִשָּׂרֵף; וְהַבָּשָׂר--כָּל-טָהוֹר, יֹאכַל בָּשָׂר.    19 And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire. And as for the flesh, every one that is clean may eat thereof.
7.20 כ  וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-תֹּאכַל בָּשָׂר, מִזֶּבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים אֲשֶׁר לַיהוָה, וְטֻמְאָתוֹ, עָלָיו--וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מֵעַמֶּיהָ.    20 But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings, that pertain unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
7.21 כא  וְנֶפֶשׁ כִּי-תִגַּע בְּכָל-טָמֵא, בְּטֻמְאַת אָדָם אוֹ בִּבְהֵמָה טְמֵאָה אוֹ בְּכָל-שֶׁקֶץ טָמֵא, וְאָכַל מִבְּשַׂר-זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, אֲשֶׁר לַיהוָה--וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מֵעַמֶּיהָ.  {פ}    21 And when any one shall touch any unclean thing, whether it be the uncleanness of man, or an unclean beast, or any unclean detestable thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which pertain unto the LORD, that soul shall be cut off from his people. {P}
7.22 כב  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    22 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
7.23 כג  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  כָּל-חֵלֶב שׁוֹר וְכֶשֶׂב, וָעֵז--לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ.    23 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: Ye shall eat no fat, of ox, or sheep, or goat.
7.24 כד  וְחֵלֶב נְבֵלָה וְחֵלֶב טְרֵפָה, יֵעָשֶׂה לְכָל-מְלָאכָה; וְאָכֹל, לֹא תֹאכְלֻהוּ.    24 And the fat of that which dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn of beasts, may be used for any other service; but ye shall in no wise eat of it.
7.25 כה  כִּי, כָּל-אֹכֵל חֵלֶב, מִן-הַבְּהֵמָה, אֲשֶׁר יַקְרִיב מִמֶּנָּה אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה--וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הָאֹכֶלֶת, מֵעַמֶּיהָ.    25 For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men present an offering made by fire unto the LORD, even the soul that eateth it shall be cut off from his people.
7.26 כו  וְכָל-דָּם לֹא תֹאכְלוּ, בְּכֹל מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם, לָעוֹף, וְלַבְּהֵמָה.    26 And ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl or of beast, in any of your dwellings.
7.27 כז  כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר-תֹּאכַל כָּל-דָּם--וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מֵעַמֶּיהָ.    27 Whosoever it be that eateth any blood, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
7.28 כח  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    28 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
7.29 כט  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  הַמַּקְרִיב אֶת-זֶבַח שְׁלָמָיו, לַיהוָה--יָבִיא אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ לַיהוָה, מִזֶּבַח שְׁלָמָיו.    29 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: He that offereth his sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the LORD shall bring his offering unto the LORD out of his sacrifice of peace-offerings.
7.30 ל  יָדָיו תְּבִיאֶינָה, אֵת אִשֵּׁי יְהוָה; אֶת-הַחֵלֶב עַל-הֶחָזֶה, יְבִיאֶנּוּ--אֵת הֶחָזֶה לְהָנִיף אֹתוֹ תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    30 His own hands shall bring the offerings of the LORD made by fire: the fat with the breast shall he bring, that the breast may be waved for a wave-offering before the LORD.
7.31 לא  וְהִקְטִיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַחֵלֶב, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה; וְהָיָה, הֶחָזֶה, לְאַהֲרֹן, וּלְבָנָיו.    31 And the priest shall make the fat smoke upon the altar; but the breast shall be Aaron's and his sons'.
7.32 לב  וְאֵת שׁוֹק הַיָּמִין, תִּתְּנוּ תְרוּמָה לַכֹּהֵן, מִזִּבְחֵי, שַׁלְמֵיכֶם.    32 And the right thigh shall ye give unto the priest for a heave-offering out of your sacrifices of peace-offerings.
7.33 לג  הַמַּקְרִיב אֶת-דַּם הַשְּׁלָמִים, וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב--מִבְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן:  לוֹ תִהְיֶה שׁוֹק הַיָּמִין, לְמָנָה.    33 He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace-offerings, and the fat, shall have the right thigh for a portion.
7.34 לד  כִּי אֶת-חֲזֵה הַתְּנוּפָה וְאֵת שׁוֹק הַתְּרוּמָה, לָקַחְתִּי מֵאֵת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִזִּבְחֵי, שַׁלְמֵיהֶם; וָאֶתֵּן אֹתָם לְאַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן וּלְבָנָיו, לְחָק-עוֹלָם, מֵאֵת, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    34 For the breast of waving and the thigh of heaving have I taken of the children of Israel out of their sacrifices of peace-offerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons as a due for ever from the children of Israel.
7.35 לה  זֹאת מִשְׁחַת אַהֲרֹן וּמִשְׁחַת בָּנָיו, מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה, בְּיוֹם הִקְרִיב אֹתָם, לְכַהֵן לַיהוָה.    35 This is the consecrated portion of Aaron, and the consecrated portion of his sons, out of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, in the day when they were presented to minister unto the LORD in the priest's office;
7.36 לו  אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה לָתֵת לָהֶם, בְּיוֹם מָשְׁחוֹ אֹתָם, מֵאֵת, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--חֻקַּת עוֹלָם, לְדֹרֹתָם.    36 which the LORD commanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that they were anointed. It is a due for ever throughout their generations.
7.37 לז  זֹאת הַתּוֹרָה, לָעֹלָה לַמִּנְחָה, וְלַחַטָּאת, וְלָאָשָׁם; וְלַמִּלּוּאִים--וּלְזֶבַח, הַשְּׁלָמִים.    37 This is the law of the burnt-offering, of the meal-offering, and of the sin-offering, and of the guilt-offering, and of the consecration-offering, and of the sacrifice of peace-offerings;
7.38 לח  אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, בְּהַר סִינָי:  בְּיוֹם צַוֺּתוֹ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַקְרִיב אֶת-קָרְבְּנֵיהֶם לַיהוָה--בְּמִדְבַּר סִינָי.  {פ}    38 which the LORD commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to present their offerings unto the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai. {P}
8.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
8.2 ב  קַח אֶת-אַהֲרֹן, וְאֶת-בָּנָיו אִתּוֹ, וְאֵת הַבְּגָדִים, וְאֵת שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה; וְאֵת פַּר הַחַטָּאת, וְאֵת שְׁנֵי הָאֵילִים, וְאֵת, סַל הַמַּצּוֹת.    2 'Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and the bullock of the sin-offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread;
8.3 ג  וְאֵת כָּל-הָעֵדָה, הַקְהֵל, אֶל-פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    3 and assemble thou all the congregation at the door of the tent of meeting.'
8.4 ד  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֹתוֹ; וַתִּקָּהֵל, הָעֵדָה, אֶל-פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    4 And Moses did as the LORD commanded him; and the congregation was assembled at the door of the tent of meeting.
8.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-הָעֵדָה:  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לַעֲשׂוֹת.    5 And Moses said unto the congregation: 'This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded to be done.'
8.6 ו  וַיַּקְרֵב מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו; וַיִּרְחַץ אֹתָם, בַּמָּיִם.    6 And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.
8.7 ז  וַיִּתֵּן עָלָיו אֶת-הַכֻּתֹּנֶת, וַיַּחְגֹּר אֹתוֹ בָּאַבְנֵט, וַיַּלְבֵּשׁ אֹתוֹ אֶת-הַמְּעִיל, וַיִּתֵּן עָלָיו אֶת-הָאֵפֹד; וַיַּחְגֹּר אֹתוֹ, בְּחֵשֶׁב הָאֵפֹד, וַיֶּאְפֹּד לוֹ, בּוֹ.    7 And he put upon him the tunic, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the skilfully woven band of the ephod, and bound it unto him therewith.
8.8 ח  וַיָּשֶׂם עָלָיו, אֶת-הַחֹשֶׁן; וַיִּתֵּן, אֶל-הַחֹשֶׁן, אֶת-הָאוּרִים, וְאֶת-הַתֻּמִּים.    8 And he placed the breastplate upon him; and in the breastplate he put the Urim and the Thummim.
8.9 ט  וַיָּשֶׂם אֶת-הַמִּצְנֶפֶת, עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וַיָּשֶׂם עַל-הַמִּצְנֶפֶת אֶל-מוּל פָּנָיו, אֵת צִיץ הַזָּהָב נֵזֶר הַקֹּדֶשׁ, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    9 And he set the mitre upon his head; and upon the mitre, in front, did he set the golden plate, the holy crown; as the LORD commanded Moses.
8.10 י  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וַיִּמְשַׁח אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ; וַיְקַדֵּשׁ, אֹתָם.    10 And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was therein, and sanctified them.
8.11 יא  וַיַּז מִמֶּנּוּ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים; וַיִּמְשַׁח אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְאֶת-הַכִּיֹּר וְאֶת-כַּנּוֹ--לְקַדְּשָׁם.    11 And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its vessels, and the laver and its base, to sanctify them.
8.12 יב  וַיִּצֹק מִשֶּׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, עַל רֹאשׁ אַהֲרֹן; וַיִּמְשַׁח אֹתוֹ, לְקַדְּשׁוֹ.    12 And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and anointed him, to sanctify him.
8.13 יג  וַיַּקְרֵב מֹשֶׁה אֶת-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, וַיַּלְבִּשֵׁם כֻּתֳּנֹת וַיַּחְגֹּר אֹתָם אַבְנֵט, וַיַּחֲבֹשׁ לָהֶם, מִגְבָּעוֹת--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    13 And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and clothed them with tunics, and girded them with girdles, and bound head-tires upon them; as the LORD commanded Moses.
8.14 יד  וַיַּגֵּשׁ, אֵת פַּר הַחַטָּאת; וַיִּסְמֹךְ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל-רֹאשׁ פַּר הַחַטָּאת.    14 And the bullock of the sin-offering was brought; and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock of the sin-offering.
8.15 טו  וַיִּשְׁחָט, וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַדָּם וַיִּתֵּן עַל-קַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ סָבִיב בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ, וַיְחַטֵּא, אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְאֶת-הַדָּם, יָצַק אֶל-יְסוֹד הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וַיְקַדְּשֵׁהוּ, לְכַפֵּר עָלָיו.    15 And when it was slain, Moses took the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured out the remaining blood at the base of the altar, and sanctified it, to make atonement for it.
8.16 טז  וַיִּקַּח, אֶת-כָּל-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת יֹתֶרֶת הַכָּבֵד, וְאֶת-שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת וְאֶת-חֶלְבְּהֶן; וַיַּקְטֵר מֹשֶׁה, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.    16 And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses made it smoke upon the altar.
8.17 יז  וְאֶת-הַפָּר וְאֶת-עֹרוֹ, וְאֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ וְאֶת-פִּרְשׁוֹ--שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    17 But the bullock, and its skin, and its flesh, and its dung, were burnt with fire without the camp; as the LORD commanded Moses.
8.18 יח  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֵת אֵיל הָעֹלָה; וַיִּסְמְכוּ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם--עַל-רֹאשׁ הָאָיִל.    18 And the ram of the burnt-offering was presented; and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.
8.19 יט  וַיִּשְׁחָט; וַיִּזְרֹק מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַדָּם עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.    19 And when it was killed, Moses dashed the blood against the altar round about.
8.20 כ  וְאֶת-הָאַיִל--נִתַּח, לִנְתָחָיו; וַיַּקְטֵר מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הָרֹאשׁ, וְאֶת-הַנְּתָחִים וְאֶת-הַפָּדֶר.    20 And when the ram was cut into its pieces, Moses made the head, and the pieces, and the suet smoke.
8.21 כא  וְאֶת-הַקֶּרֶב וְאֶת-הַכְּרָעַיִם, רָחַץ בַּמָּיִם; וַיַּקְטֵר מֹשֶׁה אֶת-כָּל-הָאַיִל הַמִּזְבֵּחָה, עֹלָה הוּא לְרֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ אִשֶּׁה הוּא לַיהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    21 And when the inwards and the legs were washed with water, Moses made the whole ram smoke upon the altar; it was a burnt-offering for a sweet savour; it was an offering made by fire unto the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.
8.22 כב  וַיַּקְרֵב אֶת-הָאַיִל הַשֵּׁנִי, אֵיל הַמִּלֻּאִים; וַיִּסְמְכוּ אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם--עַל-רֹאשׁ הָאָיִל.    22 And the other ram was presented, the ram of consecration, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.
8.23 כג  וַיִּשְׁחָט--וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה מִדָּמוֹ, וַיִּתֵּן עַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן-אַהֲרֹן הַיְמָנִית; וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדוֹ הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלוֹ הַיְמָנִית.    23 And when it was slain, Moses took of the blood thereof, and put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
8.24 כד  וַיַּקְרֵב אֶת-בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה מִן-הַדָּם עַל-תְּנוּךְ אָזְנָם הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדָם הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלָם הַיְמָנִית; וַיִּזְרֹק מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַדָּם עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.    24 And Aaron's sons were brought, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot; and Moses dashed the blood against the altar round about.
8.25 כה  וַיִּקַּח אֶת-הַחֵלֶב וְאֶת-הָאַלְיָה, וְאֶת-כָּל-הַחֵלֶב אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֵת יֹתֶרֶת הַכָּבֵד, וְאֶת-שְׁתֵּי הַכְּלָיֹת וְאֶת-חֶלְבְּהֶן; וְאֵת, שׁוֹק הַיָּמִין.    25 And he took the fat, and the fat tail, and all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right thigh.
8.26 כו  וּמִסַּל הַמַּצּוֹת אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לָקַח חַלַּת מַצָּה אַחַת וְחַלַּת לֶחֶם שֶׁמֶן אַחַת--וְרָקִיק אֶחָד; וַיָּשֶׂם, עַל-הַחֲלָבִים, וְעַל, שׁוֹק הַיָּמִין.    26 And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before the LORD, he took one unleavened cake, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and placed them on the fat, and upon the right thigh.
8.27 כז  וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הַכֹּל--עַל כַּפֵּי אַהֲרֹן, וְעַל כַּפֵּי בָנָיו; וַיָּנֶף אֹתָם תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    27 And he put the whole upon the hands of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons, and waved them for a wave-offering before the LORD.
8.28 כח  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֹתָם מֵעַל כַּפֵּיהֶם, וַיַּקְטֵר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה עַל-הָעֹלָה; מִלֻּאִים הֵם לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, אִשֶּׁה הוּא לַיהוָה.    28 And Moses took them from off their hands, and made them smoke on the altar upon the burnt-offering; they were a consecration-offering for a sweet savour; it was an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
8.29 כט  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הֶחָזֶה, וַיְנִיפֵהוּ תְנוּפָה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  מֵאֵיל הַמִּלֻּאִים, לְמֹשֶׁה הָיָה לְמָנָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    29 And Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave-offering before the LORD; it was Moses' portion of the ram of consecration; as the LORD commanded Moses.
8.30 ל  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה מִשֶּׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וּמִן-הַדָּם אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וַיַּז עַל-אַהֲרֹן עַל-בְּגָדָיו, וְעַל-בָּנָיו וְעַל-בִּגְדֵי בָנָיו אִתּוֹ; וַיְקַדֵּשׁ אֶת-אַהֲרֹן אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וְאֶת-בָּנָיו וְאֶת-בִּגְדֵי בָנָיו אִתּוֹ.    30 And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him, and sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.
8.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו, בַּשְּׁלוּ אֶת-הַבָּשָׂר פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְשָׁם תֹּאכְלוּ אֹתוֹ, וְאֶת-הַלֶּחֶם אֲשֶׁר בְּסַל הַמִּלֻּאִים:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוֵּיתִי לֵאמֹר, אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו יֹאכְלֻהוּ.    31 And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons: 'Boil the flesh at the door of the tent of meeting; and there eat it and the bread that is in the basket of consecration, as I commanded, saying: Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
8.32 לב  וְהַנּוֹתָר בַּבָּשָׂר, וּבַלָּחֶם--בָּאֵשׁ, תִּשְׂרֹפוּ.    32 And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye burn with fire.
8.33 לג  וּמִפֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד לֹא תֵצְאוּ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים--עַד יוֹם מְלֹאת, יְמֵי מִלֻּאֵיכֶם:  כִּי שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, יְמַלֵּא אֶת-יֶדְכֶם.    33 And ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting seven days, until the days of your consecration be fulfilled; for He shall consecrate you seven days.
8.34 לד  כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, בַּיּוֹם הַזֶּה--צִוָּה יְהוָה לַעֲשֹׂת, לְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיכֶם.    34 As hath been done this day, so the LORD hath commanded to do, to make atonement for you.
8.35 לה  וּפֶתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד תֵּשְׁבוּ יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת יְהוָה, וְלֹא תָמוּתוּ:  כִּי-כֵן, צֻוֵּיתִי.    35 And at the door of the tent of meeting shall ye abide day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the LORD, that ye die not; for so I am commanded.
8.36 לו  וַיַּעַשׂ אַהֲרֹן, וּבָנָיו--אֵת, כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}    36 And Aaron and his sons did all the things which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses. {S}
9.1 א  וַיְהִי, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, קָרָא מֹשֶׁה, לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו--וּלְזִקְנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel;
9.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, קַח-לְךָ עֵגֶל בֶּן-בָּקָר לְחַטָּאת וְאַיִל לְעֹלָה--תְּמִימִם; וְהַקְרֵב, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    2 and he said unto Aaron: 'Take thee a bull-calf for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering, without blemish, and offer them before the LORD.
9.3 ג  וְאֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, תְּדַבֵּר לֵאמֹר:  קְחוּ שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים לְחַטָּאת, וְעֵגֶל וָכֶבֶשׂ בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה תְּמִימִם לְעֹלָה.    3 And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying: Take ye a he-goat for a sin-offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of the first year, without blemish, for a burnt-offering;
9.4 ד  וְשׁוֹר וָאַיִל לִשְׁלָמִים, לִזְבֹּחַ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וּמִנְחָה, בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן:  כִּי הַיּוֹם, יְהוָה נִרְאָה אֲלֵיכֶם.    4 and an ox and a ram for peace-offerings, to sacrifice before the LORD; and a meal-offering mingled with oil; for to-day the LORD appeareth unto you.'
9.5 ה  וַיִּקְחוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-פְּנֵי, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיִּקְרְבוּ, כָּל-הָעֵדָה, וַיַּעַמְדוּ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    5 And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tent of meeting; and all the congregation drew near and stood before the LORD.
9.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, זֶה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה תַּעֲשׂוּ--וְיֵרָא אֲלֵיכֶם, כְּבוֹד יְהוָה.    6 And Moses said: 'This is the thing which the LORD commanded that ye should do; that the glory of the LORD may appear unto you.'
9.7 ז  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, קְרַב אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ וַעֲשֵׂה אֶת-חַטָּאתְךָ וְאֶת-עֹלָתֶךָ, וְכַפֵּר בַּעַדְךָ, וּבְעַד הָעָם; וַעֲשֵׂה אֶת-קָרְבַּן הָעָם, וְכַפֵּר בַּעֲדָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר, צִוָּה יְהוָה.    7 And Moses said unto Aaron: 'Draw near unto the altar, and offer thy sin-offering, and thy burnt-offering, and make atonement for thyself, and for the people; and present the offering of the people, and make atonement for them; as the LORD commanded.'
9.8 ח  וַיִּקְרַב אַהֲרֹן, אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וַיִּשְׁחַט אֶת-עֵגֶל הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ.    8 So Aaron drew near unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin-offering, which was for himself.
9.9 ט  וַיַּקְרִבוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֶת-הַדָּם, אֵלָיו, וַיִּטְבֹּל אֶצְבָּעוֹ בַּדָּם, וַיִּתֵּן עַל-קַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְאֶת-הַדָּם יָצַק, אֶל-יְסוֹד הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    9 And the sons of Aaron presented the blood unto him; and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the base of the altar.
9.10 י  וְאֶת-הַחֵלֶב וְאֶת-הַכְּלָיֹת וְאֶת-הַיֹּתֶרֶת מִן-הַכָּבֵד, מִן-הַחַטָּאת--הִקְטִיר, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.    10 But the fat, and the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver of the sin-offering, he made smoke upon the altar; as the LORD commanded Moses.
9.11 יא  וְאֶת-הַבָּשָׂר, וְאֶת-הָעוֹר, שָׂרַף בָּאֵשׁ, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה.    11 And the flesh and the skin were burnt with fire without the camp.
9.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁחַט, אֶת-הָעֹלָה; וַיַּמְצִאוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֵלָיו, אֶת-הַדָּם, וַיִּזְרְקֵהוּ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.    12 And he slew the burnt-offering; and Aaron's sons delivered unto him the blood, and he dashed it against the altar round about.
9.13 יג  וְאֶת-הָעֹלָה, הִמְצִיאוּ אֵלָיו לִנְתָחֶיהָ--וְאֶת-הָרֹאשׁ; וַיַּקְטֵר, עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.    13 And they delivered the burnt-offering unto him, piece by piece, and the head; and he made them smoke upon the altar.
9.14 יד  וַיִּרְחַץ אֶת-הַקֶּרֶב, וְאֶת-הַכְּרָעָיִם; וַיַּקְטֵר עַל-הָעֹלָה, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.    14 And he washed the inwards and the legs, and made them smoke upon the burnt-offering on the altar.
9.15 טו  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֵת קָרְבַּן הָעָם; וַיִּקַּח אֶת-שְׂעִיר הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר לָעָם, וַיִּשְׁחָטֵהוּ וַיְחַטְּאֵהוּ, כָּרִאשׁוֹן.    15 And the people's offering was presented; and he took the goat of the sin-offering which was for the people, and slew it, and offered it for sin, as the first.
9.16 טז  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֶת-הָעֹלָה; וַיַּעֲשֶׂהָ, כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.    16 And the burnt-offering was presented; and he offered it according to the ordinance.
9.17 יז  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וַיְמַלֵּא כַפּוֹ מִמֶּנָּה, וַיַּקְטֵר עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--מִלְּבַד, עֹלַת הַבֹּקֶר.    17 And the meal-offering was presented; and he filled his hand therefrom, and made it smoke upon the altar, besides the burnt-offering of the morning.
9.18 יח  וַיִּשְׁחַט אֶת-הַשּׁוֹר וְאֶת-הָאַיִל, זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים אֲשֶׁר לָעָם; וַיַּמְצִאוּ בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֶת-הַדָּם, אֵלָיו, וַיִּזְרְקֵהוּ עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.    18 He slew also the ox and the ram, the sacrifice of peace-offerings, which was for the people; and Aaron's sons delivered unto him the blood, and he dashed it against the altar round about,
9.19 יט  וְאֶת-הַחֲלָבִים, מִן-הַשּׁוֹר; וּמִן-הָאַיִל--הָאַלְיָה וְהַמְכַסֶּה וְהַכְּלָיֹת, וְיֹתֶרֶת הַכָּבֵד.    19 and the fat of the ox, and of the ram, the fat tail, and that which covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver.
9.20 כ  וַיָּשִׂימוּ אֶת-הַחֲלָבִים, עַל-הֶחָזוֹת; וַיַּקְטֵר הַחֲלָבִים, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.    20 And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he made the fat smoke upon the altar.
9.21 כא  וְאֵת הֶחָזוֹת, וְאֵת שׁוֹק הַיָּמִין, הֵנִיף אַהֲרֹן תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--כַּאֲשֶׁר, צִוָּה מֹשֶׁה.    21 And the breasts and the right thigh Aaron waved for a wave-offering before the LORD; as Moses commanded.
9.22 כב  וַיִּשָּׂא אַהֲרֹן אֶת-יָדָו אֶל-הָעָם, וַיְבָרְכֵם; וַיֵּרֶד, מֵעֲשֹׂת הַחַטָּאת וְהָעֹלָה--וְהַשְּׁלָמִים.    22 And Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people, and blessed them; and he came down from offering the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings.
9.23 כג  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וַיֵּצְאוּ, וַיְבָרְכוּ אֶת-הָעָם; וַיֵּרָא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֶל-כָּל-הָעָם.    23 And Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting, and came out, and blessed the people; and the glory of the LORD appeared unto all the people.
9.24 כד  וַתֵּצֵא אֵשׁ, מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַתֹּאכַל עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הַחֲלָבִים; וַיַּרְא כָּל-הָעָם וַיָּרֹנּוּ, וַיִּפְּלוּ עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם.    24 And there came forth fire from before the LORD, and consumed upon the altar the burnt-offering and the fat; and when all the people saw it, they shouted, and fell on their faces.
10.1 א  וַיִּקְחוּ בְנֵי-אַהֲרֹן נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא אִישׁ מַחְתָּתוֹ, וַיִּתְּנוּ בָהֵן אֵשׁ, וַיָּשִׂימוּ עָלֶיהָ, קְטֹרֶת; וַיַּקְרִיבוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֵשׁ זָרָה--אֲשֶׁר לֹא צִוָּה, אֹתָם.    1 And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took each of them his censer, and put fire therein, and laid incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the LORD, which He had not commanded them.
10.2 ב  וַתֵּצֵא אֵשׁ מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַתֹּאכַל אוֹתָם; וַיָּמֻתוּ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    2 And there came forth fire from before the LORD, and devoured them, and they died before the LORD.
10.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, הוּא אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה לֵאמֹר בִּקְרֹבַי אֶקָּדֵשׁ, וְעַל-פְּנֵי כָל-הָעָם, אֶכָּבֵד; וַיִּדֹּם, אַהֲרֹן.    3 Then Moses said unto Aaron: 'This is it that the LORD spoke, saying: Through them that are nigh unto Me I will be sanctified, and before all the people I will be glorified.' And Aaron held his peace.
10.4 ד  וַיִּקְרָא מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-מִישָׁאֵל וְאֶל אֶלְצָפָן, בְּנֵי עֻזִּיאֵל, דֹּד אַהֲרֹן; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, קִרְבוּ שְׂאוּ אֶת-אֲחֵיכֶם מֵאֵת פְּנֵי-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, אֶל-מִחוּץ, לַמַּחֲנֶה.    4 And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said unto them: 'Draw near, carry your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.'
10.5 ה  וַיִּקְרְבוּ, וַיִּשָּׂאֻם בְּכֻתֳּנֹתָם, אֶל-מִחוּץ, לַמַּחֲנֶה--כַּאֲשֶׁר, דִּבֶּר מֹשֶׁה.    5 So they drew near, and carried them in their tunics out of the camp, as Moses had said.
10.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וּלְאֶלְעָזָר וּלְאִיתָמָר בָּנָיו רָאשֵׁיכֶם אַל-תִּפְרָעוּ וּבִגְדֵיכֶם לֹא-תִפְרֹמוּ, וְלֹא תָמֻתוּ, וְעַל כָּל-הָעֵדָה, יִקְצֹף; וַאֲחֵיכֶם, כָּל-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל--יִבְכּוּ אֶת-הַשְּׂרֵפָה, אֲשֶׁר שָׂרַף יְהוָה.    6 And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons: 'Let not the hair of your heads go loose, neither rend your clothes, that ye die not, and that He be not wroth with all the congregation; but let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the LORD hath kindled.
10.7 ז  וּמִפֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד לֹא תֵצְאוּ, פֶּן-תָּמֻתוּ--כִּי-שֶׁמֶן מִשְׁחַת יְהוָה, עֲלֵיכֶם; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, כִּדְבַר מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}    7 And ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting, lest ye die; for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon you.' And they did according to the word of Moses. {P}
10.8 ח  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.    8 And the LORD spoke unto Aaron, saying:
10.9 ט  יַיִן וְשֵׁכָר אַל-תֵּשְׁתְּ אַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ אִתָּךְ, בְּבֹאֲכֶם אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--וְלֹא תָמֻתוּ:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.    9 'Drink no wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, that ye die not; it shall be a statute forever throughout your generations.
10.10 י  וּלְהַבְדִּיל, בֵּין הַקֹּדֶשׁ וּבֵין הַחֹל, וּבֵין הַטָּמֵא, וּבֵין הַטָּהוֹר.    10 And that ye may put difference between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean;
10.11 יא  וּלְהוֹרֹת, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֵת, כָּל-הַחֻקִּים, אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֲלֵיהֶם, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}    11 and that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the LORD hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.' {P}
10.12 יב  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, וְאֶל אֶלְעָזָר וְאֶל-אִיתָמָר בָּנָיו הַנּוֹתָרִים, קְחוּ אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה הַנּוֹתֶרֶת מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה, וְאִכְלוּהָ מַצּוֹת אֵצֶל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ:  כִּי קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, הִוא.    12 And Moses spoke unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were left: 'Take the meal-offering that remaineth of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside the altar; for it is most holy.
10.13 יג  וַאֲכַלְתֶּם אֹתָהּ, בְּמָקוֹם קָדוֹשׁ, כִּי חָקְךָ וְחָק-בָּנֶיךָ הִוא, מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה:  כִּי-כֵן, צֻוֵּיתִי.    13 And ye shall eat it in a holy place, because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the offerings of the LORD made by fire; for so I am commanded.
10.14 יד  וְאֵת חֲזֵה הַתְּנוּפָה וְאֵת שׁוֹק הַתְּרוּמָה, תֹּאכְלוּ בְּמָקוֹם טָהוֹר--אַתָּה, וּבָנֶיךָ וּבְנֹתֶיךָ אִתָּךְ:  כִּי-חָקְךָ וְחָק-בָּנֶיךָ נִתְּנוּ, מִזִּבְחֵי שַׁלְמֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    14 And the breast of waving and the thigh of heaving shall ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee; for they are given as thy due, and thy sons' due, out of the sacrifices of the peace-offerings of the children of Israel.
10.15 טו  שׁוֹק הַתְּרוּמָה וַחֲזֵה הַתְּנוּפָה, עַל אִשֵּׁי הַחֲלָבִים יָבִיאוּ, לְהָנִיף תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְהָיָה לְךָ וּלְבָנֶיךָ אִתְּךָ, לְחָק-עוֹלָם, כַּאֲשֶׁר, צִוָּה יְהוָה.    15 The thigh of heaving and the breast of waving shall they bring with the offerings of the fat made by fire, to wave it for a wave-offering before the LORD; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, as a due for ever; as the LORD hath commanded.'
10.16 טז  וְאֵת שְׂעִיר הַחַטָּאת, דָּרֹשׁ דָּרַשׁ מֹשֶׁה--וְהִנֵּה שֹׂרָף; וַיִּקְצֹף עַל-אֶלְעָזָר וְעַל-אִיתָמָר, בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, הַנּוֹתָרִם, לֵאמֹר.    16 And Moses diligently inquired for the goat of the sin-offering, and, behold, it was burnt; and he was angry with Eleazar and with Ithamar, the sons of Aaron that were left, saying:
10.17 יז  מַדּוּעַ, לֹא-אֲכַלְתֶּם אֶת-הַחַטָּאת בִּמְקוֹם הַקֹּדֶשׁ--כִּי קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, הִוא; וְאֹתָהּ נָתַן לָכֶם, לָשֵׂאת אֶת-עֲוֺן הָעֵדָה, לְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיהֶם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    17 'Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-offering in the place of the sanctuary, seeing it is most holy, and He hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the LORD?
10.18 יח  הֵן לֹא-הוּבָא אֶת-דָּמָהּ, אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ פְּנִימָה; אָכוֹל תֹּאכְלוּ אֹתָהּ בַּקֹּדֶשׁ, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוֵּיתִי.    18 Behold, the blood of it was not brought into the sanctuary within; ye should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded.'
10.19 יט  וַיְדַבֵּר אַהֲרֹן אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הֵן הַיּוֹם הִקְרִיבוּ אֶת-חַטָּאתָם וְאֶת-עֹלָתָם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וַתִּקְרֶאנָה אֹתִי, כָּאֵלֶּה; וְאָכַלְתִּי חַטָּאת הַיּוֹם, הַיִּיטַב בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.    19 And Aaron spoke unto Moses: 'Behold, this day have they offered their sin-offering and their burnt-offering before the LORD, and there have befallen me such things as these; and if I had eaten the sin-offering to-day, would it have been well-pleasing in the sight of the LORD?
10.20 כ  וַיִּשְׁמַע מֹשֶׁה, וַיִּיטַב בְּעֵינָיו.  {פ}    20 And when Moses heard that, it was well-pleasing in his sight. {P}
11.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, לֵאמֹר אֲלֵהֶם.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them:
11.2 ב  דַּבְּרוּ אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  זֹאת הַחַיָּה אֲשֶׁר תֹּאכְלוּ, מִכָּל-הַבְּהֵמָה אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאָרֶץ.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: These are the living things which ye may eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.
11.3 ג  כֹּל מַפְרֶסֶת פַּרְסָה, וְשֹׁסַעַת שֶׁסַע פְּרָסֹת, מַעֲלַת גֵּרָה, בַּבְּהֵמָה--אֹתָהּ, תֹּאכֵלוּ.    3 Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is wholly cloven-footed, and cheweth the cud, among the beasts, that may ye eat.
11.4 ד  אַךְ אֶת-זֶה, לֹא תֹאכְלוּ, מִמַּעֲלֵי הַגֵּרָה, וּמִמַּפְרִסֵי הַפַּרְסָה:  אֶת-הַגָּמָל כִּי-מַעֲלֵה גֵרָה הוּא, וּפַרְסָה אֵינֶנּוּ מַפְרִיס--טָמֵא הוּא, לָכֶם.    4 Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that only chew the cud, or of them that only part the hoof: the camel, because he cheweth the cud but parteth not the hoof, he is unclean unto you.
11.5 ה  וְאֶת-הַשָּׁפָן, כִּי-מַעֲלֵה גֵרָה הוּא, וּפַרְסָה, לֹא יַפְרִיס; טָמֵא הוּא, לָכֶם.    5 And the rock-badger, because he cheweth the cud but parteth not the hoof, he is unclean unto you.
11.6 ו  וְאֶת-הָאַרְנֶבֶת, כִּי-מַעֲלַת גֵּרָה הִוא, וּפַרְסָה, לֹא הִפְרִיסָה; טְמֵאָה הִוא, לָכֶם.    6 And the hare, because she cheweth the cud but parteth not the hoof, she is unclean unto you.
11.7 ז  וְאֶת-הַחֲזִיר כִּי-מַפְרִיס פַּרְסָה הוּא, וְשֹׁסַע שֶׁסַע פַּרְסָה, וְהוּא, גֵּרָה לֹא-יִגָּר; טָמֵא הוּא, לָכֶם.    7 And the swine, because he parteth the hoof, and is cloven-footed, but cheweth not the cud, he is unclean unto you.
11.8 ח  מִבְּשָׂרָם לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ, וּבְנִבְלָתָם לֹא תִגָּעוּ; טְמֵאִים הֵם, לָכֶם.    8 Of their flesh ye shall not eat, and their carcasses ye shall not touch; they are unclean unto you.
11.9 ט  אֶת-זֶה, תֹּאכְלוּ, מִכֹּל, אֲשֶׁר בַּמָּיִם:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ סְנַפִּיר וְקַשְׂקֶשֶׂת בַּמַּיִם, בַּיַּמִּים וּבַנְּחָלִים--אֹתָם תֹּאכֵלוּ.    9 These may ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them may ye eat.
11.10 י  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לוֹ סְנַפִּיר וְקַשְׂקֶשֶׂת, בַּיַּמִּים וּבַנְּחָלִים, מִכֹּל שֶׁרֶץ הַמַּיִם, וּמִכֹּל נֶפֶשׁ הַחַיָּה אֲשֶׁר בַּמָּיִם--שֶׁקֶץ הֵם, לָכֶם.    10 And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that swarm in the waters, and of all the living creatures that are in the waters, they are a detestable thing unto you,
11.11 יא  וְשֶׁקֶץ, יִהְיוּ לָכֶם; מִבְּשָׂרָם לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ, וְאֶת-נִבְלָתָם תְּשַׁקֵּצוּ.    11 and they shall be a detestable thing unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, and their carcasses ye shall have in detestation.
11.12 יב  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לוֹ סְנַפִּיר וְקַשְׂקֶשֶׂת, בַּמָּיִם--שֶׁקֶץ הוּא, לָכֶם.    12 Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that is a detestable thing unto you.
11.13 יג  וְאֶת-אֵלֶּה תְּשַׁקְּצוּ מִן-הָעוֹף, לֹא יֵאָכְלוּ שֶׁקֶץ הֵם:  אֶת-הַנֶּשֶׁר, וְאֶת-הַפֶּרֶס, וְאֵת, הָעָזְנִיָּה.    13 And these ye shall have in detestation among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are a detestable thing: the great vulture, and the bearded vulture, and the ospray;
11.14 יד  וְאֶת-הַדָּאָה--וְאֶת-הָאַיָּה, לְמִינָהּ.    14 and the kite, and the falcon after its kinds;
11.15 טו  אֵת כָּל-עֹרֵב, לְמִינוֹ.    15 every raven after its kinds;
11.16 טז  וְאֵת בַּת הַיַּעֲנָה, וְאֶת-הַתַּחְמָס וְאֶת-הַשָּׁחַף; וְאֶת-הַנֵּץ, לְמִינֵהוּ.    16 and the ostrich, and the night-hawk, and the sea-mew, and the hawk after its kinds;
11.17 יז  וְאֶת-הַכּוֹס וְאֶת-הַשָּׁלָךְ, וְאֶת-הַיַּנְשׁוּף.    17 and the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl;
11.18 יח  וְאֶת-הַתִּנְשֶׁמֶת וְאֶת-הַקָּאָת, וְאֶת-הָרָחָם.    18 and the horned owl, and the pelican, and the carrion-vulture;
11.19 יט  וְאֵת, הַחֲסִידָה, הָאֲנָפָה, לְמִינָהּ; וְאֶת-הַדּוּכִיפַת, וְאֶת-הָעֲטַלֵּף.    19 and the stork, and the heron after its kinds, and the hoopoe, and the bat.
11.20 כ  כֹּל שֶׁרֶץ הָעוֹף, הַהֹלֵךְ עַל-אַרְבַּע--שֶׁקֶץ הוּא, לָכֶם.    20 All winged swarming things that go upon all fours are a detestable thing unto you.
11.21 כא  אַךְ אֶת-זֶה, תֹּאכְלוּ, מִכֹּל שֶׁרֶץ הָעוֹף, הַהֹלֵךְ עַל-אַרְבַּע:  אֲשֶׁר-לא (לוֹ) כְרָעַיִם מִמַּעַל לְרַגְלָיו, לְנַתֵּר בָּהֵן עַל-הָאָרֶץ.    21 Yet these may ye eat of all winged swarming things that go upon all fours, which have jointed legs above their feet, wherewith to leap upon the earth;
11.22 כב  אֶת-אֵלֶּה מֵהֶם, תֹּאכֵלוּ--אֶת-הָאַרְבֶּה לְמִינוֹ, וְאֶת-הַסָּלְעָם לְמִינֵהוּ; וְאֶת-הַחַרְגֹּל לְמִינֵהוּ, וְאֶת-הֶחָגָב לְמִינֵהוּ.    22 even these of them ye may eat: the locust after its kinds, and the bald locust after its kinds, and the cricket after its kinds, and the grasshopper after its kinds.
11.23 כג  וְכֹל שֶׁרֶץ הָעוֹף, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ אַרְבַּע רַגְלָיִם--שֶׁקֶץ הוּא, לָכֶם.    23 But all winged swarming things, which have four feet, are a detestable thing unto you.
11.24 כד  וּלְאֵלֶּה, תִּטַּמָּאוּ; כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בְּנִבְלָתָם, יִטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    24 And by these ye shall become unclean; whosoever toucheth the carcass of them shall be unclean until even.
11.25 כה  וְכָל-הַנֹּשֵׂא, מִנִּבְלָתָם--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    25 And whosoever beareth aught of the carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
11.26 כו  לְכָל-הַבְּהֵמָה אֲשֶׁר הִוא מַפְרֶסֶת פַּרְסָה וְשֶׁסַע אֵינֶנָּה שֹׁסַעַת, וְגֵרָה אֵינֶנָּה מַעֲלָה--טְמֵאִים הֵם, לָכֶם; כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בָּהֶם, יִטְמָא.    26 Every beast which parteth the hoof, but is not cloven footed, nor cheweth the cud, is unclean unto you; every one that toucheth them shall be unclean.
11.27 כז  וְכֹל הוֹלֵךְ עַל-כַּפָּיו, בְּכָל-הַחַיָּה הַהֹלֶכֶת עַל-אַרְבַּע--טְמֵאִים הֵם, לָכֶם; כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בְּנִבְלָתָם, יִטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    27 And whatsoever goeth upon its paws, among all beasts that go on all fours, they are unclean unto you; whoso toucheth their carcass shall be unclean until the even.
11.28 כח  וְהַנֹּשֵׂא, אֶת-נִבְלָתָם--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב; טְמֵאִים הֵמָּה, לָכֶם.  {ס}    28 And he that beareth the carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; they are unclean unto you. {S}
11.29 כט  וְזֶה לָכֶם הַטָּמֵא, בַּשֶּׁרֶץ הַשֹּׁרֵץ עַל-הָאָרֶץ:  הַחֹלֶד וְהָעַכְבָּר, וְהַצָּב לְמִינֵהוּ.    29 And these are they which are unclean unto you among the swarming things that swarm upon the earth: the weasel, and the mouse, and the great lizard after its kinds,
11.30 ל  וְהָאֲנָקָה וְהַכֹּחַ, וְהַלְּטָאָה; וְהַחֹמֶט, וְהַתִּנְשָׁמֶת.    30 and the gecko, and the land-crocodile, and the lizard, and the sand-lizard, and the chameleon.
11.31 לא  אֵלֶּה הַטְּמֵאִים לָכֶם, בְּכָל-הַשָּׁרֶץ; כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בָּהֶם בְּמֹתָם, יִטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    31 These are they which are unclean to you among all that swarm; whosoever doth touch them, when they are dead, shall be unclean until the even.
11.32 לב  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִפֹּל-עָלָיו מֵהֶם בְּמֹתָם יִטְמָא, מִכָּל-כְּלִי-עֵץ אוֹ בֶגֶד אוֹ-עוֹר אוֹ שָׂק, כָּל-כְּלִי, אֲשֶׁר-יֵעָשֶׂה מְלָאכָה בָּהֶם; בַּמַּיִם יוּבָא וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעֶרֶב, וְטָהֵר.    32 And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherewith any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; then shall it be clean.
11.33 לג  וְכָל-כְּלִי-חֶרֶשׂ--אֲשֶׁר-יִפֹּל מֵהֶם, אֶל-תּוֹכוֹ:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹכוֹ יִטְמָא, וְאֹתוֹ תִשְׁבֹּרוּ.    33 And every earthen vessel whereinto any of them falleth, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean, and it ye shall break.
11.34 לד  מִכָּל-הָאֹכֶל אֲשֶׁר יֵאָכֵל, אֲשֶׁר יָבוֹא עָלָיו מַיִם--יִטְמָא; וְכָל-מַשְׁקֶה אֲשֶׁר יִשָּׁתֶה, בְּכָל-כְּלִי יִטְמָא.    34 All food therein which may be eaten, that on which water cometh, shall be unclean; and all drink in every such vessel that may be drunk shall be unclean.
11.35 לה  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִפֹּל מִנִּבְלָתָם עָלָיו, יִטְמָא--תַּנּוּר וְכִירַיִם יֻתָּץ, טְמֵאִים הֵם; וּטְמֵאִים, יִהְיוּ לָכֶם.    35 And every thing whereupon any part of their carcass falleth shall be unclean; whether oven, or range for pots, it shall be broken in pieces; they are unclean, and shall be unclean unto you.
11.36 לו  אַךְ מַעְיָן וּבוֹר מִקְוֵה-מַיִם, יִהְיֶה טָהוֹר; וְנֹגֵעַ בְּנִבְלָתָם, יִטְמָא.    36 Nevertheless a fountain or a cistern wherein is a gathering of water shall be clean; but he who toucheth their carcass shall be unclean.
11.37 לז  וְכִי יִפֹּל מִנִּבְלָתָם, עַל-כָּל-זֶרַע זֵרוּעַ אֲשֶׁר יִזָּרֵעַ--טָהוֹר, הוּא.    37 And if aught of their carcass fall upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it is clean.
11.38 לח  וְכִי יֻתַּן-מַיִם עַל-זֶרַע, וְנָפַל מִנִּבְלָתָם עָלָיו--טָמֵא הוּא, לָכֶם.  {ס}    38 But if water be put upon the seed, and aught of their carcass fall thereon, it is unclean unto you. {S}
11.39 לט  וְכִי יָמוּת מִן-הַבְּהֵמָה, אֲשֶׁר-הִיא לָכֶם לְאָכְלָה--הַנֹּגֵעַ בְּנִבְלָתָהּ, יִטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    39 And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die, he that toucheth the carcass thereof shall be unclean until the even.
11.40 מ  וְהָאֹכֵל, מִנִּבְלָתָהּ--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב; וְהַנֹּשֵׂא, אֶת-נִבְלָתָהּ--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    40 And he that eateth of the carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; he also that beareth the carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
11.41 מא  וְכָל-הַשֶּׁרֶץ, הַשֹּׁרֵץ עַל-הָאָרֶץ--שֶׁקֶץ הוּא, לֹא יֵאָכֵל.    41 And every swarming thing that swarmeth upon the earth is a detestable thing; it shall not be eaten.
11.42 מב  כֹּל הוֹלֵךְ עַל-גָּחוֹן וְכֹל הוֹלֵךְ עַל-אַרְבַּע, עַד כָּל-מַרְבֵּה רַגְלַיִם, לְכָל-הַשֶּׁרֶץ, הַשֹּׁרֵץ עַל-הָאָרֶץ--לֹא תֹאכְלוּם, כִּי-שֶׁקֶץ הֵם.    42 Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all fours, or whatsoever hath many feet, even all swarming things that swarm upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are a detestable thing.
11.43 מג  אַל-תְּשַׁקְּצוּ, אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם, בְּכָל-הַשֶּׁרֶץ, הַשֹּׁרֵץ; וְלֹא תִטַּמְּאוּ בָּהֶם, וְנִטְמֵתֶם בָּם.    43 Ye shall not make yourselves detestable with any swarming thing that swarmeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby.
11.44 מד  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְהִתְקַדִּשְׁתֶּם וִהְיִיתֶם קְדֹשִׁים, כִּי קָדוֹשׁ אָנִי; וְלֹא תְטַמְּאוּ אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם, בְּכָל-הַשֶּׁרֶץ הָרֹמֵשׂ עַל-הָאָרֶץ.    44 For I am the LORD your God; sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy; for I am holy; neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of swarming thing that moveth upon the earth.
11.45 מה  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, הַמַּעֲלֶה אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לִהְיֹת לָכֶם, לֵאלֹהִים; וִהְיִיתֶם קְדֹשִׁים, כִּי קָדוֹשׁ אָנִי.    45 For I am the LORD that brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God; ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.
11.46 מו  זֹאת תּוֹרַת הַבְּהֵמָה, וְהָעוֹף, וְכֹל נֶפֶשׁ הַחַיָּה, הָרֹמֶשֶׂת בַּמָּיִם; וּלְכָל-נֶפֶשׁ, הַשֹּׁרֶצֶת עַל-הָאָרֶץ.    46 This is the law of the beast, and of the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that swarmeth upon the earth;
11.47 מז  לְהַבְדִּיל, בֵּין הַטָּמֵא וּבֵין הַטָּהֹר; וּבֵין הַחַיָּה, הַנֶּאֱכֶלֶת, וּבֵין הַחַיָּה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא תֵאָכֵל.  {פ}    47 to make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the living thing that may be eaten and the living thing that may not be eaten. {P}
12.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
12.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר, אִשָּׁה כִּי תַזְרִיעַ, וְיָלְדָה זָכָר--וְטָמְאָה שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, כִּימֵי נִדַּת דְּוֺתָהּ תִּטְמָא.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: If a woman be delivered, and bear a man-child, then she shall be unclean seven days; as in the days of the impurity of her sickness shall she be unclean.
12.3 ג  וּבַיּוֹם, הַשְּׁמִינִי, יִמּוֹל, בְּשַׂר עָרְלָתוֹ.    3 And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.
12.4 ד  וּשְׁלֹשִׁים יוֹם וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, תֵּשֵׁב בִּדְמֵי טָהֳרָה; בְּכָל-קֹדֶשׁ לֹא-תִגָּע, וְאֶל-הַמִּקְדָּשׁ לֹא תָבֹא, עַד-מְלֹאת, יְמֵי טָהֳרָהּ.    4 And she shall continue in the blood of purification three and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purification be fulfilled.
12.5 ה  וְאִם-נְקֵבָה תֵלֵד, וְטָמְאָה שְׁבֻעַיִם כְּנִדָּתָהּ; וְשִׁשִּׁים יוֹם וְשֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים, תֵּשֵׁב עַל-דְּמֵי טָהֳרָה.    5 But if she bear a maid-child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her impurity; and she shall continue in the blood of purification threescore and six days.
12.6 ו  וּבִמְלֹאת יְמֵי טָהֳרָהּ, לְבֵן אוֹ לְבַת, תָּבִיא כֶּבֶשׂ בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ לְעֹלָה, וּבֶן-יוֹנָה אוֹ-תֹר לְחַטָּאת--אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    6 And when the days of her purification are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt-offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtle-dove, for a sin-offering, unto the door of the tent of meeting, unto the priest.
12.7 ז  וְהִקְרִיבוֹ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְכִפֶּר עָלֶיהָ, וְטָהֲרָה, מִמְּקֹר דָּמֶיהָ:  זֹאת תּוֹרַת הַיֹּלֶדֶת, לַזָּכָר אוֹ לַנְּקֵבָה.    7 And he shall offer it before the LORD, and make atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the fountain of her blood. This is the law for her that beareth, whether a male or a female.
12.8 ח  וְאִם-לֹא תִמְצָא יָדָהּ, דֵּי שֶׂה--וְלָקְחָה שְׁתֵּי-תֹרִים אוֹ שְׁנֵי בְּנֵי יוֹנָה, אֶחָד לְעֹלָה וְאֶחָד לְחַטָּאת; וְכִפֶּר עָלֶיהָ הַכֹּהֵן, וְטָהֵרָה.  {פ}    8 And if her means suffice not for a lamb, then she shall take two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons: the one for a burnt-offering, and the other for a sin-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be clean. {P}
13.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
13.2 ב  אָדָם, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בְעוֹר-בְּשָׂרוֹ שְׂאֵת אוֹ-סַפַּחַת אוֹ בַהֶרֶת, וְהָיָה בְעוֹר-בְּשָׂרוֹ, לְנֶגַע צָרָעַת--וְהוּבָא אֶל-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, אוֹ אֶל-אַחַד מִבָּנָיו הַכֹּהֲנִים.    2 When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, or a scab, or a bright spot, and it become in the skin of his flesh the plague of leprosy, then he shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests.
13.3 ג  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּגַע בְּעוֹר-הַבָּשָׂר וְשֵׂעָר בַּנֶּגַע הָפַךְ לָבָן, וּמַרְאֵה הַנֶּגַע עָמֹק מֵעוֹר בְּשָׂרוֹ--נֶגַע צָרַעַת, הוּא; וְרָאָהוּ הַכֹּהֵן, וְטִמֵּא אֹתוֹ.    3 And the priest shall look upon the plague in the skin of the flesh; and if the hair in the plague be turned white, and the appearance of the plague be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is the plague of leprosy; and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.
13.4 ד  וְאִם-בַּהֶרֶת לְבָנָה הִוא בְּעוֹר בְּשָׂרוֹ, וְעָמֹק אֵין-מַרְאֶהָ מִן-הָעוֹר, וּשְׂעָרָה, לֹא-הָפַךְ לָבָן--וְהִסְגִּיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    4 And if the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and the appearance thereof be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white, then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven days.
13.5 ה  וְרָאָהוּ הַכֹּהֵן, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וְהִנֵּה הַנֶּגַע עָמַד בְּעֵינָיו, לֹא-פָשָׂה הַנֶּגַע בָּעוֹר--וְהִסְגִּירוֹ הַכֹּהֵן שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, שֵׁנִית.    5 And the priest shall look on him the seventh day; and, behold, if the plague stay in its appearance, and the plague be not spread in the skin, then the priest shall shut him up seven days more.
13.6 ו  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אֹתוֹ בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, שֵׁנִית, וְהִנֵּה כֵּהָה הַנֶּגַע, וְלֹא-פָשָׂה הַנֶּגַע בָּעוֹר--וְטִהֲרוֹ הַכֹּהֵן מִסְפַּחַת הִוא, וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְטָהֵר.    6 And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day; and, behold, if the plague be dim, and the plague be not spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is a scab; and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
13.7 ז  וְאִם-פָּשֹׂה תִפְשֶׂה הַמִּסְפַּחַת בָּעוֹר, אַחֲרֵי הֵרָאֹתוֹ אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן לְטָהֳרָתוֹ; וְנִרְאָה שֵׁנִית, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    7 But if the scab spread abroad in the skin, after that he hath shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he shall show himself to the priest again.
13.8 ח  וְרָאָה, הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה פָּשְׂתָה הַמִּסְפַּחַת, בָּעוֹר--וְטִמְּאוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, צָרַעַת הִוא.  {פ}    8 And the priest shall look, and, behold, if the scab be spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is leprosy. {P}
13.9 ט  נֶגַע צָרַעַת, כִּי תִהְיֶה בְּאָדָם; וְהוּבָא, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    9 When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought unto the priest.
13.10 י  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה שְׂאֵת-לְבָנָה בָּעוֹר, וְהִיא, הָפְכָה שֵׂעָר לָבָן; וּמִחְיַת בָּשָׂר חַי, בַּשְׂאֵת.    10 And the priest shall look, and, behold, if there be a white rising in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick raw flesh in the rising,
13.11 יא  צָרַעַת נוֹשֶׁנֶת הִוא בְּעוֹר בְּשָׂרוֹ, וְטִמְּאוֹ הַכֹּהֵן:  לֹא יַסְגִּרֶנּוּ, כִּי טָמֵא הוּא.    11 it is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean; he shall not shut him up; for he is unclean.
13.12 יב  וְאִם-פָּרוֹחַ תִּפְרַח הַצָּרַעַת, בָּעוֹר, וְכִסְּתָה הַצָּרַעַת אֵת כָּל-עוֹר הַנֶּגַע, מֵרֹאשׁוֹ וְעַד-רַגְלָיו--לְכָל-מַרְאֵה, עֵינֵי הַכֹּהֵן.    12 And if the leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his feet, as far as appeareth to the priest;
13.13 יג  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה כִסְּתָה הַצָּרַעַת אֶת-כָּל-בְּשָׂרוֹ--וְטִהַר, אֶת-הַנָּגַע:  כֻּלּוֹ הָפַךְ לָבָן, טָהוֹר הוּא.    13 then the priest shall look; and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague; it is all turned white: he is clean.
13.14 יד  וּבְיוֹם הֵרָאוֹת בּוֹ בָּשָׂר חַי, יִטְמָא.    14 But whensoever raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.
13.15 טו  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַבָּשָׂר הַחַי, וְטִמְּאוֹ:  הַבָּשָׂר הַחַי טָמֵא הוּא, צָרַעַת הוּא.    15 And the priest shall look on the raw flesh, and pronounce him unclean; the raw flesh is unclean: it is leprosy.
13.16 טז  אוֹ כִי יָשׁוּב הַבָּשָׂר הַחַי, וְנֶהְפַּךְ לְלָבָן; וּבָא, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    16 But if the raw flesh again be turned into white, then he shall come unto the priest;
13.17 יז  וְרָאָהוּ, הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה נֶהְפַּךְ הַנֶּגַע, לְלָבָן--וְטִהַר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, טָהוֹר הוּא.  {פ}    17 and the priest shall look on him; and, behold, if the plague be turned into white, then the priest shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean. {P}
13.18 יח  וּבָשָׂר, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בוֹ-בְעֹרוֹ שְׁחִין; וְנִרְפָּא.    18 And when the flesh hath in the skin thereof a boil, and it is healed,
13.19 יט  וְהָיָה בִּמְקוֹם הַשְּׁחִין, שְׂאֵת לְבָנָה, אוֹ בַהֶרֶת, לְבָנָה אֲדַמְדָּמֶת; וְנִרְאָה, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    19 and in the place of the boil there is a white rising, or a bright spot, reddish-white, then it shall be shown to the priest.
13.20 כ  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה מַרְאֶהָ שָׁפָל מִן-הָעוֹר, וּשְׂעָרָהּ, הָפַךְ לָבָן--וְטִמְּאוֹ הַכֹּהֵן נֶגַע-צָרַעַת הִוא, בַּשְּׁחִין פָּרָחָה.    20 And the priest shall look; and, behold, if the appearance thereof be lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy, it hath broken out in the boil.
13.21 כא  וְאִם יִרְאֶנָּה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה אֵין-בָּהּ שֵׂעָר לָבָן, וּשְׁפָלָה אֵינֶנָּה מִן-הָעוֹר, וְהִיא כֵהָה--וְהִסְגִּירוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    21 But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hairs therein, and it be not lower than the skin, but be dim, then the priest shall shut him up seven days.
13.22 כב  וְאִם-פָּשֹׂה תִפְשֶׂה, בָּעוֹר--וְטִמֵּא הַכֹּהֵן אֹתוֹ, נֶגַע הִוא.    22 And if it spread abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague.
13.23 כג  וְאִם-תַּחְתֶּיהָ תַּעֲמֹד הַבַּהֶרֶת, לֹא פָשָׂתָה--צָרֶבֶת הַשְּׁחִין, הִוא; וְטִהֲרוֹ, הַכֹּהֵן.  {ס}    23 But if the bright spot stay in its place, and be not spread, it is the scar of the boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean. {S}
13.24 כד  אוֹ בָשָׂר, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בְעֹרוֹ מִכְוַת-אֵשׁ; וְהָיְתָה מִחְיַת הַמִּכְוָה, בַּהֶרֶת לְבָנָה אֲדַמְדֶּמֶת--אוֹ לְבָנָה.    24 Or when the flesh hath in the skin thereof a burning by fire, and the quick flesh of the burning become a bright spot, reddish-white, or white;
13.25 כה  וְרָאָה אֹתָהּ הַכֹּהֵן וְהִנֵּה נֶהְפַּךְ שֵׂעָר לָבָן בַּבַּהֶרֶת, וּמַרְאֶהָ עָמֹק מִן-הָעוֹר--צָרַעַת הִוא, בַּמִּכְוָה פָּרָחָה; וְטִמֵּא אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, נֶגַע צָרַעַת הִוא.    25 then the priest shall look upon it; and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and the appearance thereof be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy, it hath broken out in the burning; and the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.
13.26 כו  וְאִם יִרְאֶנָּה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה אֵין-בַּבַּהֶרֶת שֵׂעָר לָבָן, וּשְׁפָלָה אֵינֶנָּה מִן-הָעוֹר, וְהִוא כֵהָה--וְהִסְגִּירוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    26 But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the skin, but be dim; then the priest shall shut him up seven days.
13.27 כז  וְרָאָהוּ הַכֹּהֵן, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי:  אִם-פָּשֹׂה תִפְשֶׂה, בָּעוֹר--וְטִמֵּא הַכֹּהֵן אֹתוֹ, נֶגַע צָרַעַת הִוא.    27 And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day; if it spread abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.
13.28 כח  וְאִם-תַּחְתֶּיהָ תַעֲמֹד הַבַּהֶרֶת לֹא-פָשְׂתָה בָעוֹר, וְהִוא כֵהָה--שְׂאֵת הַמִּכְוָה, הִוא; וְטִהֲרוֹ, הַכֹּהֵן--כִּי-צָרֶבֶת הַמִּכְוָה, הִוא.  {פ}    28 And if the bright spot stay in its place, and be not spread in the skin, but be dim, it is the rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean; for it is the scar of the burning. {P}
13.29 כט  וְאִישׁ אוֹ אִשָּׁה, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בוֹ נָגַע, בְּרֹאשׁ, אוֹ בְזָקָן.    29 And when a man or woman hath a plague upon the head or upon the beard,
13.30 ל  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, וְהִנֵּה מַרְאֵהוּ עָמֹק מִן-הָעוֹר, וּבוֹ שֵׂעָר צָהֹב, דָּק--וְטִמֵּא אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן נֶתֶק הוּא, צָרַעַת הָרֹאשׁ אוֹ הַזָּקָן הוּא.    30 then the priest shall look on the plague; and, behold, if the appearance thereof be deeper than the skin, and there be in it yellow thin hair, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a scall, it is leprosy of the head or of the beard.
13.31 לא  וְכִי-יִרְאֶה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-נֶגַע הַנֶּתֶק, וְהִנֵּה אֵין-מַרְאֵהוּ עָמֹק מִן-הָעוֹר, וְשֵׂעָר שָׁחֹר, אֵין בּוֹ--וְהִסְגִּיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-נֶגַע הַנֶּתֶק, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    31 And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold, the appearance thereof be not deeper than the skin, and there be no black hair in it, then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of the scall seven days.
13.32 לב  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-פָשָׂה הַנֶּתֶק, וְלֹא-הָיָה בוֹ שֵׂעָר צָהֹב; וּמַרְאֵה הַנֶּתֶק, אֵין עָמֹק מִן-הָעוֹר.    32 And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague; and, behold, if the scall be not spread, and there be in it no yellow hair, and the appearance of the scall be not deeper than the skin,
13.33 לג  וְהִתְגַּלָּח--וְאֶת-הַנֶּתֶק, לֹא יְגַלֵּחַ; וְהִסְגִּיר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּתֶק שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, שֵׁנִית.    33 then he shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more.
13.34 לד  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַנֶּתֶק בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-פָשָׂה הַנֶּתֶק בָּעוֹר, וּמַרְאֵהוּ, אֵינֶנּוּ עָמֹק מִן-הָעוֹר--וְטִהַר אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְטָהֵר.    34 And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall; and, behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, and the appearance thereof be not deeper than the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean; and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
13.35 לה  וְאִם-פָּשֹׂה יִפְשֶׂה הַנֶּתֶק, בָּעוֹר, אַחֲרֵי, טָהֳרָתוֹ.    35 But if the scall spread abroad in the skin after his cleansing,
13.36 לו  וְרָאָהוּ, הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה פָּשָׂה הַנֶּתֶק, בָּעוֹר--לֹא-יְבַקֵּר הַכֹּהֵן לַשֵּׂעָר הַצָּהֹב, טָמֵא הוּא.    36 then the priest shall look on him; and, behold, if the scall be spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for the yellow hair: he is unclean.
13.37 לז  וְאִם-בְּעֵינָיו עָמַד הַנֶּתֶק וְשֵׂעָר שָׁחֹר צָמַח-בּוֹ, נִרְפָּא הַנֶּתֶק--טָהוֹר הוּא; וְטִהֲרוֹ, הַכֹּהֵן.  {ס}    37 But if the scall stay in its appearance, and black hair be grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean; and the priest shall pronounce him clean. {S}
13.38 לח  וְאִישׁ, אוֹ-אִשָּׁה, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בְעוֹר-בְּשָׂרָם, בֶּהָרֹת--בֶּהָרֹת, לְבָנֹת.    38 And if a man or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright spots;
13.39 לט  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה בְעוֹר-בְּשָׂרָם בֶּהָרֹת--כֵּהוֹת לְבָנֹת:  בֹּהַק הוּא פָּרַח בָּעוֹר, טָהוֹר הוּא.  {ס}    39 then the priest shall look; and, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be of a dull white, it is a tetter, it hath broken out in the skin: he is clean. {S}
13.40 מ  וְאִישׁ, כִּי יִמָּרֵט רֹאשׁוֹ--קֵרֵחַ הוּא, טָהוֹר הוּא.    40 And if a man's hair be fallen off his head, he is bald; yet is he clean.
13.41 מא  וְאִם מִפְּאַת פָּנָיו, יִמָּרֵט רֹאשׁוֹ--גִּבֵּחַ הוּא, טָהוֹר הוּא.    41 And if his hair be fallen off from the front part of his head, he is forehead-bald; yet is he clean.
13.42 מב  וְכִי-יִהְיֶה בַקָּרַחַת אוֹ בַגַּבַּחַת, נֶגַע לָבָן אֲדַמְדָּם--צָרַעַת פֹּרַחַת הִוא, בְּקָרַחְתּוֹ אוֹ בְגַבַּחְתּוֹ.    42 But if there be in the bald head, or the bald forehead, a reddish-white plague, it is leprosy breaking out in his bald head, or his bald forehead.
13.43 מג  וְרָאָה אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה שְׂאֵת-הַנֶּגַע לְבָנָה אֲדַמְדֶּמֶת, בְּקָרַחְתּוֹ, אוֹ בְגַבַּחְתּוֹ--כְּמַרְאֵה צָרַעַת, עוֹר בָּשָׂר.    43 Then the priest shall look upon him; and, behold, if the rising of the plague be reddish-white in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the appearance of leprosy in the skin of the flesh,
13.44 מד  אִישׁ-צָרוּעַ הוּא, טָמֵא הוּא; טַמֵּא יְטַמְּאֶנּוּ הַכֹּהֵן, בְּרֹאשׁוֹ נִגְעוֹ.    44 he is a leprous man, he is unclean; the priest shall surely pronounce him unclean: his plague is in his head.
13.45 מה  וְהַצָּרוּעַ אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ הַנֶּגַע, בְּגָדָיו יִהְיוּ פְרֻמִים וְרֹאשׁוֹ יִהְיֶה פָרוּעַ, וְעַל-שָׂפָם, יַעְטֶה; וְטָמֵא טָמֵא, יִקְרָא.    45 And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and the hair of his head shall go loose, and he shall cover his upper lip, and shall cry: 'Unclean, unclean.'
13.46 מו  כָּל-יְמֵי אֲשֶׁר הַנֶּגַע בּוֹ, יִטְמָא--טָמֵא הוּא:  בָּדָד יֵשֵׁב, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה מוֹשָׁבוֹ.  {ס}    46 All the days wherein the plague is in him he shall be unclean; he is unclean; he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his dwelling be. {S}
13.47 מז  וְהַבֶּגֶד, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בוֹ נֶגַע צָרָעַת:  בְּבֶגֶד צֶמֶר, אוֹ בְּבֶגֶד פִּשְׁתִּים.    47 And when the plague of leprosy is in a garment, whether it be a woolen garment, or a linen garment;
13.48 מח  אוֹ בִשְׁתִי אוֹ בְעֵרֶב, לַפִּשְׁתִּים וְלַצָּמֶר; אוֹ בְעוֹר, אוֹ בְּכָל-מְלֶאכֶת עוֹר.    48 or in the warp, or in the woof, whether they be of linen, or of wool; or in a skin, or in any thing made of skin.
13.49 מט  וְהָיָה הַנֶּגַע יְרַקְרַק אוֹ אֲדַמְדָּם, בַּבֶּגֶד אוֹ בָעוֹר אוֹ-בַשְּׁתִי אוֹ-בָעֵרֶב אוֹ בְכָל-כְּלִי-עוֹר--נֶגַע צָרַעַת, הוּא; וְהָרְאָה, אֶת-הַכֹּהֵן.    49 If the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin, it is the plague of leprosy, and shall be shown unto the priest.
13.50 נ  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַנָּגַע; וְהִסְגִּיר אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    50 And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut up that which hath the plague seven days.
13.51 נא  וְרָאָה אֶת-הַנֶּגַע בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, כִּי-פָשָׂה הַנֶּגַע בַּבֶּגֶד אוֹ-בַשְּׁתִי אוֹ-בָעֵרֶב אוֹ בָעוֹר, לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יֵעָשֶׂה הָעוֹר, לִמְלָאכָה--צָרַעַת מַמְאֶרֶת הַנֶּגַע, טָמֵא הוּא.    51 And he shall look on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in the skin, whatever service skin is used for, the plague is a malignant leprosy: it is unclean.
13.52 נב  וְשָׂרַף אֶת-הַבֶּגֶד אוֹ אֶת-הַשְּׁתִי אוֹ אֶת-הָעֵרֶב, בַּצֶּמֶר אוֹ בַפִּשְׁתִּים, אוֹ אֶת-כָּל-כְּלִי הָעוֹר, אֲשֶׁר-יִהְיֶה בוֹ הַנָּגַע:  כִּי-צָרַעַת מַמְאֶרֶת הִוא, בָּאֵשׁ תִּשָּׂרֵף.    52 And he shall burn the garment, or the warp, or the woof, whether it be of wool or of linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is; for it is a malignant leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.
13.53 נג  וְאִם, יִרְאֶה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-פָשָׂה הַנֶּגַע, בַּבֶּגֶד אוֹ בַשְּׁתִי אוֹ בָעֵרֶב; אוֹ, בְּכָל-כְּלִי-עוֹר.    53 And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin;
13.54 נד  וְצִוָּה, הַכֹּהֵן, וְכִבְּסוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ הַנָּגַע; וְהִסְגִּירוֹ שִׁבְעַת-יָמִים, שֵׁנִית.    54 then the priest shall command that they wash the thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more.
13.55 נה  וְרָאָה הַכֹּהֵן אַחֲרֵי הֻכַּבֵּס אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-הָפַךְ הַנֶּגַע אֶת-עֵינוֹ וְהַנֶּגַע לֹא-פָשָׂה--טָמֵא הוּא, בָּאֵשׁ תִּשְׂרְפֶנּוּ:  פְּחֶתֶת הִוא, בְּקָרַחְתּוֹ אוֹ בְגַבַּחְתּוֹ.    55 And the priest shall look, after that the plague is washed; and, behold, if the plague have not changed its colour, and the plague be not spread, it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the fire; it is a fret, whether the bareness be within or without.
13.56 נו  וְאִם, רָאָה הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה כֵּהָה הַנֶּגַע, אַחֲרֵי הֻכַּבֵּס אֹתוֹ--וְקָרַע אֹתוֹ, מִן-הַבֶּגֶד אוֹ מִן-הָעוֹר, אוֹ מִן-הַשְּׁתִי, אוֹ מִן-הָעֵרֶב.    56 And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be dim after the washing thereof, then he shall rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof.
13.57 נז  וְאִם-תֵּרָאֶה עוֹד בַּבֶּגֶד אוֹ-בַשְּׁתִי אוֹ-בָעֵרֶב, אוֹ בְכָל-כְּלִי-עוֹר--פֹּרַחַת, הִוא:  בָּאֵשׁ תִּשְׂרְפֶנּוּ, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ הַנָּגַע.    57 And if it appear still in the garment, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin, it is breaking out, thou shalt burn that wherein the plague is with fire.
13.58 נח  וְהַבֶּגֶד אוֹ-הַשְּׁתִי אוֹ-הָעֵרֶב אוֹ-כָל-כְּלִי הָעוֹר, אֲשֶׁר תְּכַבֵּס, וְסָר מֵהֶם, הַנָּגַע--וְכֻבַּס שֵׁנִית, וְטָהֵר.    58 And the garment, or the warp, or the woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.
13.59 נט  זֹאת תּוֹרַת נֶגַע-צָרַעַת בֶּגֶד הַצֶּמֶר אוֹ הַפִּשְׁתִּים, אוֹ הַשְּׁתִי אוֹ הָעֵרֶב, אוֹ, כָּל-כְּלִי-עוֹר--לְטַהֲרוֹ, אוֹ לְטַמְּאוֹ.  {פ}    59 This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of wool or linen, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean. {P}
14.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
14.2 ב  זֹאת תִּהְיֶה תּוֹרַת הַמְּצֹרָע, בְּיוֹם טָהֳרָתוֹ:  וְהוּבָא, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    2 This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: he shall be brought unto the priest.
14.3 ג  וְיָצָא, הַכֹּהֵן, אֶל-מִחוּץ, לַמַּחֲנֶה; וְרָאָה, הַכֹּהֵן, וְהִנֵּה נִרְפָּא נֶגַע-הַצָּרַעַת, מִן-הַצָּרוּעַ.    3 And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper;
14.4 ד  וְצִוָּה, הַכֹּהֵן, וְלָקַח לַמִּטַּהֵר שְׁתֵּי-צִפֳּרִים חַיּוֹת, טְהֹרוֹת; וְעֵץ אֶרֶז, וּשְׁנִי תוֹלַעַת וְאֵזֹב.    4 then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed two living clean birds, and cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.
14.5 ה  וְצִוָּה, הַכֹּהֵן, וְשָׁחַט, אֶת-הַצִּפּוֹר הָאֶחָת--אֶל-כְּלִי-חֶרֶשׂ, עַל-מַיִם חַיִּים.    5 And the priest shall command to kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water.
14.6 ו  אֶת-הַצִּפֹּר הַחַיָּה יִקַּח אֹתָהּ, וְאֶת-עֵץ הָאֶרֶז וְאֶת-שְׁנִי הַתּוֹלַעַת וְאֶת-הָאֵזֹב; וְטָבַל אוֹתָם וְאֵת הַצִּפֹּר הַחַיָּה, בְּדַם הַצִּפֹּר הַשְּׁחֻטָה, עַל, הַמַּיִם הַחַיִּים.    6 As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar-wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water.
14.7 ז  וְהִזָּה, עַל הַמִּטַּהֵר מִן-הַצָּרַעַת--שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים; וְטִהֲרוֹ, וְשִׁלַּח אֶת-הַצִּפֹּר הַחַיָּה עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה.    7 And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let go the living bird into the open field.
14.8 ח  וְכִבֶּס הַמִּטַּהֵר אֶת-בְּגָדָיו וְגִלַּח אֶת-כָּל-שְׂעָרוֹ, וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם וְטָהֵר, וְאַחַר, יָבוֹא אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וְיָשַׁב מִחוּץ לְאָהֳלוֹ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    8 And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and bathe himself in water, and he shall be clean; and after that he may come into the camp, but shall dwell outside his tent seven days.
14.9 ט  וְהָיָה בַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי יְגַלַּח אֶת-כָּל-שְׂעָרוֹ, אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ וְאֶת-זְקָנוֹ וְאֵת גַּבֹּת עֵינָיו, וְאֶת-כָּל-שְׂעָרוֹ, יְגַלֵּחַ; וְכִבֶּס אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וְרָחַץ אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ בַּמַּיִם--וְטָהֵר.    9 And it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off; and he shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.
14.10 י  וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, יִקַּח שְׁנֵי-כְבָשִׂים תְּמִימִם, וְכַבְשָׂה אַחַת בַּת-שְׁנָתָהּ, תְּמִימָה; וּשְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים, סֹלֶת מִנְחָה בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, וְלֹג אֶחָד, שָׁמֶן.    10 And on the eighth day he shall take two he-lambs without blemish, and one ewe-lamb of the first year without blemish, and three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil.
14.11 יא  וְהֶעֱמִיד הַכֹּהֵן הַמְטַהֵר, אֵת הָאִישׁ הַמִּטַּהֵר--וְאֹתָם:  לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    11 And the priest that cleanseth him shall set the man that is to be cleansed, and those things, before the LORD, at the door of the tent of meeting.
14.12 יב  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַכֶּבֶשׂ הָאֶחָד, וְהִקְרִיב אֹתוֹ לְאָשָׁם--וְאֶת-לֹג הַשָּׁמֶן; וְהֵנִיף אֹתָם תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    12 And the priest shall take one of the he-lambs, and offer him for a guilt-offering, and the log of oil, and wave them for a wave-offering before the LORD.
14.13 יג  וְשָׁחַט אֶת-הַכֶּבֶשׂ, בִּמְקוֹם אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁחַט אֶת-הַחַטָּאת וְאֶת-הָעֹלָה--בִּמְקוֹם הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  כִּי כַּחַטָּאת הָאָשָׁם הוּא, לַכֹּהֵן--קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים, הוּא.    13 And he shall kill the he-lamb in the place where they kill the sin-offering and the burnt-offering, in the place of the sanctuary; for as the sin-offering is the priest's, so is the guilt-offering; it is most holy.
14.14 יד  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן, מִדַּם הָאָשָׁם, וְנָתַן הַכֹּהֵן, עַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן הַמִּטַּהֵר הַיְמָנִית; וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדוֹ הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלוֹ הַיְמָנִית.    14 And the priest shall take of the blood of the guilt-offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
14.15 טו  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן, מִלֹּג הַשָּׁמֶן; וְיָצַק עַל-כַּף הַכֹּהֵן, הַשְּׂמָאלִית.    15 And the priest shall take of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand.
14.16 טז  וְטָבַל הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-אֶצְבָּעוֹ הַיְמָנִית, מִן-הַשֶּׁמֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-כַּפּוֹ הַשְּׂמָאלִית; וְהִזָּה מִן-הַשֶּׁמֶן בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    16 And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the LORD.
14.17 יז  וּמִיֶּתֶר הַשֶּׁמֶן אֲשֶׁר עַל-כַּפּוֹ, יִתֵּן הַכֹּהֵן עַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן הַמִּטַּהֵר הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדוֹ הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלוֹ הַיְמָנִית--עַל, דַּם הָאָשָׁם.    17 And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the guilt-offering.
14.18 יח  וְהַנּוֹתָר, בַּשֶּׁמֶן אֲשֶׁר עַל-כַּף הַכֹּהֵן, יִתֵּן, עַל-רֹאשׁ הַמִּטַּהֵר; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    18 And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed; and the priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD.
14.19 יט  וְעָשָׂה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַחַטָּאת, וְכִפֶּר, עַל-הַמִּטַּהֵר מִטֻּמְאָתוֹ; וְאַחַר, יִשְׁחַט אֶת-הָעֹלָה.    19 And the priest shall offer the sin-offering, and make atonement for him that is to be cleansed because of his uncleanness; and afterward he shall kill the burnt-offering.
14.20 כ  וְהֶעֱלָה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הָעֹלָה וְאֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, הַמִּזְבֵּחָה; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן, וְטָהֵר.  {ס}    20 And the priest shall offer the burnt-offering and the meal-offering upon the altar; and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be clean. {S}
14.21 כא  וְאִם-דַּל הוּא, וְאֵין יָדוֹ מַשֶּׂגֶת--וְלָקַח כֶּבֶשׂ אֶחָד אָשָׁם לִתְנוּפָה, לְכַפֵּר עָלָיו; וְעִשָּׂרוֹן סֹלֶת אֶחָד בָּלוּל בַּשֶּׁמֶן, לְמִנְחָה--וְלֹג שָׁמֶן.    21 And if he be poor, and his means suffice not, then he shall take one he-lamb for a guilt-offering to be waved, to make atonement for him, and one tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering, and a log of oil;
14.22 כב  וּשְׁתֵּי תֹרִים, אוֹ שְׁנֵי בְּנֵי יוֹנָה, אֲשֶׁר תַּשִּׂיג, יָדוֹ; וְהָיָה אֶחָד חַטָּאת, וְהָאֶחָד עֹלָה.    22 and two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, such as his means suffice for; and the one shall be a sin-offering, and the other a burnt-offering.
14.23 כג  וְהֵבִיא אֹתָם בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, לְטָהֳרָתוֹ--אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן:  אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    23 And on the eighth day he shall bring them for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the door of the tent of meeting, before the LORD.
14.24 כד  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-כֶּבֶשׂ הָאָשָׁם, וְאֶת-לֹג הַשָּׁמֶן; וְהֵנִיף אֹתָם הַכֹּהֵן תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    24 And the priest shall take the lamb of the guilt-offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave-offering before the LORD.
14.25 כה  וְשָׁחַט, אֶת-כֶּבֶשׂ הָאָשָׁם, וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מִדַּם הָאָשָׁם, וְנָתַן עַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן-הַמִּטַּהֵר הַיְמָנִית; וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדוֹ הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלוֹ הַיְמָנִית.    25 And he shall kill the lamb of the guilt-offering, and the priest shall take of the blood of the guilt-offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
14.26 כו  וּמִן-הַשֶּׁמֶן, יִצֹק הַכֹּהֵן, עַל-כַּף הַכֹּהֵן, הַשְּׂמָאלִית.    26 And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand.
14.27 כז  וְהִזָּה הַכֹּהֵן, בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ הַיְמָנִית, מִן-הַשֶּׁמֶן, אֲשֶׁר עַל-כַּפּוֹ הַשְּׂמָאלִית--שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    27 And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the LORD.
14.28 כח  וְנָתַן הַכֹּהֵן מִן-הַשֶּׁמֶן אֲשֶׁר עַל-כַּפּוֹ, עַל-תְּנוּךְ אֹזֶן הַמִּטַּהֵר הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן יָדוֹ הַיְמָנִית, וְעַל-בֹּהֶן רַגְלוֹ הַיְמָנִית--עַל-מְקוֹם, דַּם הָאָשָׁם.    28 And the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the guilt-offering.
14.29 כט  וְהַנּוֹתָר, מִן-הַשֶּׁמֶן אֲשֶׁר עַל-כַּף הַכֹּהֵן, יִתֵּן, עַל-רֹאשׁ הַמִּטַּהֵר--לְכַפֵּר עָלָיו, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    29 And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before the LORD.
14.30 ל  וְעָשָׂה אֶת-הָאֶחָד מִן-הַתֹּרִים, אוֹ מִן-בְּנֵי הַיּוֹנָה, מֵאֲשֶׁר תַּשִּׂיג, יָדוֹ.    30 And he shall offer one of the turtle-doves, or of the young pigeons, such as his means suffice for;
14.31 לא  אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תַּשִּׂיג יָדוֹ, אֶת-הָאֶחָד חַטָּאת וְאֶת-הָאֶחָד עֹלָה--עַל-הַמִּנְחָה; וְכִפֶּר הַכֹּהֵן עַל הַמִּטַּהֵר, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    31 even such as his means suffice for, the one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, with the meal-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for him that is to be cleansed before the LORD.
14.32 לב  זֹאת תּוֹרַת, אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ נֶגַע צָרָעַת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תַשִּׂיג יָדוֹ, בְּטָהֳרָתוֹ.  {פ}    32 This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose means suffice not for that which pertaineth to his cleansing. {P}
14.33 לג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.    33 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
14.34 לד  כִּי תָבֹאוּ אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי נֹתֵן לָכֶם לַאֲחֻזָּה; וְנָתַתִּי נֶגַע צָרַעַת, בְּבֵית אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזַּתְכֶם.    34 When ye are come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession;
14.35 לה  וּבָא אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ הַבַּיִת, וְהִגִּיד לַכֹּהֵן לֵאמֹר:  כְּנֶגַע, נִרְאָה לִי בַּבָּיִת.    35 then he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest, saying: 'There seemeth to me to be as it were a plague in the house.'
14.36 לו  וְצִוָּה הַכֹּהֵן וּפִנּוּ אֶת-הַבַּיִת, בְּטֶרֶם יָבֹא הַכֹּהֵן לִרְאוֹת אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, וְלֹא יִטְמָא, כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בַּבָּיִת; וְאַחַר כֵּן יָבֹא הַכֹּהֵן, לִרְאוֹת אֶת-הַבָּיִת.    36 And the priest shall command that they empty the house, before the priest go in to see the plague, that all that is in the house be not made unclean; and afterward the priest shall go in to see the house.
14.37 לז  וְרָאָה אֶת-הַנֶּגַע, וְהִנֵּה הַנֶּגַע בְּקִירֹת הַבַּיִת, שְׁקַעֲרוּרֹת יְרַקְרַקֹּת, אוֹ אֲדַמְדַּמֹּת; וּמַרְאֵיהֶן שָׁפָל, מִן-הַקִּיר.    37 And he shall look on the plague, and, behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house with hollow streaks, greenish or reddish, and the appearance thereof be lower than the wall;
14.38 לח  וְיָצָא הַכֹּהֵן מִן-הַבַּיִת, אֶל-פֶּתַח הַבָּיִת; וְהִסְגִּיר אֶת-הַבַּיִת, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    38 then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days.
14.39 לט  וְשָׁב הַכֹּהֵן, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי; וְרָאָה, וְהִנֵּה פָּשָׂה הַנֶּגַע בְּקִירֹת הַבָּיִת.    39 And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look; and, behold, if the plague be spread in the walls of the house;
14.40 מ  וְצִוָּה, הַכֹּהֵן, וְחִלְּצוּ אֶת-הָאֲבָנִים, אֲשֶׁר בָּהֵן הַנָּגַע; וְהִשְׁלִיכוּ אֶתְהֶן אֶל-מִחוּץ לָעִיר, אֶל-מָקוֹם טָמֵא.    40 then the priest shall command that they take out the stones in which the plague is, and cast them into an unclean place without the city.
14.41 מא  וְאֶת-הַבַּיִת יַקְצִעַ מִבַּיִת, סָבִיב; וְשָׁפְכוּ, אֶת-הֶעָפָר אֲשֶׁר הִקְצוּ, אֶל-מִחוּץ לָעִיר, אֶל-מָקוֹם טָמֵא.    41 And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shall pour out the mortar that they scrape off without the city into an unclean place.
14.42 מב  וְלָקְחוּ אֲבָנִים אֲחֵרוֹת, וְהֵבִיאוּ אֶל-תַּחַת הָאֲבָנִים; וְעָפָר אַחֵר יִקַּח, וְטָח אֶת-הַבָּיִת.    42 And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones; and he shall take other mortar, and shall plaster the house.
14.43 מג  וְאִם-יָשׁוּב הַנֶּגַע וּפָרַח בַּבַּיִת, אַחַר חִלֵּץ אֶת-הָאֲבָנִים, וְאַחֲרֵי הִקְצוֹת אֶת-הַבַּיִת, וְאַחֲרֵי הִטּוֹחַ.    43 And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that the stones have been taken out, and after the house hath been scraped, and after it is plastered;
14.44 מד  וּבָא, הַכֹּהֵן, וְרָאָה, וְהִנֵּה פָּשָׂה הַנֶּגַע בַּבָּיִת--צָרַעַת מַמְאֶרֶת הִוא בַּבַּיִת, טָמֵא הוּא.    44 then the priest shall come in and look; and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a malignant leprosy in the house: it is unclean.
14.45 מה  וְנָתַץ אֶת-הַבַּיִת, אֶת-אֲבָנָיו וְאֶת-עֵצָיו, וְאֵת, כָּל-עֲפַר הַבָּיִת; וְהוֹצִיא אֶל-מִחוּץ לָעִיר, אֶל-מָקוֹם טָמֵא.    45 And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the mortar of the house; and he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
14.46 מו  וְהַבָּא, אֶל-הַבַּיִת, כָּל-יְמֵי, הִסְגִּיר אֹתוֹ--יִטְמָא, עַד-הָעָרֶב.    46 Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until the even.
14.47 מז  וְהַשֹּׁכֵב בַּבַּיִת, יְכַבֵּס אֶת-בְּגָדָיו; וְהָאֹכֵל בַּבַּיִת, יְכַבֵּס אֶת-בְּגָדָיו.    47 And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.
14.48 מח  וְאִם-בֹּא יָבֹא הַכֹּהֵן, וְרָאָה וְהִנֵּה לֹא-פָשָׂה הַנֶּגַע בַּבַּיִת, אַחֲרֵי, הִטֹּחַ אֶת-הַבָּיִת--וְטִהַר הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַבַּיִת, כִּי נִרְפָּא הַנָּגַע.    48 And if the priest shall come in, and look, and, behold, the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was plastered; then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is healed.
14.49 מט  וְלָקַח לְחַטֵּא אֶת-הַבַּיִת, שְׁתֵּי צִפֳּרִים, וְעֵץ אֶרֶז, וּשְׁנִי תוֹלַעַת וְאֵזֹב.    49 And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.
14.50 נ  וְשָׁחַט, אֶת-הַצִּפֹּר הָאֶחָת, אֶל-כְּלִי-חֶרֶשׂ, עַל-מַיִם חַיִּים.    50 And he shall kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water.
14.51 נא  וְלָקַח אֶת-עֵץ-הָאֶרֶז וְאֶת-הָאֵזֹב וְאֵת שְׁנִי הַתּוֹלַעַת, וְאֵת הַצִּפֹּר הַחַיָּה, וְטָבַל אֹתָם בְּדַם הַצִּפֹּר הַשְּׁחוּטָה, וּבַמַּיִם הַחַיִּים; וְהִזָּה אֶל-הַבַּיִת, שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים.    51 And he shall take the cedar-wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times.
14.52 נב  וְחִטֵּא אֶת-הַבַּיִת--בְּדַם הַצִּפּוֹר, וּבַמַּיִם הַחַיִּים; וּבַצִּפֹּר הַחַיָּה, וּבְעֵץ הָאֶרֶז וּבָאֵזֹב--וּבִשְׁנִי הַתּוֹלָעַת.    52 And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar-wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet.
14.53 נג  וְשִׁלַּח אֶת-הַצִּפֹּר הַחַיָּה, אֶל-מִחוּץ לָעִיר--אֶל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה; וְכִפֶּר עַל-הַבַּיִת, וְטָהֵר.    53 But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open field; so shall he make atonement for the house; and it shall be clean.
14.54 נד  זֹאת, הַתּוֹרָה, לְכָל-נֶגַע הַצָּרַעַת, וְלַנָּתֶק.    54 This is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and for a scall;
14.55 נה  וּלְצָרַעַת הַבֶּגֶד, וְלַבָּיִת.    55 and for the leprosy of a garment, and for a house;
14.56 נו  וְלַשְׂאֵת וְלַסַּפַּחַת, וְלַבֶּהָרֶת.    56 and for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot;
14.57 נז  לְהוֹרֹת, בְּיוֹם הַטָּמֵא וּבְיוֹם הַטָּהֹר; זֹאת תּוֹרַת, הַצָּרָעַת.  {פ}    57 to teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean; this is the law of leprosy. {P}
15.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and to Aaron, saying:
15.2 ב  דַּבְּרוּ אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם אֲלֵהֶם:  אִישׁ אִישׁ, כִּי יִהְיֶה זָב מִבְּשָׂרוֹ--זוֹבוֹ, טָמֵא הוּא.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When any man hath an issue out of his flesh, his issue is unclean.
15.3 ג  וְזֹאת תִּהְיֶה טֻמְאָתוֹ, בְּזוֹבוֹ:  רָר בְּשָׂרוֹ אֶת-זוֹבוֹ, אוֹ-הֶחְתִּים בְּשָׂרוֹ מִזּוֹבוֹ--טֻמְאָתוֹ, הִוא.    3 And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.
15.4 ד  כָּל-הַמִּשְׁכָּב, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב עָלָיו הַזָּב--יִטְמָא; וְכָל-הַכְּלִי אֲשֶׁר-יֵשֵׁב עָלָיו, יִטְמָא.    4 Every bed whereon he that hath the issue lieth shall be unclean; and every thing whereon he sitteth shall be unclean.
15.5 ה  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִגַּע בְּמִשְׁכָּבוֹ--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    5 And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.6 ו  וְהַיֹּשֵׁב, עַל-הַכְּלִי, אֲשֶׁר-יֵשֵׁב עָלָיו, הַזָּב--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    6 And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he that hath the issue sat shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.7 ז  וְהַנֹּגֵעַ, בִּבְשַׂר הַזָּב--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    7 And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.8 ח  וְכִי-יָרֹק הַזָּב, בַּטָּהוֹר--וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    8 And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean, then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.9 ט  וְכָל-הַמֶּרְכָּב, אֲשֶׁר יִרְכַּב עָלָיו הַזָּב--יִטְמָא.    9 And what saddle soever he that hath the issue rideth upon shall be unclean.
15.10 י  וְכָל-הַנֹּגֵעַ, בְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה תַחְתָּיו--יִטְמָא, עַד-הָעָרֶב; וְהַנּוֹשֵׂא אוֹתָם--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    10 And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be unclean until the even; and he that beareth those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.11 יא  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר יִגַּע-בּוֹ הַזָּב, וְיָדָיו לֹא-שָׁטַף בַּמָּיִם--וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    11 And whomsoever he that hath the issue toucheth, without having rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.12 יב  וּכְלִי-חֶרֶשׂ אֲשֶׁר-יִגַּע-בּוֹ הַזָּב, יִשָּׁבֵר; וְכָל-כְּלִי-עֵץ--יִשָּׁטֵף, בַּמָּיִם.    12 And the earthen vessel, which he that hath the issue toucheth, shall be broken; and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
15.13 יג  וְכִי-יִטְהַר הַזָּב, מִזּוֹבוֹ--וְסָפַר לוֹ שִׁבְעַת יָמִים לְטָהֳרָתוֹ, וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו; וְרָחַץ בְּשָׂרוֹ בְּמַיִם חַיִּים, וְטָהֵר.    13 And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue, then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes; and he shall bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.
15.14 יד  וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, יִקַּח-לוֹ שְׁתֵּי תֹרִים, אוֹ שְׁנֵי, בְּנֵי יוֹנָה; וּבָא לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וּנְתָנָם, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    14 And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and come before the LORD unto the door of the tent of meeting, and give them unto the priest.
15.15 טו  וְעָשָׂה אֹתָם, הַכֹּהֵן--אֶחָד חַטָּאת, וְהָאֶחָד עֹלָה; וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, מִזּוֹבוֹ.  {ס}    15 And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD for his issue. {S}
15.16 טז  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-תֵצֵא מִמֶּנּוּ שִׁכְבַת-זָרַע--וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם אֶת-כָּל-בְּשָׂרוֹ, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    16 And if the flow of seed go out from a man, then he shall bathe all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.17 יז  וְכָל-בֶּגֶד וְכָל-עוֹר, אֲשֶׁר-יִהְיֶה עָלָיו שִׁכְבַת-זָרַע--וְכֻבַּס בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    17 And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the flow of seed, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even.
15.18 יח  וְאִשָּׁה, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב אִישׁ אֹתָהּ שִׁכְבַת-זָרַע--וְרָחֲצוּ בַמַּיִם, וְטָמְאוּ עַד-הָעָרֶב.  {פ}    18 The woman also with whom a man shall lie carnally, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the even. {P}
15.19 יט  וְאִשָּׁה כִּי-תִהְיֶה זָבָה, דָּם יִהְיֶה זֹבָהּ בִּבְשָׂרָהּ--שִׁבְעַת יָמִים תִּהְיֶה בְנִדָּתָהּ, וְכָל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בָּהּ יִטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    19 And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be in her impurity seven days; and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.
15.20 כ  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁכַּב עָלָיו בְּנִדָּתָהּ, יִטְמָא; וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תֵּשֵׁב עָלָיו, יִטְמָא.    20 And every thing that she lieth upon in her impurity shall be unclean; every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.
15.21 כא  וְכָל-הַנֹּגֵעַ, בְּמִשְׁכָּבָהּ--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    21 And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.22 כב  וְכָל-הַנֹּגֵעַ--בְּכָל-כְּלִי, אֲשֶׁר-תֵּשֵׁב עָלָיו:  יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    22 And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sitteth upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.23 כג  וְאִם עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּב הוּא, אוֹ עַל-הַכְּלִי אֲשֶׁר-הִוא יֹשֶׁבֶת-עָלָיו--בְּנָגְעוֹ-בוֹ:  יִטְמָא, עַד-הָעָרֶב.    23 And if he be on the bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.
15.24 כד  וְאִם שָׁכֹב יִשְׁכַּב אִישׁ אֹתָהּ, וּתְהִי נִדָּתָהּ עָלָיו--וְטָמֵא, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; וְכָל-הַמִּשְׁכָּב אֲשֶׁר-יִשְׁכַּב עָלָיו, יִטְמָא.  {ס}    24 And if any man lie with her, and her impurity be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days; and every bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean. {S}
15.25 כה  וְאִשָּׁה כִּי-יָזוּב זוֹב דָּמָהּ יָמִים רַבִּים, בְּלֹא עֶת-נִדָּתָהּ, אוֹ כִי-תָזוּב, עַל-נִדָּתָהּ:  כָּל-יְמֵי זוֹב טֻמְאָתָהּ, כִּימֵי נִדָּתָהּ תִּהְיֶה--טְמֵאָה הִוא.    25 And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days not in the time of her impurity, or if she have an issue beyond the time of her impurity; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness she shall be as in the days of her impurity: she is unclean.
15.26 כו  כָּל-הַמִּשְׁכָּב אֲשֶׁר-תִּשְׁכַּב עָלָיו, כָּל-יְמֵי זוֹבָהּ--כְּמִשְׁכַּב נִדָּתָהּ, יִהְיֶה-לָּהּ; וְכָל-הַכְּלִי, אֲשֶׁר תֵּשֵׁב עָלָיו--טָמֵא יִהְיֶה, כְּטֻמְאַת נִדָּתָהּ.    26 Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her impurity; and every thing whereon she sitteth shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her impurity.
15.27 כז  וְכָל-הַנּוֹגֵעַ בָּם, יִטְמָא; וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעָרֶב.    27 And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
15.28 כח  וְאִם-טָהֲרָה, מִזּוֹבָהּ--וְסָפְרָה לָּהּ שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וְאַחַר תִּטְהָר.    28 But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.
15.29 כט  וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, תִּקַּח-לָהּ שְׁתֵּי תֹרִים, אוֹ שְׁנֵי, בְּנֵי יוֹנָה; וְהֵבִיאָה אוֹתָם אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    29 And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting.
15.30 ל  וְעָשָׂה הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הָאֶחָד חַטָּאת, וְאֶת-הָאֶחָד עֹלָה; וְכִפֶּר עָלֶיהָ הַכֹּהֵן לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, מִזּוֹב טֻמְאָתָהּ.    30 And the priest shall offer the one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for her before the LORD for the issue of her uncleanness.
15.31 לא  וְהִזַּרְתֶּם אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִטֻּמְאָתָם; וְלֹא יָמֻתוּ בְּטֻמְאָתָם, בְּטַמְּאָם אֶת-מִשְׁכָּנִי אֲשֶׁר בְּתוֹכָם.    31 Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile My tabernacle that is in the midst of them.
15.32 לב  זֹאת תּוֹרַת, הַזָּב, וַאֲשֶׁר תֵּצֵא מִמֶּנּוּ שִׁכְבַת-זֶרַע, לְטָמְאָה-בָהּ.    32 This is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him from whom the flow of seed goeth out, so that he is unclean thereby;
15.33 לג  וְהַדָּוָה, בְּנִדָּתָהּ, וְהַזָּב אֶת-זוֹבוֹ, לַזָּכָר וְלַנְּקֵבָה; וּלְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב עִם-טְמֵאָה.  {פ}    33 and of her that is sick with her impurity, and of them that have an issue, whether it be a man, or a woman; and of him that lieth with her that is unclean. {P}
16.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אַחֲרֵי מוֹת, שְׁנֵי בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן--בְּקָרְבָתָם לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה, וַיָּמֻתוּ.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they drew near before the LORD, and died;
16.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ, וְאַל-יָבֹא בְכָל-עֵת אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, מִבֵּית לַפָּרֹכֶת--אֶל-פְּנֵי הַכַּפֹּרֶת אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָאָרֹן, וְלֹא יָמוּת, כִּי בֶּעָנָן, אֵרָאֶה עַל-הַכַּפֹּרֶת.    2 and the LORD said unto Moses: 'Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy place within the veil, before the ark-cover which is upon the ark; that he die not; for I appear in the cloud upon the ark-cover.
16.3 ג  בְּזֹאת יָבֹא אַהֲרֹן, אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  בְּפַר בֶּן-בָּקָר לְחַטָּאת, וְאַיִל לְעֹלָה.    3 Herewith shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering.
16.4 ד  כְּתֹנֶת-בַּד קֹדֶשׁ יִלְבָּשׁ, וּמִכְנְסֵי-בַד יִהְיוּ עַל-בְּשָׂרוֹ, וּבְאַבְנֵט בַּד יַחְגֹּר, וּבְמִצְנֶפֶת בַּד יִצְנֹף; בִּגְדֵי-קֹדֶשׁ הֵם, וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ וּלְבֵשָׁם.    4 He shall put on the holy linen tunic, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with the linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired; they are the holy garments; and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and put them on.
16.5 ה  וּמֵאֵת, עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, יִקַּח שְׁנֵי-שְׂעִירֵי עִזִּים, לְחַטָּאת; וְאַיִל אֶחָד, לְעֹלָה.    5 And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two he-goats for a sin-offering, and one ram for a burnt-offering.
16.6 ו  וְהִקְרִיב אַהֲרֹן אֶת-פַּר הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ; וְכִפֶּר בַּעֲדוֹ, וּבְעַד בֵּיתוֹ.    6 And Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin-offering, which is for himself, and make atonement for himself, and for his house.
16.7 ז  וְלָקַח, אֶת-שְׁנֵי הַשְּׂעִירִם; וְהֶעֱמִיד אֹתָם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.    7 And he shall take the two goats, and set them before the LORD at the door of the tent of meeting.
16.8 ח  וְנָתַן אַהֲרֹן עַל-שְׁנֵי הַשְּׂעִירִם, גֹּרָלוֹת--גּוֹרָל אֶחָד לַיהוָה, וְגוֹרָל אֶחָד לַעֲזָאזֵל.    8 And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats: one lot for the LORD, and the other lot for Azazel.
16.9 ט  וְהִקְרִיב אַהֲרֹן אֶת-הַשָּׂעִיר, אֲשֶׁר עָלָה עָלָיו הַגּוֹרָל לַיהוָה; וְעָשָׂהוּ, חַטָּאת.    9 And Aaron shall present the goat upon which the lot fell for the LORD, and offer him for a sin-offering.
16.10 י  וְהַשָּׂעִיר, אֲשֶׁר עָלָה עָלָיו הַגּוֹרָל לַעֲזָאזֵל, יָעֳמַד-חַי לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְכַפֵּר עָלָיו--לְשַׁלַּח אֹתוֹ לַעֲזָאזֵל, הַמִּדְבָּרָה.    10 But the goat, on which the lot fell for Azazel, shall be set alive before the LORD, to make atonement over him, to send him away for Azazel into the wilderness.
16.11 יא  וְהִקְרִיב אַהֲרֹן אֶת-פַּר הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, וְכִפֶּר בַּעֲדוֹ, וּבְעַד בֵּיתוֹ; וְשָׁחַט אֶת-פַּר הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ.    11 And Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin-offering, which is for himself, and shall make atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin-offering which is for himself.
16.12 יב  וְלָקַח מְלֹא-הַמַּחְתָּה גַּחֲלֵי-אֵשׁ מֵעַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, וּמְלֹא חָפְנָיו, קְטֹרֶת סַמִּים דַּקָּה; וְהֵבִיא, מִבֵּית לַפָּרֹכֶת.    12 And he shall take a censer full of coals of fire from off the altar before the LORD, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the veil.
16.13 יג  וְנָתַן אֶת-הַקְּטֹרֶת עַל-הָאֵשׁ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְכִסָּה עֲנַן הַקְּטֹרֶת, אֶת-הַכַּפֹּרֶת אֲשֶׁר עַל-הָעֵדוּת--וְלֹא יָמוּת.    13 And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may cover the ark-cover that is upon the testimony, that he die not.
16.14 יד  וְלָקַח מִדַּם הַפָּר, וְהִזָּה בְאֶצְבָּעוֹ עַל-פְּנֵי הַכַּפֹּרֶת קֵדְמָה; וְלִפְנֵי הַכַּפֹּרֶת, יַזֶּה שֶׁבַע-פְּעָמִים מִן-הַדָּם--בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ.    14 And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the ark-cover on the east; and before the ark-cover shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times.
16.15 טו  וְשָׁחַט אֶת-שְׂעִיר הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר לָעָם, וְהֵבִיא אֶת-דָּמוֹ, אֶל-מִבֵּית לַפָּרֹכֶת; וְעָשָׂה אֶת-דָּמוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְדַם הַפָּר, וְהִזָּה אֹתוֹ עַל-הַכַּפֹּרֶת, וְלִפְנֵי הַכַּפֹּרֶת.    15 Then shall he kill the goat of the sin-offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the veil, and do with his blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the ark-cover, and before the ark-cover.
16.16 טז  וְכִפֶּר עַל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, מִטֻּמְאֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִפִּשְׁעֵיהֶם, לְכָל-חַטֹּאתָם; וְכֵן יַעֲשֶׂה, לְאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, הַשֹּׁכֵן אִתָּם, בְּתוֹךְ טֻמְאֹתָם.    16 And he shall make atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleannesses of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions, even all their sins; and so shall he do for the tent of meeting, that dwelleth with them in the midst of their uncleannesses.
16.17 יז  וְכָל-אָדָם לֹא-יִהְיֶה בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, בְּבֹאוֹ לְכַפֵּר בַּקֹּדֶשׁ--עַד-צֵאתוֹ; וְכִפֶּר בַּעֲדוֹ וּבְעַד בֵּיתוֹ, וּבְעַד כָּל-קְהַל יִשְׂרָאֵל.    17 And there shall be no man in the tent of meeting when he goeth in to make atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the assembly of Israel.
16.18 יח  וְיָצָא, אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה--וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו; וְלָקַח מִדַּם הַפָּר, וּמִדַּם הַשָּׂעִיר, וְנָתַן עַל-קַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב.    18 And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the LORD, and make atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about.
16.19 יט  וְהִזָּה עָלָיו מִן-הַדָּם בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ, שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים; וְטִהֲרוֹ וְקִדְּשׁוֹ, מִטֻּמְאֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    19 And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleannesses of the children of Israel.
16.20 כ  וְכִלָּה מִכַּפֵּר אֶת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וְאֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְהִקְרִיב, אֶת-הַשָּׂעִיר הֶחָי.    20 And when he hath made an end of atoning for the holy place, and the tent of meeting, and the altar, he shall present the live goat.
16.21 כא  וְסָמַךְ אַהֲרֹן אֶת-שְׁתֵּי יָדָו, עַל רֹאשׁ הַשָּׂעִיר הַחַי, וְהִתְוַדָּה עָלָיו אֶת-כָּל-עֲוֺנֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-כָּל-פִּשְׁעֵיהֶם לְכָל-חַטֹּאתָם; וְנָתַן אֹתָם עַל-רֹאשׁ הַשָּׂעִיר, וְשִׁלַּח בְּיַד-אִישׁ עִתִּי הַמִּדְבָּרָה.    21 And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions, even all their sins; and he shall put them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of an appointed man into the wilderness.
16.22 כב  וְנָשָׂא הַשָּׂעִיר עָלָיו אֶת-כָּל-עֲוֺנֹתָם, אֶל-אֶרֶץ גְּזֵרָה; וְשִׁלַּח אֶת-הַשָּׂעִיר, בַּמִּדְבָּר.    22 And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land which is cut off; and he shall let go the goat in the wilderness.
16.23 כג  וּבָא אַהֲרֹן, אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וּפָשַׁט אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַבָּד, אֲשֶׁר לָבַשׁ בְּבֹאוֹ אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ; וְהִנִּיחָם, שָׁם.    23 And Aaron shall come into the tent of meeting, and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them there.
16.24 כד  וְרָחַץ אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ בַמַּיִם בְּמָקוֹם קָדוֹשׁ, וְלָבַשׁ אֶת-בְּגָדָיו; וְיָצָא, וְעָשָׂה אֶת-עֹלָתוֹ וְאֶת-עֹלַת הָעָם, וְכִפֶּר בַּעֲדוֹ, וּבְעַד הָעָם.    24 And he shall bathe his flesh in water in a holy place and put on his other vestments, and come forth, and offer his burnt-offering and the burnt-offering of the people, and make atonement for himself and for the people.
16.25 כה  וְאֵת חֵלֶב הַחַטָּאת, יַקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה.    25 And the fat of the sin-offering shall he make smoke upon the altar.
16.26 כו  וְהַמְשַׁלֵּחַ אֶת-הַשָּׂעִיר, לַעֲזָאזֵל--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְרָחַץ אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ בַּמָּיִם; וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, יָבוֹא אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה.    26 And he that letteth go the goat for Azazel shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into the camp.
16.27 כז  וְאֵת פַּר הַחַטָּאת וְאֵת שְׂעִיר הַחַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר הוּבָא אֶת-דָּמָם לְכַפֵּר בַּקֹּדֶשׁ--יוֹצִיא, אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה; וְשָׂרְפוּ בָאֵשׁ, אֶת-עֹרֹתָם וְאֶת-בְּשָׂרָם וְאֶת-פִּרְשָׁם.    27 And the bullock of the sin-offering, and the goat of the sin-offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall be carried forth without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.
16.28 כח  וְהַשֹּׂרֵף אֹתָם--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְרָחַץ אֶת-בְּשָׂרוֹ בַּמָּיִם; וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן, יָבוֹא אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה.    28 And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into the camp.
16.29 כט  וְהָיְתָה לָכֶם, לְחֻקַּת עוֹלָם:  בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ תְּעַנּוּ אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם, וְכָל-מְלָאכָה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ--הָאֶזְרָח, וְהַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכְכֶם.    29 And it shall be a statute for ever unto you: in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and shall do no manner of work, the home-born, or the stranger that sojourneth among you.
16.30 ל  כִּי-בַיּוֹם הַזֶּה יְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיכֶם, לְטַהֵר אֶתְכֶם:  מִכֹּל, חַטֹּאתֵיכֶם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, תִּטְהָרוּ.    30 For on this day shall atonement be made for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the LORD.
16.31 לא  שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן הִיא לָכֶם, וְעִנִּיתֶם אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם--חֻקַּת, עוֹלָם.    31 It is a sabbath of solemn rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls; it is a statute for ever.
16.32 לב  וְכִפֶּר הַכֹּהֵן אֲשֶׁר-יִמְשַׁח אֹתוֹ, וַאֲשֶׁר יְמַלֵּא אֶת-יָדוֹ, לְכַהֵן, תַּחַת אָבִיו; וְלָבַשׁ אֶת-בִּגְדֵי הַבָּד, בִּגְדֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ.    32 And the priest, who shall be anointed and who shall be consecrated to be priest in his father's stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen garments, even the holy garments.
16.33 לג  וְכִפֶּר אֶת-מִקְדַּשׁ הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וְאֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ יְכַפֵּר; וְעַל הַכֹּהֲנִים וְעַל-כָּל-עַם הַקָּהָל, יְכַפֵּר.    33 And he shall make atonement for the most holy place, and he shall make atonement for the tent of meeting and for the altar; and he shall make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly.
16.34 לד  וְהָיְתָה-זֹּאת לָכֶם לְחֻקַּת עוֹלָם, לְכַפֵּר עַל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל מִכָּל-חַטֹּאתָם--אַחַת, בַּשָּׁנָה; וַיַּעַשׂ, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}    34 And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make atonement for the children of Israel because of all their sins once in the year.' And he did as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
17.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
17.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו, וְאֶל כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֲלֵיהֶם:  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.    2 Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them: This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, saying:
17.3 ג  אִישׁ אִישׁ, מִבֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁחַט שׁוֹר אוֹ-כֶשֶׂב אוֹ-עֵז, בַּמַּחֲנֶה; אוֹ אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁחַט, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה.    3 What man soever there be of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it without the camp,
17.4 ד  וְאֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לֹא הֱבִיאוֹ, לְהַקְרִיב קָרְבָּן לַיהוָה, לִפְנֵי מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה--דָּם יֵחָשֵׁב לָאִישׁ הַהוּא, דָּם שָׁפָךְ, וְנִכְרַת הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, מִקֶּרֶב עַמּוֹ.    4 and hath not brought it unto the door of the tent of meeting, to present it as an offering unto the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD, blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people.
17.5 ה  לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר יָבִיאוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-זִבְחֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר הֵם זֹבְחִים עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה, וֶהֱבִיאֻם לַיהוָה אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן; וְזָבְחוּ זִבְחֵי שְׁלָמִים, לַיהוָה--אוֹתָם.    5 To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they sacrifice in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto the door of the tent of meeting, unto the priest, and sacrifice them for sacrifices of peace-offerings unto the LORD.
17.6 ו  וְזָרַק הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַדָּם עַל-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְהִקְטִיר הַחֵלֶב, לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ לַיהוָה.    6 And the priest shall dash the blood against the altar of the LORD at the door of the tent of meeting, and make the fat smoke for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
17.7 ז  וְלֹא-יִזְבְּחוּ עוֹד, אֶת-זִבְחֵיהֶם, לַשְּׂעִירִם, אֲשֶׁר הֵם זֹנִים אַחֲרֵיהֶם:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם תִּהְיֶה-זֹּאת לָהֶם, לְדֹרֹתָם.    7 And they shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices unto the satyrs, after whom they go astray. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.
17.8 ח  וַאֲלֵהֶם תֹּאמַר--אִישׁ אִישׁ מִבֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִן-הַגֵּר אֲשֶׁר-יָגוּר בְּתוֹכָם:  אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲלֶה עֹלָה, אוֹ-זָבַח.    8 And thou shalt say unto them: Whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, that offereth a burnt-offering or sacrifice,
17.9 ט  וְאֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לֹא יְבִיאֶנּוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֹתוֹ, לַיהוָה--וְנִכְרַת הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, מֵעַמָּיו.    9 and bringeth it not unto the door of the tent of meeting, to sacrifice it unto the LORD, even that man shall be cut off from his people.
17.10 י  וְאִישׁ אִישׁ מִבֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִן-הַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכָם, אֲשֶׁר יֹאכַל, כָּל-דָּם--וְנָתַתִּי פָנַי, בַּנֶּפֶשׁ הָאֹכֶלֶת אֶת-הַדָּם, וְהִכְרַתִּי אֹתָהּ, מִקֶּרֶב עַמָּהּ.    10 And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, that eateth any manner of blood, I will set My face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.
17.11 יא  כִּי נֶפֶשׁ הַבָּשָׂר, בַּדָּם הִוא, וַאֲנִי נְתַתִּיו לָכֶם עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, לְכַפֵּר עַל-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם:  כִּי-הַדָּם הוּא, בַּנֶּפֶשׁ יְכַפֵּר.    11 For the life of the flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that maketh atonement by reason of the life.
17.12 יב  עַל-כֵּן אָמַרְתִּי לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ מִכֶּם לֹא-תֹאכַל דָּם; וְהַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכְכֶם, לֹא-יֹאכַל דָּם.    12 Therefore I said unto the children of Israel: No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood.
17.13 יג  וְאִישׁ אִישׁ מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וּמִן-הַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכָם, אֲשֶׁר יָצוּד צֵיד חַיָּה אוֹ-עוֹף, אֲשֶׁר יֵאָכֵל--וְשָׁפַךְ, אֶת-דָּמוֹ, וְכִסָּהוּ, בֶּעָפָר.    13 And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, that taketh in hunting any beast or fowl that may be eaten, he shall pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.
17.14 יד  כִּי-נֶפֶשׁ כָּל-בָּשָׂר, דָּמוֹ בְנַפְשׁוֹ הוּא, וָאֹמַר לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, דַּם כָּל-בָּשָׂר לֹא תֹאכֵלוּ:  כִּי נֶפֶשׁ כָּל-בָּשָׂר דָּמוֹ הִוא, כָּל-אֹכְלָיו יִכָּרֵת.    14 For as to the life of all flesh, the blood thereof is all one with the life thereof; therefore I said unto the children of Israel: Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh; for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof; whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.
17.15 טו  וְכָל-נֶפֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר תֹּאכַל נְבֵלָה וּטְרֵפָה, בָּאֶזְרָח, וּבַגֵּר:  וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם, וְטָמֵא עַד-הָעֶרֶב--וְטָהֵר.    15 And every soul that eateth that which dieth of itself, or that which is torn of beasts, whether he be home-born or a stranger, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even; then shall he be clean.
17.16 טז  וְאִם לֹא יְכַבֵּס, וּבְשָׂרוֹ לֹא יִרְחָץ--וְנָשָׂא, עֲוֺנוֹ.  {פ}    16 But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh, then he shall bear his iniquity. {P}
18.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
18.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: I am the LORD your God.
18.3 ג  כְּמַעֲשֵׂה אֶרֶץ-מִצְרַיִם אֲשֶׁר יְשַׁבְתֶּם-בָּהּ, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ; וּכְמַעֲשֵׂה אֶרֶץ-כְּנַעַן אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מֵבִיא אֶתְכֶם שָׁמָּה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ, וּבְחֻקֹּתֵיהֶם, לֹא תֵלֵכוּ.    3 After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do; and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do; neither shall ye walk in their statutes.
18.4 ד  אֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי תַּעֲשׂוּ וְאֶת-חֻקֹּתַי תִּשְׁמְרוּ, לָלֶכֶת בָּהֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    4 Mine ordinances shall ye do, and My statutes shall ye keep, to walk therein: I am the LORD your God.
18.5 ה  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-חֻקֹּתַי וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם הָאָדָם וָחַי בָּהֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.  {ס}    5 Ye shall therefore keep My statutes, and Mine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them: I am the LORD. {S}
18.6 ו  אִישׁ אִישׁ אֶל-כָּל-שְׁאֵר בְּשָׂרוֹ, לֹא תִקְרְבוּ לְגַלּוֹת עֶרְוָה:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.  {ס}    6 None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness. I am the LORD. {S}
18.7 ז  עֶרְוַת אָבִיךָ וְעֶרְוַת אִמְּךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  אִמְּךָ הִוא, לֹא תְגַלֶּה עֶרְוָתָהּ.  {ס}    7 The nakedness of thy father, and the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. {S}
18.8 ח  עֶרְוַת אֵשֶׁת-אָבִיךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  עֶרְוַת אָבִיךָ, הִוא.  {ס}    8 The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy father's nakedness. {S}
18.9 ט  עֶרְוַת אֲחוֹתְךָ בַת-אָבִיךָ, אוֹ בַת-אִמֶּךָ, מוֹלֶדֶת בַּיִת, אוֹ מוֹלֶדֶת חוּץ--לֹא תְגַלֶּה, עֶרְוָתָן.  {ס}    9 The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother, whether born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover. {S}
18.10 י  עֶרְוַת בַּת-בִּנְךָ אוֹ בַת-בִּתְּךָ, לֹא תְגַלֶּה עֶרְוָתָן:  כִּי עֶרְוָתְךָ, הֵנָּה.  {ס}    10 The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover; for theirs is thine own nakedness. {S}
18.11 יא  עֶרְוַת בַּת-אֵשֶׁת אָבִיךָ מוֹלֶדֶת אָבִיךָ, אֲחוֹתְךָ הִוא--לֹא תְגַלֶּה, עֶרְוָתָהּ.  {ס}    11 The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. {S}
18.12 יב  עֶרְוַת אֲחוֹת-אָבִיךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  שְׁאֵר אָבִיךָ, הִוא.  {ס}    12 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister: she is thy father's near kinswoman. {S}
18.13 יג  עֶרְוַת אֲחוֹת-אִמְּךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  כִּי-שְׁאֵר אִמְּךָ, הִוא.  {ס}    13 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister; for she is thy mother's near kinswoman. {S}
18.14 יד  עֶרְוַת אֲחִי-אָבִיךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  אֶל-אִשְׁתּוֹ לֹא תִקְרָב, דֹּדָתְךָ הִוא.  {ס}    14 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt. {S}
18.15 טו  עֶרְוַת כַּלָּתְךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  אֵשֶׁת בִּנְךָ הִוא, לֹא תְגַלֶּה עֶרְוָתָהּ.  {ס}    15 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter-in-law: she is thy son' wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. {S}
18.16 טז  עֶרְוַת אֵשֶׁת-אָחִיךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  עֶרְוַת אָחִיךָ, הִוא.  {ס}    16 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it is thy brother's nakedness. {S}
18.17 יז  עֶרְוַת אִשָּׁה וּבִתָּהּ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  אֶת-בַּת-בְּנָהּ וְאֶת-בַּת-בִּתָּהּ, לֹא תִקַּח לְגַלּוֹת עֶרְוָתָהּ--שַׁאֲרָה הֵנָּה, זִמָּה הִוא.    17 Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter; thou shalt not take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness: they are near kinswomen; it is lewdness.
18.18 יח  וְאִשָּׁה אֶל-אֲחֹתָהּ, לֹא תִקָּח:  לִצְרֹר, לְגַלּוֹת עֶרְוָתָהּ עָלֶיהָ--בְּחַיֶּיהָ.    18 And thou shalt not take a woman to her sister, to be a rival to her, to uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her lifetime.
18.19 יט  וְאֶל-אִשָּׁה, בְּנִדַּת טֻמְאָתָהּ--לֹא תִקְרַב, לְגַלּוֹת עֶרְוָתָהּ.    19 And thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is impure by her uncleanness.
18.20 כ  וְאֶל-אֵשֶׁת, עֲמִיתְךָ--לֹא-תִתֵּן שְׁכָבְתְּךָ, לְזָרַע:  לְטָמְאָה-בָהּ.    20 And thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife, to defile thyself with her.
18.21 כא  וּמִזַּרְעֲךָ לֹא-תִתֵּן, לְהַעֲבִיר לַמֹּלֶךְ; וְלֹא תְחַלֵּל אֶת-שֵׁם אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲנִי יְהוָה.    21 And thou shalt not give any of thy seed to set them apart to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.
18.22 כב  וְאֶת-זָכָר--לֹא תִשְׁכַּב, מִשְׁכְּבֵי אִשָּׁה:  תּוֹעֵבָה, הִוא.    22 Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind; it is abomination.
18.23 כג  וּבְכָל-בְּהֵמָה לֹא-תִתֵּן שְׁכָבְתְּךָ, לְטָמְאָה-בָהּ; וְאִשָּׁה, לֹא-תַעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי בְהֵמָה לְרִבְעָהּ--תֶּבֶל הוּא.    23 And thou shalt not lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith; neither shall any woman stand before a beast, to lie down thereto; it is perversion.
18.24 כד  אַל-תִּטַּמְּאוּ, בְּכָל-אֵלֶּה:  כִּי בְכָל-אֵלֶּה נִטְמְאוּ הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי מְשַׁלֵּחַ מִפְּנֵיכֶם.    24 Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things; for in all these the nations are defiled, which I cast out from before you.
18.25 כה  וַתִּטְמָא הָאָרֶץ, וָאֶפְקֹד עֲוֺנָהּ עָלֶיהָ; וַתָּקִא הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-יֹשְׁבֶיהָ.    25 And the land was defiled, therefore I did visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land vomited out her inhabitants.
18.26 כו  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אַתֶּם, אֶת-חֻקֹּתַי וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי, וְלֹא תַעֲשׂוּ, מִכֹּל הַתּוֹעֵבֹת הָאֵלֶּה:  הָאֶזְרָח, וְהַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכְכֶם.    26 Ye therefore shall keep My statutes and Mine ordinances, and shall not do any of these abominations; neither the home-born, nor the stranger that sojourneth among you--
18.27 כז  כִּי אֶת-כָּל-הַתּוֹעֵבֹת הָאֵל, עָשׂוּ אַנְשֵׁי-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵיכֶם; וַתִּטְמָא, הָאָרֶץ.    27 for all these abominations have the men of the land done, that were before you, and the land is defiled--
18.28 כח  וְלֹא-תָקִיא הָאָרֶץ אֶתְכֶם, בְּטַמַּאֲכֶם אֹתָהּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר קָאָה אֶת-הַגּוֹי, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵיכֶם.    28 that the land vomit not you out also, when ye defile it, as it vomited out the nation that was before you.
18.29 כט  כִּי כָּל-אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה, מִכֹּל הַתּוֹעֵבֹת הָאֵלֶּה--וְנִכְרְתוּ הַנְּפָשׁוֹת הָעֹשֹׂת, מִקֶּרֶב עַמָּם.    29 For whosoever shall do any of these abominations, even the souls that do them shall be cut off from among their people.
18.30 ל  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-מִשְׁמַרְתִּי, לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת מֵחֻקּוֹת הַתּוֹעֵבֹת אֲשֶׁר נַעֲשׂוּ לִפְנֵיכֶם, וְלֹא תִטַּמְּאוּ, בָּהֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.  {פ}    30 Therefore shall ye keep My charge, that ye do not any of these abominable customs, which were done before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the LORD your God. {P}
19.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
19.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם--קְדֹשִׁים תִּהְיוּ:  כִּי קָדוֹשׁ, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    2 Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them: Ye shall be holy; for I the LORD your God am holy.
19.3 ג  אִישׁ אִמּוֹ וְאָבִיו תִּירָאוּ, וְאֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתַי תִּשְׁמֹרוּ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    3 Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and ye shall keep My sabbaths: I am the LORD your God.
19.4 ד  אַל-תִּפְנוּ, אֶל-הָאֱלִילִם, וֵאלֹהֵי מַסֵּכָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ לָכֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    4 Turn ye not unto the idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am the LORD your God.
19.5 ה  וְכִי תִזְבְּחוּ זֶבַח שְׁלָמִים, לַיהוָה--לִרְצֹנְכֶם, תִּזְבָּחֻהוּ.    5 And when ye offer a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the LORD, ye shall offer it that ye may be accepted.
19.6 ו  בְּיוֹם זִבְחֲכֶם יֵאָכֵל, וּמִמָּחֳרָת; וְהַנּוֹתָר עַד-יוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, בָּאֵשׁ יִשָּׂרֵף.    6 It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow; and if aught remain until the third day, it shall be burnt with fire.
19.7 ז  וְאִם הֵאָכֹל יֵאָכֵל, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי--פִּגּוּל הוּא, לֹא יֵרָצֶה.    7 And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is a vile thing; it shall not be accepted.
19.8 ח  וְאֹכְלָיו עֲוֺנוֹ יִשָּׂא, כִּי-אֶת-קֹדֶשׁ יְהוָה חִלֵּל; וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מֵעַמֶּיהָ.    8 But every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the holy thing of the LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from his people.
19.9 ט  וּבְקֻצְרְכֶם אֶת-קְצִיר אַרְצְכֶם, לֹא תְכַלֶּה פְּאַת שָׂדְךָ לִקְצֹר; וְלֶקֶט קְצִירְךָ, לֹא תְלַקֵּט.    9 And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corner of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest.
19.10 י  וְכַרְמְךָ לֹא תְעוֹלֵל, וּפֶרֶט כַּרְמְךָ לֹא תְלַקֵּט:  לֶעָנִי וְלַגֵּר תַּעֲזֹב אֹתָם, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    10 And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather the fallen fruit of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and for the stranger: I am the LORD your God.
19.11 יא  לֹא, תִּגְנֹבוּ; וְלֹא-תְכַחֲשׁוּ וְלֹא-תְשַׁקְּרוּ, אִישׁ בַּעֲמִיתוֹ.    11 Ye shall not steal; neither shall ye deal falsely, nor lie one to another.
19.12 יב  וְלֹא-תִשָּׁבְעוּ בִשְׁמִי, לַשָּׁקֶר:  וְחִלַּלְתָּ אֶת-שֵׁם אֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲנִי יְהוָה.    12 And ye shall not swear by My name falsely, so that thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.
19.13 יג  לֹא-תַעֲשֹׁק אֶת-רֵעֲךָ, וְלֹא תִגְזֹל; לֹא-תָלִין פְּעֻלַּת שָׂכִיר, אִתְּךָ--עַד-בֹּקֶר.    13 Thou shalt not oppress thy neighbour, nor rob him; the wages of a hired servant shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.
19.14 יד  לֹא-תְקַלֵּל חֵרֵשׁ--וְלִפְנֵי עִוֵּר, לֹא תִתֵּן מִכְשֹׁל; וְיָרֵאתָ מֵּאֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲנִי יְהוָה.    14 Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling-block before the blind, but thou shalt fear thy God: I am the LORD.
19.15 טו  לֹא-תַעֲשׂוּ עָוֶל, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט--לֹא-תִשָּׂא פְנֵי-דָל, וְלֹא תֶהְדַּר פְּנֵי גָדוֹל:  בְּצֶדֶק, תִּשְׁפֹּט עֲמִיתֶךָ.    15 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor favour the person of the mighty; but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.
19.16 טז  לֹא-תֵלֵךְ רָכִיל בְּעַמֶּיךָ, לֹא תַעֲמֹד עַל-דַּם רֵעֶךָ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    16 Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people; neither shalt thou stand idly by the blood of thy neighbour: I am the LORD.
19.17 יז  לֹא-תִשְׂנָא אֶת-אָחִיךָ, בִּלְבָבֶךָ; הוֹכֵחַ תּוֹכִיחַ אֶת-עֲמִיתֶךָ, וְלֹא-תִשָּׂא עָלָיו חֵטְא.    17 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour, and not bear sin because of him.
19.18 יח  לֹא-תִקֹּם וְלֹא-תִטֹּר אֶת-בְּנֵי עַמֶּךָ, וְאָהַבְתָּ לְרֵעֲךָ כָּמוֹךָ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    18 Thou shalt not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the LORD.
19.19 יט  אֶת-חֻקֹּתַי, תִּשְׁמֹרוּ--בְּהֶמְתְּךָ לֹא-תַרְבִּיעַ כִּלְאַיִם, שָׂדְךָ לֹא-תִזְרַע כִּלְאָיִם; וּבֶגֶד כִּלְאַיִם שַׁעַטְנֵז, לֹא יַעֲלֶה עָלֶיךָ.    19 Ye shall keep My statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind; thou shalt not sow thy field with two kinds of seed; neither shall there come upon thee a garment of two kinds of stuff mingled together.
19.20 כ  וְאִישׁ כִּי-יִשְׁכַּב אֶת-אִשָּׁה שִׁכְבַת-זֶרַע, וְהִוא שִׁפְחָה נֶחֱרֶפֶת לְאִישׁ, וְהָפְדֵּה לֹא נִפְדָּתָה, אוֹ חֻפְשָׁה לֹא נִתַּן-לָהּ--בִּקֹּרֶת תִּהְיֶה לֹא יוּמְתוּ, כִּי-לֹא חֻפָּשָׁה.    20 And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid, designated for a man, and not at all redeemed, nor was freedom given her; there shall be inquisition; they shall not be put to death, because she was not free.
19.21 כא  וְהֵבִיא אֶת-אֲשָׁמוֹ לַיהוָה, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--אֵיל, אָשָׁם.    21 And he shall bring his forfeit unto the LORD, unto the door of the tent of meeting, even a ram for a guilt-offering.
19.22 כב  וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו הַכֹּהֵן בְּאֵיל הָאָשָׁם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, עַל-חַטָּאתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר חָטָא; וְנִסְלַח לוֹ, מֵחַטָּאתוֹ אֲשֶׁר חָטָא.  {פ}    22 And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt-offering before the LORD for his sin which he hath sinned; and he shall be forgiven for his sin which he hath sinned. {P}
19.23 כג  וְכִי-תָבֹאוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, וּנְטַעְתֶּם כָּל-עֵץ מַאֲכָל--וַעֲרַלְתֶּם עָרְלָתוֹ, אֶת-פִּרְיוֹ; שָׁלֹשׁ שָׁנִים, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם עֲרֵלִים--לֹא יֵאָכֵל.    23 And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as forbidden; three years shall it be as forbidden unto you; it shall not be eaten.
19.24 כד  וּבַשָּׁנָה, הָרְבִיעִת, יִהְיֶה, כָּל-פִּרְיוֹ--קֹדֶשׁ הִלּוּלִים, לַיהוָה.    24 And in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy, for giving praise unto the LORD.
19.25 כה  וּבַשָּׁנָה הַחֲמִישִׁת, תֹּאכְלוּ אֶת-פִּרְיוֹ, לְהוֹסִיף לָכֶם, תְּבוּאָתוֹ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    25 But in the fifth year may ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you more richly the increase thereof: I am the LORD your God.
19.26 כו  לֹא תֹאכְלוּ, עַל-הַדָּם; לֹא תְנַחֲשׁוּ, וְלֹא תְעוֹנֵנוּ.    26 Ye shall not eat with the blood; neither shall ye practise divination nor soothsaying.
19.27 כז  לֹא תַקִּפוּ, פְּאַת רֹאשְׁכֶם; וְלֹא תַשְׁחִית, אֵת פְּאַת זְקָנֶךָ.    27 Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard.
19.28 כח  וְשֶׂרֶט לָנֶפֶשׁ, לֹא תִתְּנוּ בִּבְשַׂרְכֶם, וּכְתֹבֶת קַעֲקַע, לֹא תִתְּנוּ בָּכֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    28 Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor imprint any marks upon you: I am the LORD.
19.29 כט  אַל-תְּחַלֵּל אֶת-בִּתְּךָ, לְהַזְנוֹתָהּ; וְלֹא-תִזְנֶה הָאָרֶץ, וּמָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ זִמָּה.    29 Profane not thy daughter, to make her a harlot, lest the land fall into harlotry, and the land become full of lewdness.
19.30 ל  אֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתַי תִּשְׁמֹרוּ, וּמִקְדָּשִׁי תִּירָאוּ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    30 Ye shall keep My sabbaths, and reverence My sanctuary: I am the LORD.
19.31 לא  אַל-תִּפְנוּ אֶל-הָאֹבֹת וְאֶל-הַיִּדְּעֹנִים, אַל-תְּבַקְשׁוּ לְטָמְאָה בָהֶם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    31 Turn ye not unto the ghosts, nor unto familiar spirits; seek them not out, to be defiled by them: I am the LORD your God.
19.32 לב  מִפְּנֵי שֵׂיבָה תָּקוּם, וְהָדַרְתָּ פְּנֵי זָקֵן; וְיָרֵאתָ מֵּאֱלֹהֶיךָ, אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {ס}    32 Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and thou shalt fear thy God: I am the LORD. {S}
19.33 לג  וְכִי-יָגוּר אִתְּךָ גֵּר, בְּאַרְצְכֶם--לֹא תוֹנוּ, אֹתוֹ.    33 And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not do him wrong.
19.34 לד  כְּאֶזְרָח מִכֶּם יִהְיֶה לָכֶם הַגֵּר הַגָּר אִתְּכֶם, וְאָהַבְתָּ לוֹ כָּמוֹךָ--כִּי-גֵרִים הֱיִיתֶם, בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    34 The stranger that sojourneth with you shall be unto you as the home-born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
19.35 לה  לֹא-תַעֲשׂוּ עָוֶל, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט, בַּמִּדָּה, בַּמִּשְׁקָל וּבַמְּשׂוּרָה.    35 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure.
19.36 לו  מֹאזְנֵי צֶדֶק אַבְנֵי-צֶדֶק, אֵיפַת צֶדֶק וְהִין צֶדֶק--יִהְיֶה לָכֶם:  אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-הוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.    36 Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
19.37 לז  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-כָּל-חֻקֹּתַי וְאֶת-כָּל-מִשְׁפָּטַי, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֹתָם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.  {פ}    37 And ye shall observe all My statutes, and all Mine ordinances, and do them: I am the LORD. {P}
20.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
20.2 ב  וְאֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, תֹּאמַר, אִישׁ אִישׁ מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל וּמִן-הַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר יִתֵּן מִזַּרְעוֹ לַמֹּלֶךְ, מוֹת יוּמָת; עַם הָאָרֶץ, יִרְגְּמֻהוּ בָאָבֶן.    2 Moreover, thou shalt say to the children of Israel: Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth of his seed unto Molech; he shall surely be put to death; the people of the land shall stone him with stones.
20.3 ג  וַאֲנִי אֶתֵּן אֶת-פָּנַי, בָּאִישׁ הַהוּא, וְהִכְרַתִּי אֹתוֹ, מִקֶּרֶב עַמּוֹ:  כִּי מִזַּרְעוֹ, נָתַן לַמֹּלֶךְ--לְמַעַן טַמֵּא אֶת-מִקְדָּשִׁי, וּלְחַלֵּל אֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי.    3 I also will set My face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people, because he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to defile My sanctuary, and to profane My holy name.
20.4 ד  וְאִם הַעְלֵם יַעְלִימוּ עַם הָאָרֶץ אֶת-עֵינֵיהֶם, מִן-הָאִישׁ הַהוּא, בְּתִתּוֹ מִזַּרְעוֹ, לַמֹּלֶךְ--לְבִלְתִּי, הָמִית אֹתוֹ.    4 And if the people of the land do at all hide their eyes from that man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and put him not to death;
20.5 ה  וְשַׂמְתִּי אֲנִי אֶת-פָּנַי בָּאִישׁ הַהוּא, וּבְמִשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ; וְהִכְרַתִּי אֹתוֹ וְאֵת כָּל-הַזֹּנִים אַחֲרָיו, לִזְנוֹת אַחֲרֵי הַמֹּלֶךְ--מִקֶּרֶב עַמָּם.    5 then I will set My face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that go astray after him, to go astray after Molech, from among their people.
20.6 ו  וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר תִּפְנֶה אֶל-הָאֹבֹת וְאֶל-הַיִּדְּעֹנִים, לִזְנֹת, אַחֲרֵיהֶם--וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-פָּנַי בַּנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, וְהִכְרַתִּי אֹתוֹ מִקֶּרֶב עַמּוֹ.    6 And the soul that turneth unto the ghosts, and unto the familiar spirits, to go astray after them, I will even set My face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.
20.7 ז  וְהִתְקַדִּשְׁתֶּם--וִהְיִיתֶם, קְדֹשִׁים:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    7 Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy; for I am the LORD your God.
20.8 ח  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֶת-חֻקֹּתַי, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם, אֹתָם:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, מְקַדִּשְׁכֶם.    8 And keep ye My statutes, and do them: I am the LORD who sanctify you.
20.9 ט  כִּי-אִישׁ אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יְקַלֵּל אֶת-אָבִיו וְאֶת-אִמּוֹ--מוֹת יוּמָת:  אָבִיו וְאִמּוֹ קִלֵּל, דָּמָיו בּוֹ.    9 For whatsoever man there be that curseth his father or his mother shall surely be put to death; he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall be upon him.
20.10 י  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִנְאַף אֶת-אֵשֶׁת אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִנְאַף, אֶת-אֵשֶׁת רֵעֵהוּ--מוֹת-יוּמַת הַנֹּאֵף, וְהַנֹּאָפֶת.    10 And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, both the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.
20.11 יא  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב אֶת-אֵשֶׁת אָבִיו--עֶרְוַת אָבִיו, גִּלָּה; מוֹת-יוּמְתוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם, דְּמֵיהֶם בָּם.    11 And the man that lieth with his father's wife--he hath uncovered his father's nakedness--both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
20.12 יב  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב אֶת-כַּלָּתוֹ--מוֹת יוּמְתוּ, שְׁנֵיהֶם:  תֶּבֶל עָשׂוּ, דְּמֵיהֶם בָּם.    12 And if a man lie with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death; they have wrought corruption; their blood shall be upon them.
20.13 יג  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב אֶת-זָכָר מִשְׁכְּבֵי אִשָּׁה--תּוֹעֵבָה עָשׂוּ, שְׁנֵיהֶם; מוֹת יוּמָתוּ, דְּמֵיהֶם בָּם.    13 And if a man lie with mankind, as with womankind, both of them have committed abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
20.14 יד  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִקַּח אֶת-אִשָּׁה וְאֶת-אִמָּהּ--זִמָּה הִוא; בָּאֵשׁ יִשְׂרְפוּ אֹתוֹ, וְאֶתְהֶן, וְלֹא-תִהְיֶה זִמָּה, בְּתוֹכְכֶם.    14 And if a man take with his wife also her mother, it is wickedness: they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you.
20.15 טו  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִתֵּן שְׁכָבְתּוֹ בִּבְהֵמָה--מוֹת יוּמָת; וְאֶת-הַבְּהֵמָה, תַּהֲרֹגוּ.    15 And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death; and ye shall slay the beast.
20.16 טז  וְאִשָּׁה, אֲשֶׁר תִּקְרַב אֶל-כָּל-בְּהֵמָה לְרִבְעָה אֹתָהּ--וְהָרַגְתָּ אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה, וְאֶת-הַבְּהֵמָה; מוֹת יוּמָתוּ, דְּמֵיהֶם בָּם.    16 And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
20.17 יז  וְאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִקַּח אֶת-אֲחֹתוֹ בַּת-אָבִיו אוֹ בַת-אִמּוֹ וְרָאָה אֶת-עֶרְוָתָהּ וְהִיא-תִרְאֶה אֶת-עֶרְוָתוֹ, חֶסֶד הוּא--וְנִכְרְתוּ, לְעֵינֵי בְּנֵי עַמָּם; עֶרְוַת אֲחֹתוֹ גִּלָּה, עֲוֺנוֹ יִשָּׂא.    17 And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness: it is a shameful thing; and they shall be cut off in the sight of the children of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.
20.18 יח  וְאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִשְׁכַּב אֶת-אִשָּׁה דָּוָה, וְגִלָּה אֶת-עֶרְוָתָהּ אֶת-מְקֹרָהּ הֶעֱרָה, וְהִוא, גִּלְּתָה אֶת-מְקוֹר דָּמֶיהָ--וְנִכְרְתוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם, מִקֶּרֶב עַמָּם.    18 And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness--he hath made naked her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood--both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
20.19 יט  וְעֶרְוַת אֲחוֹת אִמְּךָ וַאֲחוֹת אָבִיךָ, לֹא תְגַלֵּה:  כִּי אֶת-שְׁאֵרוֹ הֶעֱרָה, עֲוֺנָם יִשָּׂאוּ.    19 And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister; for he hath made naked his near kin; they shall bear their iniquity.
20.20 כ  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכַּב אֶת-דֹּדָתוֹ--עֶרְוַת דֹּדוֹ, גִּלָּה; חֶטְאָם יִשָּׂאוּ, עֲרִירִים יָמֻתוּ.    20 And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife--he hath uncovered his uncle's nakedness--they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.
20.21 כא  וְאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר יִקַּח אֶת-אֵשֶׁת אָחִיו--נִדָּה הִוא; עֶרְוַת אָחִיו גִּלָּה, עֲרִירִים יִהְיוּ.    21 And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is impurity: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.
20.22 כב  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם אֶת-כָּל-חֻקֹּתַי וְאֶת-כָּל-מִשְׁפָּטַי, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֹתָם; וְלֹא-תָקִיא אֶתְכֶם, הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מֵבִיא אֶתְכֶם שָׁמָּה, לָשֶׁבֶת בָּהּ.    22 Ye shall therefore keep all My statutes, and all Mine ordinances, and do them, that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, vomit you not out.
20.23 כג  וְלֹא תֵלְכוּ בְּחֻקֹּת הַגּוֹי, אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי מְשַׁלֵּחַ מִפְּנֵיכֶם:  כִּי אֶת-כָּל-אֵלֶּה עָשׂוּ, וָאָקֻץ בָּם.    23 And ye shall not walk in the customs of the nation, which I am casting out before you; for they did all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.
20.24 כד  וָאֹמַר לָכֶם, אַתֶּם תִּירְשׁוּ אֶת-אַדְמָתָם, וַאֲנִי אֶתְּנֶנָּה לָכֶם לָרֶשֶׁת אֹתָהּ, אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבָשׁ:  אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-הִבְדַּלְתִּי אֶתְכֶם מִן-הָעַמִּים.    24 But I have said unto you: 'Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, a land flowing with milk and honey.' I am the LORD your God, who have set you apart from the peoples.
20.25 כה  וְהִבְדַּלְתֶּם בֵּין-הַבְּהֵמָה הַטְּהֹרָה, לַטְּמֵאָה, וּבֵין-הָעוֹף הַטָּמֵא, לַטָּהֹר; וְלֹא-תְשַׁקְּצוּ אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם בַּבְּהֵמָה וּבָעוֹף, וּבְכֹל אֲשֶׁר תִּרְמֹשׂ הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר-הִבְדַּלְתִּי לָכֶם, לְטַמֵּא.    25 Ye shall therefore separate between the clean beast and the unclean, and between the unclean fowl and the clean; and ye shall not make your souls detestable by beast, or by fowl, or by any thing wherewith the ground teemeth, which I have set apart for you to hold unclean.
20.26 כו  וִהְיִיתֶם לִי קְדֹשִׁים, כִּי קָדוֹשׁ אֲנִי יְהוָה; וָאַבְדִּל אֶתְכֶם מִן-הָעַמִּים, לִהְיוֹת לִי.    26 And ye shall be holy unto Me; for I the LORD am holy, and have set you apart from the peoples, that ye should be Mine.
20.27 כז  וְאִישׁ אוֹ-אִשָּׁה, כִּי-יִהְיֶה בָהֶם אוֹב אוֹ יִדְּעֹנִי--מוֹת יוּמָתוּ; בָּאֶבֶן יִרְגְּמוּ אֹתָם, דְּמֵיהֶם בָּם.  {פ}    27 A man also or a woman that divineth by a ghost or a familiar spirit, shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones; their blood shall be upon them. {P}
21.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֱמֹר אֶל-הַכֹּהֲנִים בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן; וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, לְנֶפֶשׁ לֹא-יִטַּמָּא בְּעַמָּיו.    1 And the LORD said unto Moses: Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto them: There shall none defile himself for the dead among his people;
21.2 ב  כִּי, אִם-לִשְׁאֵרוֹ, הַקָּרֹב, אֵלָיו:  לְאִמּוֹ וּלְאָבִיו, וְלִבְנוֹ וּלְבִתּוֹ וּלְאָחִיו.    2 except for his kin, that is near unto him, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother;
21.3 ג  וְלַאֲחֹתוֹ הַבְּתוּלָה הַקְּרוֹבָה אֵלָיו, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הָיְתָה לְאִישׁ--לָהּ, יִטַּמָּא.    3 and for his sister a virgin, that is near unto him, that hath had no husband, for her may he defile himself.
21.4 ד  לֹא יִטַּמָּא, בַּעַל בְּעַמָּיו--לְהֵחַלּוֹ.    4 He shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
21.5 ה  לֹא-יקרחה (יִקְרְחוּ) קָרְחָה בְּרֹאשָׁם, וּפְאַת זְקָנָם לֹא יְגַלֵּחוּ; וּבִבְשָׂרָם--לֹא יִשְׂרְטוּ, שָׂרָטֶת.    5 They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corners of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.
21.6 ו  קְדֹשִׁים יִהְיוּ, לֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, וְלֹא יְחַלְּלוּ, שֵׁם אֱלֹהֵיהֶם:  כִּי אֶת-אִשֵּׁי יְהוָה לֶחֶם אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, הֵם מַקְרִיבִם--וְהָיוּ קֹדֶשׁ.    6 They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God; for the offerings of the LORD made by fire, the bread of their God, they do offer; therefore they shall be holy.
21.7 ז  אִשָּׁה זֹנָה וַחֲלָלָה לֹא יִקָּחוּ, וְאִשָּׁה גְּרוּשָׁה מֵאִישָׁהּ לֹא יִקָּחוּ:  כִּי-קָדֹשׁ הוּא, לֵאלֹהָיו.    7 They shall not take a woman that is a harlot, or profaned; neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband; for he is holy unto his God.
21.8 ח  וְקִדַּשְׁתּוֹ--כִּי-אֶת-לֶחֶם אֱלֹהֶיךָ, הוּא מַקְרִיב; קָדֹשׁ, יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ--כִּי קָדוֹשׁ, אֲנִי יְהוָה מְקַדִּשְׁכֶם.    8 Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy God; he shall be holy unto thee; for I the LORD, who sanctify you, am holy.
21.9 ט  וּבַת אִישׁ כֹּהֵן, כִּי תֵחֵל לִזְנוֹת--אֶת-אָבִיהָ הִיא מְחַלֶּלֶת, בָּאֵשׁ תִּשָּׂרֵף.  {ס}    9 And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the harlot, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire. {S}
21.10 י  וְהַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל מֵאֶחָיו אֲשֶׁר-יוּצַק עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ שֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה, וּמִלֵּא אֶת-יָדוֹ, לִלְבֹּשׁ, אֶת-הַבְּגָדִים--אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ לֹא יִפְרָע, וּבְגָדָיו לֹא יִפְרֹם.    10 And the priest that is highest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil is poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not let the hair of his head go loose, nor rend his clothes;
21.11 יא  וְעַל כָּל-נַפְשֹׁת מֵת, לֹא יָבֹא:  לְאָבִיו וּלְאִמּוֹ, לֹא יִטַּמָּא.    11 neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother;
21.12 יב  וּמִן-הַמִּקְדָּשׁ, לֹא יֵצֵא, וְלֹא יְחַלֵּל, אֵת מִקְדַּשׁ אֱלֹהָיו:  כִּי נֵזֶר שֶׁמֶן מִשְׁחַת אֱלֹהָיו, עָלָיו--אֲנִי יְהוָה.    12 neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the consecration of the anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD.
21.13 יג  וְהוּא, אִשָּׁה בִבְתוּלֶיהָ יִקָּח.    13 And he shall take a wife in her virginity.
21.14 יד  אַלְמָנָה וּגְרוּשָׁה וַחֲלָלָה זֹנָה, אֶת-אֵלֶּה לֹא יִקָּח:  כִּי אִם-בְּתוּלָה מֵעַמָּיו, יִקַּח אִשָּׁה.    14 A widow, or one divorced, or a profaned woman, or a harlot, these shall he not take; but a virgin of his own people shall he take to wife.
21.15 טו  וְלֹא-יְחַלֵּל זַרְעוֹ, בְּעַמָּיו:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, מְקַדְּשׁוֹ.  {ס}    15 And he shall not profane his seed among his people; for I am the LORD who sanctify him. {S}
21.16 טז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    16 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
21.17 יז  דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, לֵאמֹר:  אִישׁ מִזַּרְעֲךָ לְדֹרֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה בוֹ מוּם--לֹא יִקְרַב, לְהַקְרִיב לֶחֶם אֱלֹהָיו.    17 Speak unto Aaron, saying: Whosoever he be of thy seed throughout their generations that hath a blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.
21.18 יח  כִּי כָל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ מוּם, לֹא יִקְרָב:  אִישׁ עִוֵּר אוֹ פִסֵּחַ, אוֹ חָרֻם אוֹ שָׂרוּעַ.    18 For whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath any thing maimed, or anything too long,
21.19 יט  אוֹ אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-יִהְיֶה בוֹ שֶׁבֶר רָגֶל, אוֹ, שֶׁבֶר יָד.    19 or a man that is broken-footed, or broken-handed,
21.20 כ  אוֹ-גִבֵּן אוֹ-דַק, אוֹ תְּבַלֻּל בְּעֵינוֹ, אוֹ גָרָב אוֹ יַלֶּפֶת, אוֹ מְרוֹחַ אָשֶׁךְ.    20 or crook-backed, or a dwarf, or that hath his eye overspread, or is scabbed, or scurvy, or hath his stones crushed;
21.21 כא  כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ מוּם, מִזֶּרַע אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן--לֹא יִגַּשׁ, לְהַקְרִיב אֶת-אִשֵּׁי יְהוָה:  מוּם בּוֹ--אֵת לֶחֶם אֱלֹהָיו, לֹא יִגַּשׁ לְהַקְרִיב.    21 no man of the seed of Aaron the priest, that hath a blemish, shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the LORD made by fire; he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God.
21.22 כב  לֶחֶם אֱלֹהָיו, מִקָּדְשֵׁי הַקֳּדָשִׁים, וּמִן-הַקֳּדָשִׁים, יֹאכֵל.    22 He may eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy.
21.23 כג  אַךְ אֶל-הַפָּרֹכֶת לֹא יָבֹא, וְאֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ לֹא יִגַּשׁ--כִּי-מוּם בּוֹ; וְלֹא יְחַלֵּל אֶת-מִקְדָּשַׁי, כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה מְקַדְּשָׁם.    23 Only he shall not go in unto the veil, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not My holy places; for I am the LORD who sanctify them.
21.24 כד  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו, וְאֶל-כָּל-בְּנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    24 So Moses spoke unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel. {P}
22.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
22.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו, וְיִנָּזְרוּ מִקָּדְשֵׁי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלֹא יְחַלְּלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי--אֲשֶׁר הֵם מַקְדִּשִׁים לִי, אֲנִי יְהוָה.    2 Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, which they hallow unto Me, and that they profane not My holy name: I am the LORD.
22.3 ג  אֱמֹר אֲלֵהֶם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם כָּל-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִקְרַב מִכָּל-זַרְעֲכֶם אֶל-הַקֳּדָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר יַקְדִּישׁוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לַיהוָה, וְטֻמְאָתוֹ, עָלָיו:  וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מִלְּפָנַי--אֲנִי יְהוָה.    3 Say unto them: Whosoever he be of all your seed throughout your generations, that approacheth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from before Me: I am the LORD.
22.4 ד  אִישׁ אִישׁ מִזֶּרַע אַהֲרֹן, וְהוּא צָרוּעַ אוֹ זָב--בַּקֳּדָשִׁים לֹא יֹאכַל, עַד אֲשֶׁר יִטְהָר; וְהַנֹּגֵעַ, בְּכָל-טְמֵא-נֶפֶשׁ, אוֹ אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-תֵּצֵא מִמֶּנּוּ שִׁכְבַת-זָרַע.    4 What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath an issue, he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any one that is unclean by the dead; or from whomsoever the flow of seed goeth out;
22.5 ה  אוֹ-אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר יִגַּע, בְּכָל-שֶׁרֶץ אֲשֶׁר יִטְמָא-לוֹ; אוֹ בְאָדָם אֲשֶׁר יִטְמָא-לוֹ, לְכֹל טֻמְאָתוֹ.    5 or whosoever toucheth any swarming thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath;
22.6 ו  נֶפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר תִּגַּע-בּוֹ, וְטָמְאָה עַד-הָעָרֶב; וְלֹא יֹאכַל מִן-הַקֳּדָשִׁים, כִּי אִם-רָחַץ בְּשָׂרוֹ בַּמָּיִם.    6 the soul that toucheth any such shall be unclean until the even, and shall not eat of the holy things, unless he bathe his flesh in water.
22.7 ז  וּבָא הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, וְטָהֵר; וְאַחַר יֹאכַל מִן-הַקֳּדָשִׁים, כִּי לַחְמוֹ הוּא.    7 And when the sun is down, he shall be clean; and afterward he may eat of the holy things, because it is his bread.
22.8 ח  נְבֵלָה וּטְרֵפָה לֹא יֹאכַל, לְטָמְאָה-בָהּ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    8 That which dieth of itself, or is torn of beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself therewith: I am the LORD.
22.9 ט  וְשָׁמְרוּ אֶת-מִשְׁמַרְתִּי, וְלֹא-יִשְׂאוּ עָלָיו חֵטְא, וּמֵתוּ בוֹ, כִּי יְחַלְּלֻהוּ:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, מְקַדְּשָׁם.    9 They shall therefore keep My charge, lest they bear sin for it, and die therein, if they profane it: I am the LORD who sanctify them.
22.10 י  וְכָל-זָר, לֹא-יֹאכַל קֹדֶשׁ; תּוֹשַׁב כֹּהֵן וְשָׂכִיר, לֹא-יֹאכַל קֹדֶשׁ.    10 There shall no common man eat of the holy thing; a tenant of a priest, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.
22.11 יא  וְכֹהֵן, כִּי-יִקְנֶה נֶפֶשׁ קִנְיַן כַּסְפּוֹ--הוּא, יֹאכַל בּוֹ; וִילִיד בֵּיתוֹ, הֵם יֹאכְלוּ בְלַחְמוֹ.    11 But if a priest buy any soul, the purchase of his money, he may eat of it; and such as are born in his house, they may eat of his bread.
22.12 יב  וּבַת-כֹּהֵן--כִּי תִהְיֶה, לְאִישׁ זָר:  הִוא, בִּתְרוּמַת הַקֳּדָשִׁים לֹא תֹאכֵל.    12 And if a priest's daughter be married unto a common man, she shall not eat of that which is set apart from the holy things.
22.13 יג  וּבַת-כֹּהֵן כִּי תִהְיֶה אַלְמָנָה וּגְרוּשָׁה, וְזֶרַע אֵין לָהּ--וְשָׁבָה אֶל-בֵּית אָבִיהָ כִּנְעוּרֶיהָ, מִלֶּחֶם אָבִיהָ תֹּאכֵל; וְכָל-זָר, לֹא-יֹאכַל בּוֹ.    13 But if a priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned unto her father's house, as in her youth, she may eat of her father's bread; but there shall no common man eat thereof.
22.14 יד  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-יֹאכַל קֹדֶשׁ בִּשְׁגָגָה--וְיָסַף חֲמִשִׁיתוֹ עָלָיו, וְנָתַן לַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ.    14 And if a man eat of the holy thing through error, then he shall put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give unto the priest the holy thing.
22.15 טו  וְלֹא יְחַלְּלוּ, אֶת-קָדְשֵׁי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֵת אֲשֶׁר-יָרִימוּ, לַיהוָה.    15 And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, which they set apart unto the LORD;
22.16 טז  וְהִשִּׂיאוּ אוֹתָם עֲוֺן אַשְׁמָה, בְּאָכְלָם אֶת-קָדְשֵׁיהֶם:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, מְקַדְּשָׁם.  {פ}    16 and so cause them to bear the iniquity that bringeth guilt, when they eat their holy things; for I am the LORD who sanctify them. {P}
22.17 יז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    17 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
22.18 יח  דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו, וְאֶל כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֲלֵהֶם:  אִישׁ אִישׁ מִבֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל וּמִן-הַגֵּר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יַקְרִיב קָרְבָּנוֹ לְכָל-נִדְרֵיהֶם וּלְכָל-נִדְבוֹתָם, אֲשֶׁר-יַקְרִיבוּ לַיהוָה, לְעֹלָה.    18 Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them: Whosoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that bringeth his offering, whether it be any of their vows, or any of their free-will-offerings, which are brought unto the LORD for a burnt-offering;
22.19 יט  לִרְצֹנְכֶם:  תָּמִים זָכָר--בַּבָּקָר, בַּכְּשָׂבִים וּבָעִזִּים.    19 that ye may be accepted, ye shall offer a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.
22.20 כ  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ מוּם, לֹא תַקְרִיבוּ:  כִּי-לֹא לְרָצוֹן, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם.    20 But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not bring; for it shall not be acceptable for you.
22.21 כא  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-יַקְרִיב זֶבַח-שְׁלָמִים לַיהוָה, לְפַלֵּא-נֶדֶר אוֹ לִנְדָבָה, בַּבָּקָר אוֹ בַצֹּאן--תָּמִים יִהְיֶה לְרָצוֹן, כָּל-מוּם לֹא יִהְיֶה-בּוֹ.    21 And whosoever bringeth a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the LORD in fulfilment of a vow clearly uttered, or for a freewill-offering, of the herd or of the flock, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.
22.22 כב  עַוֶּרֶת אוֹ שָׁבוּר אוֹ-חָרוּץ אוֹ-יַבֶּלֶת, אוֹ גָרָב אוֹ יַלֶּפֶת--לֹא-תַקְרִיבוּ אֵלֶּה, לַיהוָה; וְאִשֶּׁה, לֹא-תִתְּנוּ מֵהֶם עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ--לַיהוָה.    22 Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scabbed, or scurvy, ye shall not offer these unto the LORD, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD.
22.23 כג  וְשׁוֹר וָשֶׂה, שָׂרוּעַ וְקָלוּט--נְדָבָה תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתוֹ, וּלְנֵדֶר לֹא יֵרָצֶה.    23 Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing too long or too short, that mayest thou offer for a freewill-offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.
22.24 כד  וּמָעוּךְ וְכָתוּת וְנָתוּק וְכָרוּת, לֹא תַקְרִיבוּ לַיהוָה; וּבְאַרְצְכֶם, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.    24 That which hath its stones bruised, or crushed, or torn, or cut, ye shall not offer unto the LORD; neither shall ye do thus in your land.
22.25 כה  וּמִיַּד בֶּן-נֵכָר, לֹא תַקְרִיבוּ אֶת-לֶחֶם אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--מִכָּל-אֵלֶּה:  כִּי מָשְׁחָתָם בָּהֶם מוּם בָּם, לֹא יֵרָצוּ לָכֶם.  {ס}    25 Neither from the hand of a foreigner shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these, because their corruption is in them, there is a blemish in them; they shall not be accepted for you. {S}
22.26 כו  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    26 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
22.27 כז  שׁוֹר אוֹ-כֶשֶׂב אוֹ-עֵז כִּי יִוָּלֵד, וְהָיָה שִׁבְעַת יָמִים תַּחַת אִמּוֹ; וּמִיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, וָהָלְאָה, יֵרָצֶה, לְקָרְבַּן אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.    27 When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam; but from the eighth day and thenceforth it may be accepted for an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
22.28 כח  וְשׁוֹר, אוֹ-שֶׂה--אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-בְּנוֹ, לֹא תִשְׁחֲטוּ בְּיוֹם אֶחָד.    28 And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and its young both in one day.
22.29 כט  וְכִי-תִזְבְּחוּ זֶבַח-תּוֹדָה, לַיהוָה--לִרְצֹנְכֶם, תִּזְבָּחוּ.    29 And when ye sacrifice a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the LORD, ye shall sacrifice it that ye may be accepted.
22.30 ל  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא יֵאָכֵל, לֹא-תוֹתִירוּ מִמֶּנּוּ עַד-בֹּקֶר:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    30 On the same day it shall be eaten; ye shall leave none of it until the morning: I am the LORD.
22.31 לא  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, מִצְוֺתַי, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם, אֹתָם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.    31 And ye shall keep My commandments, and do them: I am the LORD.
22.32 לב  וְלֹא תְחַלְּלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשִׁי, וְנִקְדַּשְׁתִּי, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אֲנִי יְהוָה, מְקַדִּשְׁכֶם.    32 And ye shall not profane My holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel: I am the LORD who hallow you,
22.33 לג  הַמּוֹצִיא אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לִהְיוֹת לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.  {פ}    33 that brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD. {P}
23.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
23.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, מוֹעֲדֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-תִּקְרְאוּ אֹתָם מִקְרָאֵי קֹדֶשׁ--אֵלֶּה הֵם, מוֹעֲדָי.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: The appointed seasons of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are My appointed seasons.
23.3 ג  שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים, תֵּעָשֶׂה מְלָאכָה, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ, כָּל-מְלָאכָה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ:  שַׁבָּת הִוא לַיהוָה, בְּכֹל מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם.  {פ}    3 Six days shall work be done; but on the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of work; it is a sabbath unto the LORD in all your dwellings. {P}
23.4 ד  אֵלֶּה מוֹעֲדֵי יְהוָה, מִקְרָאֵי קֹדֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר-תִּקְרְאוּ אֹתָם, בְּמוֹעֲדָם.    4 These are the appointed seasons of the LORD, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their appointed season.
23.5 ה  בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר לַחֹדֶשׁ--בֵּין הָעַרְבָּיִם:  פֶּסַח, לַיהוָה.    5 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at dusk, is the LORD'S passover.
23.6 ו  וּבַחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, חַג הַמַּצּוֹת לַיהוָה:  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, מַצּוֹת תֹּאכֵלוּ.    6 And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the LORD; seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread.
23.7 ז  בַּיּוֹם, הָרִאשׁוֹן, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם; כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.    7 In the first day ye shall have a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work.
23.8 ח  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ, כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.  {פ}    8 And ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD seven days; in the seventh day is a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work. {P}
23.9 ט  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    9 And the LORD spoke unto Moses saying:
23.10 י  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, כִּי-תָבֹאוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי נֹתֵן לָכֶם, וּקְצַרְתֶּם אֶת-קְצִירָהּ--וַהֲבֵאתֶם אֶת-עֹמֶר רֵאשִׁית קְצִירְכֶם, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן.    10 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye are come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring the sheaf of the first-fruits of your harvest unto the priest.
23.11 יא  וְהֵנִיף אֶת-הָעֹמֶר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לִרְצֹנְכֶם; מִמָּחֳרַת, הַשַּׁבָּת, יְנִיפֶנּוּ, הַכֹּהֵן.    11 And he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD, to be accepted for you; on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.
23.12 יב  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם, בְּיוֹם הֲנִיפְכֶם אֶת-הָעֹמֶר, כֶּבֶשׂ תָּמִים בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ לְעֹלָה, לַיהוָה.    12 And in the day when ye wave the sheaf, ye shall offer a he-lamb without blemish of the first year for a burnt-offering unto the LORD.
23.13 יג  וּמִנְחָתוֹ שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה--רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ; וְנִסְכֹּה יַיִן, רְבִיעִת הַהִין.    13 And the meal-offering thereof shall be two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the LORD for a sweet savour; and the drink-offering thereof shall be of wine, the fourth part of a hin.
23.14 יד  וְלֶחֶם וְקָלִי וְכַרְמֶל לֹא תֹאכְלוּ, עַד-עֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--עַד הֲבִיאֲכֶם, אֶת-קָרְבַּן אֱלֹהֵיכֶם:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, בְּכֹל מֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם.  {ס}    14 And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor fresh ears, until this selfsame day, until ye have brought the offering of your God; it is a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings. {S}
23.15 טו  וּסְפַרְתֶּם לָכֶם, מִמָּחֳרַת הַשַּׁבָּת, מִיּוֹם הֲבִיאֲכֶם, אֶת-עֹמֶר הַתְּנוּפָה:  שֶׁבַע שַׁבָּתוֹת, תְּמִימֹת תִּהְיֶינָה.    15 And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the day of rest, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the waving; seven weeks shall there be complete;
23.16 טז  עַד מִמָּחֳרַת הַשַּׁבָּת הַשְּׁבִיעִת, תִּסְפְּרוּ חֲמִשִּׁים יוֹם; וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם מִנְחָה חֲדָשָׁה, לַיהוָה.    16 even unto the morrow after the seventh week shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall present a new meal-offering unto the LORD.
23.17 יז  מִמּוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם תָּבִיאּוּ לֶחֶם תְּנוּפָה, שְׁתַּיִם שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים--סֹלֶת תִּהְיֶינָה, חָמֵץ תֵּאָפֶינָה:  בִּכּוּרִים, לַיהוָה.    17 Ye shall bring out of your dwellings two wave-loaves of two tenth parts of an ephah; they shall be of fine flour, they shall be baked with leaven, for first-fruits unto the LORD.
23.18 יח  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם עַל-הַלֶּחֶם, שִׁבְעַת כְּבָשִׂים תְּמִימִם בְּנֵי שָׁנָה, וּפַר בֶּן-בָּקָר אֶחָד, וְאֵילִם שְׁנָיִם:  יִהְיוּ עֹלָה, לַיהוָה, וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם, אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ לַיהוָה.    18 And ye shall present with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams; they shall be a burnt-offering unto the LORD, with their meal-offering, and their drink-offerings, even an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
23.19 יט  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת; וּשְׁנֵי כְבָשִׂים בְּנֵי שָׁנָה, לְזֶבַח שְׁלָמִים.    19 And ye shall offer one he-goat for a sin-offering, and two he-lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace-offerings.
23.20 כ  וְהֵנִיף הַכֹּהֵן אֹתָם עַל לֶחֶם הַבִּכֻּרִים תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, עַל-שְׁנֵי, כְּבָשִׂים; קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיוּ לַיהוָה, לַכֹּהֵן.    20 And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the first-fruits for a wave-offering before the LORD, with the two lambs; they shall be holy to the LORD for the priest.
23.21 כא  וּקְרָאתֶם בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם--כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם בְּכָל-מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.    21 And ye shall make proclamation on the selfsame day; there shall be a holy convocation unto you; ye shall do no manner of servile work; it is a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.
23.22 כב  וּבְקֻצְרְכֶם אֶת-קְצִיר אַרְצְכֶם, לֹא-תְכַלֶּה פְּאַת שָׂדְךָ בְּקֻצְרֶךָ, וְלֶקֶט קְצִירְךָ, לֹא תְלַקֵּט; לֶעָנִי וְלַגֵּר תַּעֲזֹב אֹתָם, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.  {פ}    22 And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corner of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest; thou shalt leave them for the poor, and for the stranger: I am the LORD your God. {P}
23.23 כג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    23 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
23.24 כד  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם שַׁבָּתוֹן--זִכְרוֹן תְּרוּעָה, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ.    24 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shall be a solemn rest unto you, a memorial proclaimed with the blast of horns, a holy convocation.
23.25 כה  כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ; וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם אִשֶּׁה, לַיהוָה.  {ס}    25 Ye shall do no manner of servile work; and ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD. {S}
23.26 כו  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    26 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
23.27 כז  אַךְ בֶּעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי הַזֶּה יוֹם הַכִּפֻּרִים הוּא, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, וְעִנִּיתֶם, אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם; וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם אִשֶּׁה, לַיהוָה.    27 Howbeit on the tenth day of this seventh month is the day of atonement; there shall be a holy convocation unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls; and ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
23.28 כח  וְכָל-מְלָאכָה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ, בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה:  כִּי יוֹם כִּפֻּרִים, הוּא, לְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיכֶם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    28 And ye shall do no manner of work in that same day; for it is a day of atonement, to make atonement for you before the LORD your God.
23.29 כט  כִּי כָל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר לֹא-תְעֻנֶּה, בְּעֶצֶם הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--וְנִכְרְתָה, מֵעַמֶּיהָ.    29 For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from his people.
23.30 ל  וְכָל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשֶׂה כָּל-מְלָאכָה, בְּעֶצֶם, הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--וְהַאֲבַדְתִּי אֶת-הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מִקֶּרֶב עַמָּהּ.    30 And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any manner of work in that same day, that soul will I destroy from among his people.
23.31 לא  כָּל-מְלָאכָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, בְּכֹל מֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם.    31 Ye shall do no manner of work; it is a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
23.32 לב  שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן הוּא לָכֶם, וְעִנִּיתֶם אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם; בְּתִשְׁעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ, בָּעֶרֶב--מֵעֶרֶב עַד-עֶרֶב, תִּשְׁבְּתוּ שַׁבַּתְּכֶם.  {פ}    32 It shall be unto you a sabbath of solemn rest, and ye shall afflict your souls; in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto even, shall ye keep your sabbath. {P}
23.33 לג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    33 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
23.34 לד  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם, לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי הַזֶּה, חַג הַסֻּכּוֹת שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, לַיהוָה.    34 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the LORD.
23.35 לה  בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ; כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.    35 On the first day shall be a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work.
23.36 לו  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, תַּקְרִיבוּ אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה; בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה, עֲצֶרֶת הִוא--כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.    36 Seven days ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD; on the eighth day shall be a holy convocation unto you; and ye shall bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD; it is a day of solemn assembly; ye shall do no manner of servile work.
23.37 לז  אֵלֶּה מוֹעֲדֵי יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר-תִּקְרְאוּ אֹתָם מִקְרָאֵי קֹדֶשׁ:  לְהַקְרִיב אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה, עֹלָה וּמִנְחָה זֶבַח וּנְסָכִים--דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ.    37 These are the appointed seasons of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to bring an offering made by fire unto the LORD, a burnt-offering, and a meal-offering, a sacrifice, and drink-offerings, each on its own day;
23.38 לח  מִלְּבַד, שַׁבְּתֹת יְהוָה; וּמִלְּבַד מַתְּנוֹתֵיכֶם, וּמִלְּבַד כָּל-נִדְרֵיכֶם וּמִלְּבַד כָּל-נִדְבֹתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְּנוּ, לַיהוָה.    38 beside the sabbaths of the LORD, and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your freewill-offerings, which ye give unto the LORD.
23.39 לט  אַךְ בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, בְּאָסְפְּכֶם אֶת-תְּבוּאַת הָאָרֶץ, תָּחֹגּוּ אֶת-חַג-יְהוָה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן שַׁבָּתוֹן, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי שַׁבָּתוֹן.    39 Howbeit on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruits of the land, ye shall keep the feast of the LORD seven days; on the first day shall be a solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest.
23.40 מ  וּלְקַחְתֶּם לָכֶם בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן, פְּרִי עֵץ הָדָר כַּפֹּת תְּמָרִים, וַעֲנַף עֵץ-עָבֹת, וְעַרְבֵי-נָחַל; וּשְׂמַחְתֶּם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.    40 And ye shall take you on the first day the fruit of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook, and ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God seven days.
23.41 מא  וְחַגֹּתֶם אֹתוֹ חַג לַיהוָה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים בַּשָּׁנָה:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי תָּחֹגּוּ אֹתוֹ.    41 And ye shall keep it a feast unto the LORD seven days in the year; it is a statute for ever in your generations; ye shall keep it in the seventh month.
23.42 מב  בַּסֻּכֹּת תֵּשְׁבוּ, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; כָּל-הָאֶזְרָח, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, יֵשְׁבוּ, בַּסֻּכֹּת.    42 Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are home-born in Israel shall dwell in booths;
23.43 מג  לְמַעַן, יֵדְעוּ דֹרֹתֵיכֶם, כִּי בַסֻּכּוֹת הוֹשַׁבְתִּי אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּהוֹצִיאִי אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    43 that your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
23.44 מד  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-מֹעֲדֵי יְהוָה, אֶל-בְּנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}    44 And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the appointed seasons of the LORD. {P}
24.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
24.2 ב  צַו אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִקְחוּ אֵלֶיךָ שֶׁמֶן זַיִת זָךְ כָּתִית--לַמָּאוֹר:  לְהַעֲלֹת נֵר, תָּמִיד.    2 'Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure olive oil beaten for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually.
24.3 ג  מִחוּץ לְפָרֹכֶת הָעֵדֻת בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, יַעֲרֹךְ אֹתוֹ אַהֲרֹן מֵעֶרֶב עַד-בֹּקֶר לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--תָּמִיד:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.    3 Without the veil of the testimony, in the tent of meeting, shall Aaron order it from evening to morning before the LORD continually; it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations.
24.4 ד  עַל הַמְּנֹרָה הַטְּהֹרָה, יַעֲרֹךְ אֶת-הַנֵּרוֹת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, תָּמִיד.  {פ}    4 He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the LORD continually. {P}
24.5 ה  וְלָקַחְתָּ סֹלֶת--וְאָפִיתָ אֹתָהּ, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה חַלּוֹת; שְׁנֵי, עֶשְׂרֹנִים, יִהְיֶה, הַחַלָּה הָאֶחָת.    5 And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth parts of an ephah shall be in one cake.
24.6 ו  וְשַׂמְתָּ אוֹתָם שְׁתַּיִם מַעֲרָכוֹת, שֵׁשׁ הַמַּעֲרָכֶת, עַל הַשֻּׁלְחָן הַטָּהֹר, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.    6 And thou shalt set them in two rows, six in a row, upon the pure table before the LORD.
24.7 ז  וְנָתַתָּ עַל-הַמַּעֲרֶכֶת, לְבֹנָה זַכָּה; וְהָיְתָה לַלֶּחֶם לְאַזְכָּרָה, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.    7 And thou shalt put pure frankincense with each row, that it may be to the bread for a memorial-part, even an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
24.8 ח  בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, יַעַרְכֶנּוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--תָּמִיד:  מֵאֵת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּרִית עוֹלָם.    8 Every sabbath day he shall set it in order before the LORD continually; it is from the children of Israel, an everlasting covenant.
24.9 ט  וְהָיְתָה לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו, וַאֲכָלֻהוּ בְּמָקוֹם קָדֹשׁ:  כִּי קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים הוּא לוֹ, מֵאִשֵּׁי יְהוָה--חָק-עוֹלָם.  {ס}    9 And it shall be for Aaron and his sons; and they shall eat it in a holy place; for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, a perpetual due.' {S}
24.10 י  וַיֵּצֵא, בֶּן-אִשָּׁה יִשְׂרְאֵלִית, וְהוּא בֶּן-אִישׁ מִצְרִי, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּנָּצוּ, בַּמַּחֲנֶה, בֶּן הַיִּשְׂרְאֵלִית, וְאִישׁ הַיִּשְׂרְאֵלִי.    10 And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel; and the son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp.
24.11 יא  וַיִּקֹּב בֶּן-הָאִשָּׁה הַיִּשְׂרְאֵלִית אֶת-הַשֵּׁם, וַיְקַלֵּל, וַיָּבִיאוּ אֹתוֹ, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וְשֵׁם אִמּוֹ שְׁלֹמִית בַּת-דִּבְרִי, לְמַטֵּה-דָן.    11 And the son of the Israelitish woman blasphemed the Name, and cursed; and they brought him unto Moses. And his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.
24.12 יב  וַיַּנִּיחֻהוּ, בַּמִּשְׁמָר, לִפְרֹשׁ לָהֶם, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה.  {פ}    12 And they put him in ward, that it might be declared unto them at the mouth of the LORD. {P}
24.13 יג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    13 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
24.14 יד  הוֹצֵא אֶת-הַמְקַלֵּל, אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, וְסָמְכוּ כָל-הַשֹּׁמְעִים אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ; וְרָגְמוּ אֹתוֹ, כָּל-הָעֵדָה.    14 'Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.
24.15 טו  וְאֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, תְּדַבֵּר לֵאמֹר:  אִישׁ אִישׁ כִּי-יְקַלֵּל אֱלֹהָיו, וְנָשָׂא חֶטְאוֹ.    15 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying: Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin.
24.16 טז  וְנֹקֵב שֵׁם-יְהוָה מוֹת יוּמָת, רָגוֹם יִרְגְּמוּ-בוֹ כָּל-הָעֵדָה:  כַּגֵּר, כָּאֶזְרָח--בְּנָקְבוֹ-שֵׁם, יוּמָת.    16 And he that blasphemeth the name of the LORD, he shall surely be put to death; all the congregation shall certainly stone him; as well the stranger, as the home-born, when he blasphemeth the Name, shall be put to death.
24.17 יז  וְאִישׁ, כִּי יַכֶּה כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ אָדָם--מוֹת, יוּמָת.    17 And he that smiteth any man mortally shall surely be put to death.
24.18 יח  וּמַכֵּה נֶפֶשׁ-בְּהֵמָה, יְשַׁלְּמֶנָּה--נֶפֶשׁ, תַּחַת נָפֶשׁ.    18 And he that smiteth a beast mortally shall make it good: life for life.
24.19 יט  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-יִתֵּן מוּם בַּעֲמִיתוֹ--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, כֵּן יֵעָשֶׂה לּוֹ.    19 And if a man maim his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him:
24.20 כ  שֶׁבֶר, תַּחַת שֶׁבֶר, עַיִן תַּחַת עַיִן, שֵׁן תַּחַת שֵׁן--כַּאֲשֶׁר יִתֵּן מוּם בָּאָדָם, כֵּן יִנָּתֶן בּוֹ.    20 breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; as he hath maimed a man, so shall it be rendered unto him.
24.21 כא  וּמַכֵּה בְהֵמָה, יְשַׁלְּמֶנָּה; וּמַכֵּה אָדָם, יוּמָת.    21 And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; and he that killeth a man shall be put to death.
24.22 כב  מִשְׁפַּט אֶחָד יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, כַּגֵּר כָּאֶזְרָח יִהְיֶה:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    22 Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for the home-born; for I am the LORD your God.'
24.23 כג  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיּוֹצִיאוּ אֶת-הַמְקַלֵּל אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיִּרְגְּמוּ אֹתוֹ אָבֶן; וּבְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל עָשׂוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}    23 And Moses spoke to the children of Israel, and they brought forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stoned him with stones. And the children of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
25.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בְּהַר סִינַי לֵאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying:
25.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, כִּי תָבֹאוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי נֹתֵן לָכֶם--וְשָׁבְתָה הָאָרֶץ, שַׁבָּת לַיהוָה.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the LORD.
25.3 ג  שֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים תִּזְרַע שָׂדֶךָ, וְשֵׁשׁ שָׁנִים תִּזְמֹר כַּרְמֶךָ; וְאָסַפְתָּ, אֶת-תְּבוּאָתָהּ.    3 Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the produce thereof.
25.4 ד  וּבַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִיעִת, שַׁבַּת שַׁבָּתוֹן יִהְיֶה לָאָרֶץ--שַׁבָּת, לַיהוָה:  שָׂדְךָ לֹא תִזְרָע, וְכַרְמְךָ לֹא תִזְמֹר.    4 But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of solemn rest for the land, a sabbath unto the LORD; thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.
25.5 ה  אֵת סְפִיחַ קְצִירְךָ לֹא תִקְצוֹר, וְאֶת-עִנְּבֵי נְזִירֶךָ לֹא תִבְצֹר:  שְׁנַת שַׁבָּתוֹן, יִהְיֶה לָאָרֶץ.    5 That which groweth of itself of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, and the grapes of thy undressed vine thou shalt not gather; it shall be a year of solemn rest for the land.
25.6 ו  וְהָיְתָה שַׁבַּת הָאָרֶץ לָכֶם, לְאָכְלָה--לְךָ, וּלְעַבְדְּךָ וְלַאֲמָתֶךָ; וְלִשְׂכִירְךָ, וּלְתוֹשָׁבְךָ, הַגָּרִים, עִמָּךְ.    6 And the sabbath-produce of the land shall be for food for you: for thee, and for thy servant and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant and for the settler by thy side that sojourn with thee;
25.7 ז  וְלִבְהֶמְתְּךָ--וְלַחַיָּה, אֲשֶׁר בְּאַרְצֶךָ:  תִּהְיֶה כָל-תְּבוּאָתָהּ, לֶאֱכֹל.  {ס}    7 and for thy cattle, and for the beasts that are in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be for food. {S}
25.8 ח  וְסָפַרְתָּ לְךָ, שֶׁבַע שַׁבְּתֹת שָׁנִים--שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים, שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים; וְהָיוּ לְךָ, יְמֵי שֶׁבַע שַׁבְּתֹת הַשָּׁנִים, תֵּשַׁע וְאַרְבָּעִים, שָׁנָה.    8 And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and there shall be unto thee the days of seven sabbaths of years, even forty and nine years.
25.9 ט  וְהַעֲבַרְתָּ שׁוֹפַר תְּרוּעָה, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִעִי, בֶּעָשׂוֹר, לַחֹדֶשׁ; בְּיוֹם, הַכִּפֻּרִים, תַּעֲבִירוּ שׁוֹפָר, בְּכָל-אַרְצְכֶם.    9 Then shalt thou make proclamation with the blast of the horn on the tenth day of the seventh month; in the day of atonement shall ye make proclamation with the horn throughout all your land.
25.10 י  וְקִדַּשְׁתֶּם, אֵת שְׁנַת הַחֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה, וּקְרָאתֶם דְּרוֹר בָּאָרֶץ, לְכָל-יֹשְׁבֶיהָ; יוֹבֵל הִוא, תִּהְיֶה לָכֶם, וְשַׁבְתֶּם אִישׁ אֶל-אֲחֻזָּתוֹ, וְאִישׁ אֶל-מִשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ תָּשֻׁבוּ.    10 And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout the land unto all the inhabitants thereof; it shall be a jubilee unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.
25.11 יא  יוֹבֵל הִוא, שְׁנַת הַחֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--תִּהְיֶה לָכֶם; לֹא תִזְרָעוּ--וְלֹא תִקְצְרוּ אֶת-סְפִיחֶיהָ, וְלֹא תִבְצְרוּ אֶת-נְזִרֶיהָ.    11 A jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you; ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of the undressed vines.
25.12 יב  כִּי יוֹבֵל הִוא, קֹדֶשׁ תִּהְיֶה לָכֶם; מִן-הַשָּׂדֶה--תֹּאכְלוּ, אֶת-תְּבוּאָתָהּ.    12 For it is a jubilee; it shall be holy unto you; ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.
25.13 יג  בִּשְׁנַת הַיּוֹבֵל, הַזֹּאת, תָּשֻׁבוּ, אִישׁ אֶל-אֲחֻזָּתוֹ.    13 In this year of jubilee ye shall return every man unto his possession.
25.14 יד  וְכִי-תִמְכְּרוּ מִמְכָּר לַעֲמִיתֶךָ, אוֹ קָנֹה מִיַּד עֲמִיתֶךָ--אַל-תּוֹנוּ, אִישׁ אֶת-אָחִיו.    14 And if thou sell aught unto thy neighbour, or buy of thy neighbour's hand, ye shall not wrong one another.
25.15 טו  בְּמִסְפַּר שָׁנִים אַחַר הַיּוֹבֵל, תִּקְנֶה מֵאֵת עֲמִיתֶךָ; בְּמִסְפַּר שְׁנֵי-תְבוּאֹת, יִמְכָּר-לָךְ.    15 According to the number of years after the jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the crops he shall sell unto thee.
25.16 טז  לְפִי רֹב הַשָּׁנִים, תַּרְבֶּה מִקְנָתוֹ, וּלְפִי מְעֹט הַשָּׁנִים, תַּמְעִיט מִקְנָתוֹ:  כִּי מִסְפַּר תְּבוּאֹת, הוּא מֹכֵר לָךְ.    16 According to the multitude of the years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of the years thou shalt diminish the price of it; for the number of crops doth he sell unto thee.
25.17 יז  וְלֹא תוֹנוּ אִישׁ אֶת-עֲמִיתוֹ, וְיָרֵאתָ מֵאֱלֹהֶיךָ:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    17 And ye shall not wrong one another; but thou shalt fear thy God; for I am the LORD your God.
25.18 יח  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם, אֶת-חֻקֹּתַי, וְאֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי תִּשְׁמְרוּ, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֹתָם--וִישַׁבְתֶּם עַל-הָאָרֶץ, לָבֶטַח.    18 Wherefore ye shall do My statutes, and keep Mine ordinances and do them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.
25.19 יט  וְנָתְנָה הָאָרֶץ פִּרְיָהּ, וַאֲכַלְתֶּם לָשֹׂבַע; וִישַׁבְתֶּם לָבֶטַח, עָלֶיהָ.    19 And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat until ye have enough, and dwell therein in safety.
25.20 כ  וְכִי תֹאמְרוּ, מַה-נֹּאכַל בַּשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִיעִת:  הֵן לֹא נִזְרָע, וְלֹא נֶאֱסֹף אֶת-תְּבוּאָתֵנוּ.    20 And if ye shall say: 'What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we may not sow, nor gather in our increase';
25.21 כא  וְצִוִּיתִי אֶת-בִּרְכָתִי לָכֶם, בַּשָּׁנָה הַשִּׁשִּׁית; וְעָשָׂת, אֶת-הַתְּבוּאָה, לִשְׁלֹשׁ, הַשָּׁנִים.    21 then I will command My blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth produce for the three years.
25.22 כב  וּזְרַעְתֶּם, אֵת הַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁמִינִת, וַאֲכַלְתֶּם, מִן-הַתְּבוּאָה יָשָׁן; עַד הַשָּׁנָה הַתְּשִׁיעִת, עַד-בּוֹא תְּבוּאָתָהּ--תֹּאכְלוּ, יָשָׁן.    22 And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat of the produce, the old store; until the ninth year, until her produce come in, ye shall eat the old store.
25.23 כג  וְהָאָרֶץ, לֹא תִמָּכֵר לִצְמִתֻת--כִּי-לִי, הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי-גֵרִים וְתוֹשָׁבִים אַתֶּם, עִמָּדִי.    23 And the land shall not be sold in perpetuity; for the land is Mine; for ye are strangers and settlers with Me.
25.24 כד  וּבְכֹל, אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזַּתְכֶם, גְּאֻלָּה, תִּתְּנוּ לָאָרֶץ.  {ס}    24 And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land. {S}
25.25 כה  כִּי-יָמוּךְ אָחִיךָ, וּמָכַר מֵאֲחֻזָּתוֹ--וּבָא גֹאֲלוֹ, הַקָּרֹב אֵלָיו, וְגָאַל, אֵת מִמְכַּר אָחִיו.    25 If thy brother be waxen poor, and sell some of his possession, then shall his kinsman that is next unto him come, and shall redeem that which his brother hath sold.
25.26 כו  וְאִישׁ, כִּי לֹא יִהְיֶה-לּוֹ גֹּאֵל, וְהִשִּׂיגָה יָדוֹ, וּמָצָא כְּדֵי גְאֻלָּתוֹ.    26 And if a man have no one to redeem it, and he be waxen rich and find sufficient means to redeem it;
25.27 כז  וְחִשַּׁב, אֶת-שְׁנֵי מִמְכָּרוֹ, וְהֵשִׁיב אֶת-הָעֹדֵף, לָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר מָכַר-לוֹ; וְשָׁב, לַאֲחֻזָּתוֹ.    27 then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; and he shall return unto his possession.
25.28 כח  וְאִם לֹא-מָצְאָה יָדוֹ, דֵּי הָשִׁיב לוֹ--וְהָיָה מִמְכָּרוֹ בְּיַד הַקֹּנֶה אֹתוֹ, עַד שְׁנַת הַיּוֹבֵל; וְיָצָא, בַּיֹּבֵל, וְשָׁב, לַאֲחֻזָּתוֹ.  {ס}    28 But if he have not sufficient means to get it back for himself, then that which he hath sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubilee; and in the jubilee it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession. {S}
25.29 כט  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-יִמְכֹּר בֵּית-מוֹשַׁב עִיר חוֹמָה--וְהָיְתָה גְּאֻלָּתוֹ, עַד-תֹּם שְׁנַת מִמְכָּרוֹ:  יָמִים, תִּהְיֶה גְאֻלָּתוֹ.    29 And if a man sell a dwelling-house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; for a full year shall he have the right of redemption.
25.30 ל  וְאִם לֹא-יִגָּאֵל, עַד-מְלֹאת לוֹ שָׁנָה תְמִימָה--וְקָם הַבַּיִת אֲשֶׁר-בָּעִיר אֲשֶׁר-לא (לוֹ) חֹמָה לַצְּמִיתֻת לַקֹּנֶה אֹתוֹ, לְדֹרֹתָיו:  לֹא יֵצֵא, בַּיֹּבֵל.    30 And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be made sure in perpetuity to him that bought it, throughout his generations; it shall not go out in the jubilee.
25.31 לא  וּבָתֵּי הַחֲצֵרִים, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לָהֶם חֹמָה סָבִיב--עַל-שְׂדֵה הָאָרֶץ, יֵחָשֵׁב:  גְּאֻלָּה, תִּהְיֶה-לּוֹ, וּבַיֹּבֵל, יֵצֵא.    31 But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be reckoned with the fields of the country; they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubilee.
25.32 לב  וְעָרֵי, הַלְוִיִּם--בָּתֵּי, עָרֵי אֲחֻזָּתָם:  גְּאֻלַּת עוֹלָם, תִּהְיֶה לַלְוִיִּם.    32 But as for the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities of their possession, the Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption.
25.33 לג  וַאֲשֶׁר יִגְאַל מִן-הַלְוִיִּם, וְיָצָא מִמְכַּר-בַּיִת וְעִיר אֲחֻזָּתוֹ בַּיֹּבֵל:  כִּי בָתֵּי עָרֵי הַלְוִיִּם, הִוא אֲחֻזָּתָם, בְּתוֹךְ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    33 And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold in the city of his possession, shall go out in the jubilee; for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel.
25.34 לד  וּשְׂדֵה מִגְרַשׁ עָרֵיהֶם, לֹא יִמָּכֵר:  כִּי-אֲחֻזַּת עוֹלָם הוּא, לָהֶם.  {ס}    34 But the fields of the open land about their cities may not be sold; for that is their perpetual possession. {S}
25.35 לה  וְכִי-יָמוּךְ אָחִיךָ, וּמָטָה יָדוֹ עִמָּךְ--וְהֶחֱזַקְתָּ בּוֹ, גֵּר וְתוֹשָׁב וָחַי עִמָּךְ.    35 And if thy brother be waxen poor, and his means fail with thee; then thou shalt uphold him: as a stranger and a settler shall he live with thee.
25.36 לו  אַל-תִּקַּח מֵאִתּוֹ נֶשֶׁךְ וְתַרְבִּית, וְיָרֵאתָ מֵאֱלֹהֶיךָ; וְחֵי אָחִיךָ, עִמָּךְ.    36 Take thou no interest of him or increase; but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee.
25.37 לז  אֶת-כַּסְפְּךָ--לֹא-תִתֵּן לוֹ, בְּנֶשֶׁךְ; וּבְמַרְבִּית, לֹא-תִתֵּן אָכְלֶךָ.    37 Thou shalt not give him thy money upon interest, nor give him thy victuals for increase.
25.38 לח  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-הוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם--לָתֵת לָכֶם אֶת-אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, לִהְיוֹת לָכֶם לֵאלֹהִים.  {ס}    38 I am the LORD your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, to be your God. {S}
25.39 לט  וְכִי-יָמוּךְ אָחִיךָ עִמָּךְ, וְנִמְכַּר-לָךְ--לֹא-תַעֲבֹד בּוֹ, עֲבֹדַת עָבֶד.    39 And if thy brother be waxen poor with thee, and sell himself unto thee, thou shalt not make him to serve as a bondservant.
25.40 מ  כְּשָׂכִיר כְּתוֹשָׁב, יִהְיֶה עִמָּךְ; עַד-שְׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל, יַעֲבֹד עִמָּךְ.    40 As a hired servant, and as a settler, he shall be with thee; he shall serve with thee unto the year of jubilee.
25.41 מא  וְיָצָא, מֵעִמָּךְ--הוּא, וּבָנָיו עִמּוֹ; וְשָׁב, אֶל-מִשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ, וְאֶל-אֲחֻזַּת אֲבֹתָיו, יָשׁוּב.    41 Then shall he go out from thee, he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return.
25.42 מב  כִּי-עֲבָדַי הֵם, אֲשֶׁר-הוֹצֵאתִי אֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; לֹא יִמָּכְרוּ, מִמְכֶּרֶת עָבֶד.    42 For they are My servants, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt; they shall not be sold as bondmen.
25.43 מג  לֹא-תִרְדֶּה בוֹ, בְּפָרֶךְ; וְיָרֵאתָ, מֵאֱלֹהֶיךָ.    43 Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God.
25.44 מד  וְעַבְדְּךָ וַאֲמָתְךָ, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיוּ-לָךְ:  מֵאֵת הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבֹתֵיכֶם--מֵהֶם תִּקְנוּ, עֶבֶד וְאָמָה.    44 And as for thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, whom thou mayest have: of the nations that are round about you, of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.
25.45 מה  וְגַם מִבְּנֵי הַתּוֹשָׁבִים הַגָּרִים עִמָּכֶם, מֵהֶם תִּקְנוּ, וּמִמִּשְׁפַּחְתָּם אֲשֶׁר עִמָּכֶם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹלִידוּ בְּאַרְצְכֶם; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם, לַאֲחֻזָּה.    45 Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them may ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they have begotten in your land; and they may be your possession.
25.46 מו  וְהִתְנַחַלְתֶּם אֹתָם לִבְנֵיכֶם אַחֲרֵיכֶם, לָרֶשֶׁת אֲחֻזָּה--לְעֹלָם, בָּהֶם תַּעֲבֹדוּ; וּבְאַחֵיכֶם בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אִישׁ בְּאָחִיו, לֹא-תִרְדֶּה בוֹ בְּפָרֶךְ.  {ס}    46 And ye may make them an inheritance for your children after you, to hold for a possession: of them may ye take your bondmen for ever; but over your brethren the children of Israel ye shall not rule, one over another, with rigour. {S}
25.47 מז  וְכִי תַשִּׂיג, יַד גֵּר וְתוֹשָׁב עִמָּךְ, וּמָךְ אָחִיךָ, עִמּוֹ; וְנִמְכַּר, לְגֵר תּוֹשָׁב עִמָּךְ, אוֹ לְעֵקֶר, מִשְׁפַּחַת גֵּר.    47 And if a stranger who is a settler with thee be waxen rich, and thy brother be waxen poor beside him, and sell himself unto the stranger who is a settler with thee, or to the offshoot of a stranger's family,
25.48 מח  אַחֲרֵי נִמְכַּר, גְּאֻלָּה תִּהְיֶה-לּוֹ:  אֶחָד מֵאֶחָיו, יִגְאָלֶנּוּ.    48 after that he is sold he may be redeemed; one of his brethren may redeem him;
25.49 מט  אוֹ-דֹדוֹ אוֹ בֶן-דֹּדוֹ, יִגְאָלֶנּוּ, אוֹ-מִשְּׁאֵר בְּשָׂרוֹ מִמִּשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ, יִגְאָלֶנּוּ; אוֹ-הִשִּׂיגָה יָדוֹ, וְנִגְאָל.    49 or his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him; or if he be waxen rich, he may redeem himself.
25.50 נ  וְחִשַּׁב, עִם-קֹנֵהוּ, מִשְּׁנַת הִמָּכְרוֹ לוֹ, עַד שְׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל; וְהָיָה כֶּסֶף מִמְכָּרוֹ, בְּמִסְפַּר שָׁנִים, כִּימֵי שָׂכִיר, יִהְיֶה עִמּוֹ.    50 And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he sold himself to him unto the year of jubilee; and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years; according to the time of a hired servant shall he be with him.
25.51 נא  אִם-עוֹד רַבּוֹת, בַּשָּׁנִים--לְפִיהֶן יָשִׁיב גְּאֻלָּתוֹ, מִכֶּסֶף מִקְנָתוֹ.    51 If there be yet many years, according unto them he shall give back the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for.
25.52 נב  וְאִם-מְעַט נִשְׁאַר בַּשָּׁנִים, עַד-שְׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל--וְחִשַּׁב-לוֹ; כְּפִי שָׁנָיו, יָשִׁיב אֶת-גְּאֻלָּתוֹ.    52 And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubilee, then he shall reckon with him; according unto his years shall he give back the price of his redemption.
25.53 נג  כִּשְׂכִיר שָׁנָה בְּשָׁנָה, יִהְיֶה עִמּוֹ; לֹא-יִרְדֶּנּוּ בְּפֶרֶךְ, לְעֵינֶיךָ.    53 As a servant hired year by year shall he be with him; he shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.
25.54 נד  וְאִם-לֹא יִגָּאֵל, בְּאֵלֶּה--וְיָצָא בִּשְׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל, הוּא וּבָנָיו עִמּוֹ.    54 And if he be not redeemed by any of these means, then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, he, and his children with him.
25.55 נה  כִּי-לִי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲבָדִים--עֲבָדַי הֵם, אֲשֶׁר-הוֹצֵאתִי אוֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    55 For unto Me the children of Israel are servants; they are My servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
26.1 א  לֹא-תַעֲשׂוּ לָכֶם אֱלִילִם, וּפֶסֶל וּמַצֵּבָה לֹא-תָקִימוּ לָכֶם, וְאֶבֶן מַשְׂכִּית לֹא תִתְּנוּ בְּאַרְצְכֶם, לְהִשְׁתַּחֲוֺת עָלֶיהָ:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.    1 Ye shall make you no idols, neither shall ye rear you up a graven image, or a pillar, neither shall ye place any figured stone in your land, to bow down unto it; for I am the LORD your God.
26.2 ב  אֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתַי תִּשְׁמֹרוּ, וּמִקְדָּשִׁי תִּירָאוּ:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה.  {פ}    2 Ye shall keep My sabbaths, and reverence My sanctuary: I am the LORD. {P}
26.3 ג  אִם-בְּחֻקֹּתַי, תֵּלֵכוּ; וְאֶת-מִצְוֺתַי תִּשְׁמְרוּ, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֹתָם.    3 If ye walk in My statutes, and keep My commandments, and do them;
26.4 ד  וְנָתַתִּי גִשְׁמֵיכֶם, בְּעִתָּם; וְנָתְנָה הָאָרֶץ יְבוּלָהּ, וְעֵץ הַשָּׂדֶה יִתֵּן פִּרְיוֹ.    4 then I will give your rains in their season, and the land shall yield her produce, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.
26.5 ה  וְהִשִּׂיג לָכֶם דַּיִשׁ אֶת-בָּצִיר, וּבָצִיר יַשִּׂיג אֶת-זָרַע; וַאֲכַלְתֶּם לַחְמְכֶם לָשֹׂבַע, וִישַׁבְתֶּם לָבֶטַח בְּאַרְצְכֶם.    5 And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time; and ye shall eat your bread until ye have enough, and dwell in your land safely.
26.6 ו  וְנָתַתִּי שָׁלוֹם בָּאָרֶץ, וּשְׁכַבְתֶּם וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד; וְהִשְׁבַּתִּי חַיָּה רָעָה, מִן-הָאָרֶץ, וְחֶרֶב, לֹא-תַעֲבֹר בְּאַרְצְכֶם.    6 And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid; and I will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land.
26.7 ז  וּרְדַפְתֶּם, אֶת-אֹיְבֵיכֶם; וְנָפְלוּ לִפְנֵיכֶם, לֶחָרֶב.    7 And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword.
26.8 ח  וְרָדְפוּ מִכֶּם חֲמִשָּׁה מֵאָה, וּמֵאָה מִכֶּם רְבָבָה יִרְדֹּפוּ; וְנָפְלוּ אֹיְבֵיכֶם לִפְנֵיכֶם, לֶחָרֶב.    8 And five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall chase ten thousand; and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.
26.9 ט  וּפָנִיתִי אֲלֵיכֶם--וְהִפְרֵיתִי אֶתְכֶם, וְהִרְבֵּיתִי אֶתְכֶם; וַהֲקִימֹתִי אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, אִתְּכֶם.    9 And I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you; and will establish My covenant with you.
26.10 י  וַאֲכַלְתֶּם יָשָׁן, נוֹשָׁן; וְיָשָׁן, מִפְּנֵי חָדָשׁ תּוֹצִיאוּ.    10 And ye shall eat old store long kept, and ye shall bring forth the old from before the new.
26.11 יא  וְנָתַתִּי מִשְׁכָּנִי, בְּתוֹכְכֶם; וְלֹא-תִגְעַל נַפְשִׁי, אֶתְכֶם.    11 And I will set My tabernacle among you, and My soul shall not abhor you.
26.12 יב  וְהִתְהַלַּכְתִּי, בְּתוֹכְכֶם, וְהָיִיתִי לָכֶם, לֵאלֹהִים; וְאַתֶּם, תִּהְיוּ-לִי לְעָם.    12 And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be My people.
26.13 יג  אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, מִהְיֹת לָהֶם, עֲבָדִים; וָאֶשְׁבֹּר מֹטֹת עֻלְּכֶם, וָאוֹלֵךְ אֶתְכֶם קוֹמְמִיּוּת.  {פ}    13 I am the LORD your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bars of your yoke, and made you go upright. {P}
26.14 יד  וְאִם-לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ, לִי; וְלֹא תַעֲשׂוּ, אֵת כָּל-הַמִּצְוֺת הָאֵלֶּה.    14 But if ye will not hearken unto Me, and will not do all these commandments;
26.15 טו  וְאִם-בְּחֻקֹּתַי תִּמְאָסוּ, וְאִם אֶת-מִשְׁפָּטַי תִּגְעַל נַפְשְׁכֶם, לְבִלְתִּי עֲשׂוֹת אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺתַי, לְהַפְרְכֶם אֶת-בְּרִיתִי.    15 and if ye shall reject My statutes, and if your soul abhor Mine ordinances, so that ye will not do all My commandments, but break My covenant;
26.16 טז  אַף-אֲנִי אֶעֱשֶׂה-זֹּאת לָכֶם, וְהִפְקַדְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם בֶּהָלָה אֶת-הַשַּׁחֶפֶת וְאֶת-הַקַּדַּחַת, מְכַלּוֹת עֵינַיִם, וּמְדִיבֹת נָפֶשׁ; וּזְרַעְתֶּם לָרִיק זַרְעֲכֶם, וַאֲכָלֻהוּ אֹיְבֵיכֶם.    16 I also will do this unto you: I will appoint terror over you, even consumption and fever, that shall make the eyes to fail, and the soul to languish; and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
26.17 יז  וְנָתַתִּי פָנַי בָּכֶם, וְנִגַּפְתֶּם לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיכֶם; וְרָדוּ בָכֶם שֹׂנְאֵיכֶם, וְנַסְתֶּם וְאֵין-רֹדֵף אֶתְכֶם.    17 And I will set My face against you, and ye shall be smitten before your enemies; they that hate you shall rule over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.
26.18 יח  וְאִם-עַד-אֵלֶּה--לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ, לִי:  וְיָסַפְתִּי לְיַסְּרָה אֶתְכֶם, שֶׁבַע עַל-חַטֹּאתֵיכֶם.    18 And if ye will not yet for these things hearken unto Me, then I will chastise you seven times more for your sins.
26.19 יט  וְשָׁבַרְתִּי, אֶת-גְּאוֹן עֻזְּכֶם; וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-שְׁמֵיכֶם כַּבַּרְזֶל, וְאֶת-אַרְצְכֶם כַּנְּחֻשָׁה.    19 And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass.
26.20 כ  וְתַם לָרִיק, כֹּחֲכֶם; וְלֹא-תִתֵּן אַרְצְכֶם, אֶת-יְבוּלָהּ, וְעֵץ הָאָרֶץ, לֹא יִתֵּן פִּרְיוֹ.    20 And your strength shall be spent in vain; for your land shall not yield her produce, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruit.
26.21 כא  וְאִם-תֵּלְכוּ עִמִּי קֶרִי, וְלֹא תֹאבוּ לִשְׁמֹעַ לִי--וְיָסַפְתִּי עֲלֵיכֶם מַכָּה, שֶׁבַע כְּחַטֹּאתֵיכֶם.    21 And if ye walk contrary unto Me, and will not hearken unto Me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.
26.22 כב  וְהִשְׁלַחְתִּי בָכֶם אֶת-חַיַּת הַשָּׂדֶה, וְשִׁכְּלָה אֶתְכֶם, וְהִכְרִיתָה אֶת-בְּהֶמְתְּכֶם, וְהִמְעִיטָה אֶתְכֶם; וְנָשַׁמּוּ, דַּרְכֵיכֶם.    22 And I will send the beast of the field among you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your ways shall become desolate.
26.23 כג  וְאִם-בְּאֵלֶּה--לֹא תִוָּסְרוּ, לִי; וַהֲלַכְתֶּם עִמִּי, קֶרִי.    23 And if in spite of these things ye will not be corrected unto Me, but will walk contrary unto Me;
26.24 כד  וְהָלַכְתִּי אַף-אֲנִי עִמָּכֶם, בְּקֶרִי; וְהִכֵּיתִי אֶתְכֶם גַּם-אָנִי, שֶׁבַע עַל-חַטֹּאתֵיכֶם.    24 then will I also walk contrary unto you; and I will smite you, even I, seven times for your sins.
26.25 כה  וְהֵבֵאתִי עֲלֵיכֶם חֶרֶב, נֹקֶמֶת נְקַם-בְּרִית, וְנֶאֱסַפְתֶּם, אֶל-עָרֵיכֶם; וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי דֶבֶר בְּתוֹכְכֶם, וְנִתַּתֶּם בְּיַד-אוֹיֵב.    25 And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall execute the vengeance of the covenant; and ye shall be gathered together within your cities; and I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
26.26 כו  בְּשִׁבְרִי לָכֶם, מַטֵּה-לֶחֶם, וְאָפוּ עֶשֶׂר נָשִׁים לַחְמְכֶם בְּתַנּוּר אֶחָד, וְהֵשִׁיבוּ לַחְמְכֶם בַּמִּשְׁקָל; וַאֲכַלְתֶּם, וְלֹא תִשְׂבָּעוּ.  {ס}    26 When I break your staff of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by weight; and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied. {S}
26.27 כז  וְאִם-בְּזֹאת--לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ, לִי; וַהֲלַכְתֶּם עִמִּי, בְּקֶרִי.    27 And if ye will not for all this hearken unto Me, but walk contrary unto Me;
26.28 כח  וְהָלַכְתִּי עִמָּכֶם, בַּחֲמַת-קֶרִי; וְיִסַּרְתִּי אֶתְכֶם אַף-אָנִי, שֶׁבַע עַל-חַטֹּאתֵיכֶם.    28 then I will walk contrary unto you in fury; and I also will chastise you seven times for your sins.
26.29 כט  וַאֲכַלְתֶּם, בְּשַׂר בְּנֵיכֶם; וּבְשַׂר בְּנֹתֵיכֶם, תֹּאכֵלוּ.    29 And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.
26.30 ל  וְהִשְׁמַדְתִּי אֶת-בָּמֹתֵיכֶם, וְהִכְרַתִּי אֶת-חַמָּנֵיכֶם, וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-פִּגְרֵיכֶם, עַל-פִּגְרֵי גִּלּוּלֵיכֶם; וְגָעֲלָה נַפְשִׁי, אֶתְכֶם.    30 And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your sun-pillars, and cast your carcasses upon the carcasses of your idols; and My soul shall abhor you.
26.31 לא  וְנָתַתִּי אֶת-עָרֵיכֶם חָרְבָּה, וַהֲשִׁמּוֹתִי אֶת-מִקְדְּשֵׁיכֶם; וְלֹא אָרִיחַ, בְּרֵיחַ נִיחֹחֲכֶם.    31 And I will make your cities a waste, and will bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.
26.32 לב  וַהֲשִׁמֹּתִי אֲנִי, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וְשָׁמְמוּ עָלֶיהָ אֹיְבֵיכֶם, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בָּהּ.    32 And I will bring the land into desolation; and your enemies that dwell therein shall be astonished at it.
26.33 לג  וְאֶתְכֶם אֱזָרֶה בַגּוֹיִם, וַהֲרִיקֹתִי אַחֲרֵיכֶם חָרֶב; וְהָיְתָה אַרְצְכֶם שְׁמָמָה, וְעָרֵיכֶם יִהְיוּ חָרְבָּה.    33 And you will I scatter among the nations, and I will draw out the sword after you; and your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be a waste.
26.34 לד  אָז תִּרְצֶה הָאָרֶץ אֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתֶיהָ, כֹּל יְמֵי הָשַּׁמָּה, וְאַתֶּם, בְּאֶרֶץ אֹיְבֵיכֶם; אָז תִּשְׁבַּת הָאָרֶץ, וְהִרְצָת אֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתֶיהָ.    34 Then shall the land be paid her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye are in your enemies' land; even then shall the land rest, and repay her sabbaths.
26.35 לה  כָּל-יְמֵי הָשַּׁמָּה, תִּשְׁבֹּת, אֵת אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שָׁבְתָה בְּשַׁבְּתֹתֵיכֶם, בְּשִׁבְתְּכֶם עָלֶיהָ.    35 As long as it lieth desolate it shall have rest; even the rest which it had not in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.
26.36 לו  וְהַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּכֶם--וְהֵבֵאתִי מֹרֶךְ בִּלְבָבָם, בְּאַרְצֹת אֹיְבֵיהֶם; וְרָדַף אֹתָם, קוֹל עָלֶה נִדָּף, וְנָסוּ מְנֻסַת-חֶרֶב וְנָפְלוּ, וְאֵין רֹדֵף.    36 And as for them that are left of you, I will send a faintness into their heart in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a driven leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as one fleeth from the sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.
26.37 לז  וְכָשְׁלוּ אִישׁ-בְּאָחִיו כְּמִפְּנֵי-חֶרֶב, וְרֹדֵף אָיִן; וְלֹא-תִהְיֶה לָכֶם תְּקוּמָה, לִפְנֵי אֹיְבֵיכֶם.    37 And they shall stumble one upon another, as it were before the sword, when none pursueth; and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.
26.38 לח  וַאֲבַדְתֶּם, בַּגּוֹיִם; וְאָכְלָה אֶתְכֶם, אֶרֶץ אֹיְבֵיכֶם.    38 And ye shall perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.
26.39 לט  וְהַנִּשְׁאָרִים בָּכֶם, יִמַּקּוּ בַּעֲוֺנָם, בְּאַרְצֹת, אֹיְבֵיכֶם; וְאַף בַּעֲוֺנֹת אֲבֹתָם, אִתָּם יִמָּקּוּ.    39 And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.
26.40 מ  וְהִתְוַדּוּ אֶת-עֲוֺנָם וְאֶת-עֲוֺן אֲבֹתָם, בְּמַעֲלָם אֲשֶׁר מָעֲלוּ-בִי, וְאַף, אֲשֶׁר-הָלְכוּ עִמִּי בְּקֶרִי.    40 And they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, in their treachery which they committed against Me, and also that they have walked contrary unto Me.
26.41 מא  אַף-אֲנִי, אֵלֵךְ עִמָּם בְּקֶרִי, וְהֵבֵאתִי אֹתָם, בְּאֶרֶץ אֹיְבֵיהֶם; אוֹ-אָז יִכָּנַע, לְבָבָם הֶעָרֵל, וְאָז, יִרְצוּ אֶת-עֲוֺנָם.    41 I also will walk contrary unto them, and bring them into the land of their enemies; if then perchance their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then be paid the punishment of their iniquity;
26.42 מב  וְזָכַרְתִּי, אֶת-בְּרִיתִי יַעֲקוֹב; וְאַף אֶת-בְּרִיתִי יִצְחָק וְאַף אֶת-בְּרִיתִי אַבְרָהָם, אֶזְכֹּר--וְהָאָרֶץ אֶזְכֹּר.    42 then will I remember My covenant with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.
26.43 מג  וְהָאָרֶץ תֵּעָזֵב מֵהֶם וְתִרֶץ אֶת-שַׁבְּתֹתֶיהָ, בָּהְשַׁמָּה מֵהֶם, וְהֵם, יִרְצוּ אֶת-עֲוֺנָם; יַעַן וּבְיַעַן--בְּמִשְׁפָּטַי מָאָסוּ, וְאֶת-חֻקֹּתַי גָּעֲלָה נַפְשָׁם.    43 For the land shall lie forsaken without them, and shall be paid her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them; and they shall be paid the punishment of their iniquity; because, even because they rejected Mine ordinances, and their soul abhorred My statutes.
26.44 מד  וְאַף-גַּם-זֹאת בִּהְיוֹתָם בְּאֶרֶץ אֹיְבֵיהֶם, לֹא-מְאַסְתִּים וְלֹא-גְעַלְתִּים לְכַלֹּתָם--לְהָפֵר בְּרִיתִי, אִתָּם:  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.    44 And yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break My covenant with them; for I am the LORD their God.
26.45 מה  וְזָכַרְתִּי לָהֶם, בְּרִית רִאשֹׁנִים:  אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִי-אֹתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם, לִהְיוֹת לָהֶם לֵאלֹהִים--אֲנִי יְהוָה.    45 But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.
26.46 מו  אֵלֶּה הַחֻקִּים וְהַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, וְהַתּוֹרֹת, אֲשֶׁר נָתַן יְהוָה, בֵּינוֹ וּבֵין בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּהַר סִינַי, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}    46 These are the statutes and ordinances and laws, which the LORD made between Him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses. {P}
27.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.    1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
27.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, אִישׁ, כִּי יַפְלִא נֶדֶר--בְּעֶרְכְּךָ נְפָשֹׁת, לַיהוָה.    2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When a man shall clearly utter a vow of persons unto the LORD, according to thy valuation,
27.3 ג  וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ, הַזָּכָר, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וְעַד בֶּן-שִׁשִּׁים שָׁנָה:  וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ, חֲמִשִּׁים שֶׁקֶל כֶּסֶף--בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ.    3 then thy valuation shall be for the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy valuation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
27.4 ד  וְאִם-נְקֵבָה, הִוא--וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ, שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁקֶל.    4 And if it be a female, then thy valuation shall be thirty shekels.
27.5 ה  וְאִם מִבֶּן-חָמֵשׁ שָׁנִים, וְעַד בֶּן-עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה--וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ הַזָּכָר, עֶשְׂרִים שְׁקָלִים; וְלַנְּקֵבָה, עֲשֶׂרֶת שְׁקָלִים.    5 And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy valuation shall be for the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
27.6 ו  וְאִם מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ, וְעַד בֶּן-חָמֵשׁ שָׁנִים--וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ הַזָּכָר, חֲמִשָּׁה שְׁקָלִים כָּסֶף; וְלַנְּקֵבָה עֶרְכְּךָ, שְׁלֹשֶׁת שְׁקָלִים כָּסֶף.    6 And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy valuation shall be for the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy valuation shall be three shekels of silver.
27.7 ז  וְאִם מִבֶּן-שִׁשִּׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, אִם-זָכָר--וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ, חֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר שָׁקֶל; וְלַנְּקֵבָה, עֲשָׂרָה שְׁקָלִים.    7 And if it be from sixty years old and upward: if it be a male, then thy valuation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
27.8 ח  וְאִם-מָךְ הוּא, מֵעֶרְכֶּךָ--וְהֶעֱמִידוֹ לִפְנֵי הַכֹּהֵן, וְהֶעֱרִיךְ אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן:  עַל-פִּי, אֲשֶׁר תַּשִּׂיג יַד הַנֹּדֵר--יַעֲרִיכֶנּוּ, הַכֹּהֵן.  {ס}    8 But if he be too poor for thy valuation, then he shall be set before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to the means of him that vowed shall the priest value him. {S}
27.9 ט  וְאִם-בְּהֵמָה--אֲשֶׁר יַקְרִיבוּ מִמֶּנָּה קָרְבָּן, לַיהוָה:  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר יִתֵּן מִמֶּנּוּ לַיהוָה, יִהְיֶה-קֹּדֶשׁ.    9 And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the LORD, all that any man giveth of such unto the LORD shall be holy.
27.10 י  לֹא יַחֲלִיפֶנּוּ, וְלֹא-יָמִיר אֹתוֹ טוֹב בְּרָע--אוֹ-רַע בְּטוֹב; וְאִם-הָמֵר יָמִיר בְּהֵמָה בִּבְהֵמָה, וְהָיָה-הוּא וּתְמוּרָתוֹ יִהְיֶה-קֹּדֶשׁ.    10 He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good; and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy.
27.11 יא  וְאִם, כָּל-בְּהֵמָה טְמֵאָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יַקְרִיבוּ מִמֶּנָּה קָרְבָּן, לַיהוָה--וְהֶעֱמִיד אֶת-הַבְּהֵמָה, לִפְנֵי הַכֹּהֵן.    11 And if it be any unclean beast, of which they may not bring an offering unto the LORD, then he shall set the beast before the priest.
27.12 יב  וְהֶעֱרִיךְ הַכֹּהֵן אֹתָהּ, בֵּין טוֹב וּבֵין רָע:  כְּעֶרְכְּךָ הַכֹּהֵן, כֵּן יִהְיֶה.    12 And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad; as thou the priest valuest it, so shall it be.
27.13 יג  וְאִם-גָּאֹל, יִגְאָלֶנָּה--וְיָסַף חֲמִישִׁתוֹ, עַל-עֶרְכֶּךָ.    13 But if he will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part thereof unto thy valuation.
27.14 יד  וְאִישׁ, כִּי-יַקְדִּשׁ אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה--וְהֶעֱרִיכוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, בֵּין טוֹב וּבֵין רָע:  כַּאֲשֶׁר יַעֲרִיךְ אֹתוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, כֵּן יָקוּם.    14 And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the LORD, then the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad; as the priest shall value it, so shall it stand.
27.15 טו  וְאִם-הַמַּקְדִּישׁ--יִגְאַל, אֶת-בֵּיתוֹ:  וְיָסַף חֲמִישִׁית כֶּסֶף-עֶרְכְּךָ, עָלָיו--וְהָיָה לוֹ.    15 And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy valuation unto it, and it shall be his.
27.16 טז  וְאִם מִשְּׂדֵה אֲחֻזָּתוֹ, יַקְדִּישׁ אִישׁ לַיהוָה--וְהָיָה עֶרְכְּךָ, לְפִי זַרְעוֹ:  זֶרַע חֹמֶר שְׂעֹרִים, בַּחֲמִשִּׁים שֶׁקֶל כָּסֶף.    16 And if a man shall sanctify unto the LORD part of the field of his possession, then thy valuation shall be according to the sowing thereof; the sowing of a homer of barley shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver.
27.17 יז  אִם-מִשְּׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל, יַקְדִּישׁ שָׂדֵהוּ--כְּעֶרְכְּךָ, יָקוּם.    17 If he sanctify his field from the year of jubilee, according to thy valuation it shall stand.
27.18 יח  וְאִם-אַחַר הַיֹּבֵל, יַקְדִּישׁ שָׂדֵהוּ--וְחִשַּׁב-לוֹ הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַכֶּסֶף עַל-פִּי הַשָּׁנִים הַנּוֹתָרֹת, עַד שְׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל; וְנִגְרַע, מֵעֶרְכֶּךָ.    18 But if he sanctify his field after the jubilee, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain unto the year of jubilee, and an abatement shall be made from thy valuation.
27.19 יט  וְאִם-גָּאֹל יִגְאַל אֶת-הַשָּׂדֶה, הַמַּקְדִּישׁ אֹתוֹ:  וְיָסַף חֲמִשִׁית כֶּסֶף-עֶרְכְּךָ, עָלָיו--וְקָם לוֹ.    19 And if he that sanctified the field will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy valuation unto it, and it shall be assured to him.
27.20 כ  וְאִם-לֹא יִגְאַל אֶת-הַשָּׂדֶה, וְאִם-מָכַר אֶת-הַשָּׂדֶה לְאִישׁ אַחֵר--לֹא יִגָּאֵל, עוֹד.    20 And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.
27.21 כא  וְהָיָה הַשָּׂדֶה בְּצֵאתוֹ בַיֹּבֵל, קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה--כִּשְׂדֵה הַחֵרֶם:  לַכֹּהֵן, תִּהְיֶה אֲחֻזָּתוֹ.    21 But the field, when it goeth out in the jubilee, shall be holy unto the LORD, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the priest's.
27.22 כב  וְאִם, אֶת-שְׂדֵה מִקְנָתוֹ, אֲשֶׁר, לֹא מִשְּׂדֵה אֲחֻזָּתוֹ--יַקְדִּישׁ, לַיהוָה.    22 And if he sanctify unto the LORD a field which he hath bought, which is not of the field of his possession;
27.23 כג  וְחִשַּׁב-לוֹ הַכֹּהֵן, אֵת מִכְסַת הָעֶרְכְּךָ, עַד, שְׁנַת הַיֹּבֵל; וְנָתַן אֶת-הָעֶרְכְּךָ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, קֹדֶשׁ לַיהוָה.    23 then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy valuation unto the year of jubilee; and he shall give thy valuation in that day, as a holy thing unto the LORD.
27.24 כד  בִּשְׁנַת הַיּוֹבֵל יָשׁוּב הַשָּׂדֶה, לַאֲשֶׁר קָנָהוּ מֵאִתּוֹ--לַאֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, אֲחֻזַּת הָאָרֶץ.    24 In the year of jubilee the field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land belongeth.
27.25 כה  וְכָל-עֶרְכְּךָ--יִהְיֶה, בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  עֶשְׂרִים גֵּרָה, יִהְיֶה הַשָּׁקֶל.    25 And all thy valuations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary; twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.
27.26 כו  אַךְ-בְּכוֹר אֲשֶׁר-יְבֻכַּר לַיהוָה, בִּבְהֵמָה--לֹא-יַקְדִּישׁ אִישׁ, אֹתוֹ:  אִם-שׁוֹר אִם-שֶׂה, לַיהוָה הוּא.    26 Howbeit the firstling among beasts, which is born as a firstling to the LORD, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox or sheep, it is the LORD'S.
27.27 כז  וְאִם בַּבְּהֵמָה הַטְּמֵאָה וּפָדָה בְעֶרְכֶּךָ, וְיָסַף חֲמִשִׁתוֹ עָלָיו; וְאִם-לֹא יִגָּאֵל, וְנִמְכַּר בְּעֶרְכֶּךָ.    27 And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall ransom it according to thy valuation, and shall add unto it the fifth part thereof; or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy valuation.
27.28 כח  אַךְ-כָּל-חֵרֶם אֲשֶׁר יַחֲרִם אִישׁ לַיהוָה מִכָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ, מֵאָדָם וּבְהֵמָה וּמִשְּׂדֵה אֲחֻזָּתוֹ--לֹא יִמָּכֵר, וְלֹא יִגָּאֵל:  כָּל-חֵרֶם, קֹדֶשׁ-קָדָשִׁים הוּא לַיהוָה.    28 Notwithstanding, no devoted thing, that a man may devote unto the LORD of all that he hath, whether of man or beast, or of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy unto the LORD.
27.29 כט  כָּל-חֵרֶם, אֲשֶׁר יָחֳרַם מִן-הָאָדָם--לֹא יִפָּדֶה:  מוֹת, יוּמָת.    29 None devoted, that may be devoted of men, shall be ransomed; he shall surely be put to death.
27.30 ל  וְכָל-מַעְשַׂר הָאָרֶץ מִזֶּרַע הָאָרֶץ, מִפְּרִי הָעֵץ--לַיהוָה, הוּא:  קֹדֶשׁ, לַיהוָה.    30 And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the LORD'S; it is holy unto the LORD.
27.31 לא  וְאִם-גָּאֹל יִגְאַל אִישׁ, מִמַּעַשְׂרוֹ--חֲמִשִׁיתוֹ, יֹסֵף עָלָיו.    31 And if a man will redeem aught of his tithe, he shall add unto it the fifth part thereof.
27.32 לב  וְכָל-מַעְשַׂר בָּקָר וָצֹאן, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲבֹר תַּחַת הַשָּׁבֶט--הָעֲשִׂירִי, יִהְיֶה-קֹּדֶשׁ לַיהוָה.    32 And all the tithe of the herd or the flock, whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the LORD.
27.33 לג  לֹא יְבַקֵּר בֵּין-טוֹב לָרַע, וְלֹא יְמִירֶנּוּ; וְאִם-הָמֵר יְמִירֶנּוּ, וְהָיָה-הוּא וּתְמוּרָתוֹ יִהְיֶה-קֹּדֶשׁ לֹא יִגָּאֵל.    33 He shall not inquire whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it; and if he change it at all, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.
27.34 לד  אֵלֶּה הַמִּצְוֺת, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה--אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  בְּהַר, סִינָי.  {ש}    34 These are the commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai. {P}
