1.1 א  מַשָּׂא דְבַר-יְהוָה, אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּיַד, מַלְאָכִי.	1 The burden of the word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.
1.2 ב  אָהַבְתִּי אֶתְכֶם אָמַר יְהוָה, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם בַּמָּה אֲהַבְתָּנוּ; הֲלוֹא-אָח עֵשָׂו לְיַעֲקֹב נְאֻם-יְהוָה, וָאֹהַב אֶת-יַעֲקֹב.	2 I have loved you, saith the LORD. Yet ye say: 'Wherein hast Thou loved us?' Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the LORD; yet I loved Jacob;
1.3 ג  וְאֶת-עֵשָׂו, שָׂנֵאתִי; וָאָשִׂים אֶת-הָרָיו שְׁמָמָה, וְאֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ לְתַנּוֹת מִדְבָּר.	3 But Esau I hated, and made his mountains a desolation, and gave his heritage to the jackals of the wilderness.
1.4 ד  כִּי-תֹאמַר אֱדוֹם רֻשַּׁשְׁנוּ, וְנָשׁוּב וְנִבְנֶה חֳרָבוֹת--כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, הֵמָּה יִבְנוּ וַאֲנִי אֶהֱרוֹס; וְקָרְאוּ לָהֶם גְּבוּל רִשְׁעָה, וְהָעָם אֲשֶׁר-זָעַם יְהוָה עַד-עוֹלָם.	4 Whereas Edom saith: 'We are beaten down, but we will return and build the waste places'; thus saith the LORD of hosts: They shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall be called the border of wickedness, and the people whom the LORD execrateth for ever.
1.5 ה  וְעֵינֵיכֶם, תִּרְאֶינָה; וְאַתֶּם תֹּאמְרוּ יִגְדַּל יְהוָה, מֵעַל לִגְבוּל יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say: 'The LORD is great beyond the border of Israel.'
1.6 ו  בֵּן יְכַבֵּד אָב, וְעֶבֶד אֲדֹנָיו; וְאִם-אָב אָנִי אַיֵּה כְבוֹדִי וְאִם-אֲדוֹנִים אָנִי אַיֵּה מוֹרָאִי אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לָכֶם הַכֹּהֲנִים בּוֹזֵי שְׁמִי, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, בַּמֶּה בָזִינוּ אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ.	6 A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master; if then I be a father, where is My honour? and if I be a master, where is My fear? saith the LORD of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise My name. And ye say: 'Wherein have we despised Thy name?'
1.7 ז  מַגִּישִׁים עַל-מִזְבְּחִי לֶחֶם מְגֹאָל, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם בַּמֶּה גֵאַלְנוּךָ; בֶּאֱמָרְכֶם, שֻׁלְחַן יְהוָה נִבְזֶה הוּא.	7 Ye offer polluted bread upon Mine altar. And ye say: 'Wherein have we polluted thee?' In that ye say: 'The table of the LORD is contemptible.'
1.8 ח  וְכִי-תַגִּישׁוּן עִוֵּר לִזְבֹּחַ אֵין רָע, וְכִי תַגִּישׁוּ פִּסֵּחַ וְחֹלֶה אֵין רָע; הַקְרִיבֵהוּ נָא לְפֶחָתֶךָ, הֲיִרְצְךָ אוֹ הֲיִשָּׂא פָנֶיךָ--אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	8 And when ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it no evil! And when ye offer the lame and sick, is it no evil! Present it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee? or will he accept thy person? saith the LORD of hosts.
1.9 ט  וְעַתָּה חַלּוּ-נָא פְנֵי-אֵל, וִיחָנֵּנוּ; מִיֶּדְכֶם, הָיְתָה זֹּאת--הֲיִשָּׂא מִכֶּם פָּנִים, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	9 And now, I pray you, entreat the favour of God that He may be gracious unto us!--this hath been of your doing.--will He accept any of your persons? saith the LORD of hosts.
1.10 י  מִי גַם-בָּכֶם וְיִסְגֹּר דְּלָתַיִם, וְלֹא-תָאִירוּ מִזְבְּחִי חִנָּם; אֵין-לִי חֵפֶץ בָּכֶם, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וּמִנְחָה, לֹא-אֶרְצֶה מִיֶּדְכֶם.	10 Oh that there were even one among you that would shut the doors, that ye might not kindle fire on Mine altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you, saith the LORD of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.
1.11 יא  כִּי מִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ וְעַד-מְבוֹאוֹ, גָּדוֹל שְׁמִי בַּגּוֹיִם, וּבְכָל-מָקוֹם מֻקְטָר מֻגָּשׁ לִשְׁמִי, וּמִנְחָה טְהוֹרָה:  כִּי-גָדוֹל שְׁמִי בַּגּוֹיִם, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	11 For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same My name is great among the nations; and in every place offerings are presented unto My name, even pure oblations; for My name is great among the nations, saith the LORD of hosts.
1.12 יב  וְאַתֶּם, מְחַלְּלִים אוֹתוֹ--בֶּאֱמָרְכֶם, שֻׁלְחַן אֲדֹנָי מְגֹאָל הוּא, וְנִיבוֹ, נִבְזֶה אָכְלוֹ.	12 But ye profane it, in that ye say: 'The table of the LORD is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even the food thereof, is contemptible.'
1.13 יג  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם הִנֵּה מַתְּלָאָה וְהִפַּחְתֶּם אוֹתוֹ, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וַהֲבֵאתֶם גָּזוּל וְאֶת-הַפִּסֵּחַ וְאֶת-הַחוֹלֶה, וַהֲבֵאתֶם אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה; הַאֶרְצֶה אוֹתָהּ מִיֶּדְכֶם, אָמַר יְהוָה.  {ס}	13 Ye say also: 'Behold, what a weariness is it!' and ye have snuffed at it, saith the LORD of hosts; and ye have brought that which was taken by violence, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye bring the offering; should I accept this of your hand? saith the LORD. {S}
1.14 יד  וְאָרוּר נוֹכֵל, וְיֵשׁ בְּעֶדְרוֹ זָכָר, וְנֹדֵר וְזֹבֵחַ מָשְׁחָת, לַאדֹנָי:  כִּי מֶלֶךְ גָּדוֹל אָנִי, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וּשְׁמִי, נוֹרָא בַגּוֹיִם.	14 But cursed be he that dealeth craftily, whereas he hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a blemished thing; for I am a great King, saith the LORD of hosts, and My name is feared among the nations.
2.1 א  וְעַתָּה, אֲלֵיכֶם הַמִּצְוָה הַזֹּאת--הַכֹּהֲנִים.	1 And now, this commandment is for you, O ye priests.
2.2 ב  אִם-לֹא תִשְׁמְעוּ וְאִם-לֹא תָשִׂימוּ עַל-לֵב לָתֵת כָּבוֹד לִשְׁמִי, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וְשִׁלַּחְתִּי בָכֶם אֶת-הַמְּאֵרָה, וְאָרוֹתִי אֶת-בִּרְכוֹתֵיכֶם; וְגַם, אָרוֹתִיהָ, כִּי אֵינְכֶם, שָׂמִים עַל-לֵב.	2 If ye will not hearken, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto My name, saith the LORD of hosts, then will I send the curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings; yea, I curse them, because ye do not lay it to heart.
2.3 ג  הִנְנִי גֹעֵר לָכֶם, אֶת-הַזֶּרַע, וְזֵרִיתִי פֶרֶשׁ עַל-פְּנֵיכֶם, פֶּרֶשׁ חַגֵּיכֶם; וְנָשָׂא אֶתְכֶם, אֵלָיו.	3 Behold, I will rebuke the seed for your hurt, and will spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your sacrifices; and ye shall be taken away unto it.
2.4 ד  וִידַעְתֶּם--כִּי שִׁלַּחְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם, אֵת הַמִּצְוָה הַזֹּאת:  לִהְיוֹת בְּרִיתִי אֶת-לֵוִי, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	4 Know then that I have sent this commandment unto you, that My covenant might be with Levi, saith the LORD of hosts.
2.5 ה  בְּרִיתִי הָיְתָה אִתּוֹ, הַחַיִּים וְהַשָּׁלוֹם, וָאֶתְּנֵם-לוֹ מוֹרָא, וַיִּירָאֵנִי; וּמִפְּנֵי שְׁמִי, נִחַת הוּא.	5 My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him, and of fear, and he feared Me, and was afraid of My name.
2.6 ו  תּוֹרַת אֱמֶת הָיְתָה בְּפִיהוּ, וְעַוְלָה לֹא-נִמְצָא בִשְׂפָתָיו; בְּשָׁלוֹם וּבְמִישׁוֹר הָלַךְ אִתִּי, וְרַבִּים הֵשִׁיב מֵעָוֺן.	6 The law of truth was in his mouth, and unrighteousness was not found in his lips; he walked with Me in peace and uprightness, and did turn many away from iniquity.
2.7 ז  כִּי-שִׂפְתֵי כֹהֵן יִשְׁמְרוּ-דַעַת, וְתוֹרָה יְבַקְשׁוּ מִפִּיהוּ:  כִּי מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה-צְבָאוֹת, הוּא.	7 For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the LORD of hosts.
2.8 ח  וְאַתֶּם סַרְתֶּם מִן-הַדֶּרֶךְ, הִכְשַׁלְתֶּם רַבִּים בַּתּוֹרָה; שִׁחַתֶּם בְּרִית הַלֵּוִי, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	8 But ye are turned aside out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble in the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the LORD of hosts.
2.9 ט  וְגַם-אֲנִי נָתַתִּי אֶתְכֶם, נִבְזִים וּשְׁפָלִים--לְכָל-הָעָם:  כְּפִי, אֲשֶׁר אֵינְכֶם שֹׁמְרִים אֶת-דְּרָכַי, וְנֹשְׂאִים פָּנִים, בַּתּוֹרָה.  {פ}	9 Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept My ways, but have had respect of persons in the law. {P}
2.10 י  הֲלוֹא אָב אֶחָד לְכֻלָּנוּ, הֲלוֹא אֵל אֶחָד בְּרָאָנוּ; מַדּוּעַ, נִבְגַּד אִישׁ בְּאָחִיו--לְחַלֵּל, בְּרִית אֲבֹתֵינוּ.	10 Have we not all one father? Hath not one God created us? Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, profaning the covenant of our fathers?
2.11 יא  בָּגְדָה יְהוּדָה, וְתוֹעֵבָה נֶעֶשְׂתָה בְיִשְׂרָאֵל וּבִירוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי חִלֵּל יְהוּדָה, קֹדֶשׁ יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר אָהֵב, וּבָעַל, בַּת-אֵל נֵכָר.	11 Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the LORD which He loveth, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.
2.12 יב  יַכְרֵת יְהוָה לָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂנָּה, עֵר וְעֹנֶה, מֵאָהֳלֵי, יַעֲקֹב; וּמַגִּישׁ מִנְחָה, לַיהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {פ}	12 May the LORD cut off to the man that doeth this, him that calleth and him that answereth out of the tents of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto the LORD of hosts. {P}
2.13 יג  וְזֹאת, שֵׁנִית תַּעֲשׂוּ--כַּסּוֹת דִּמְעָה אֶת-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה, בְּכִי וַאֲנָקָה; מֵאֵין עוֹד, פְּנוֹת אֶל-הַמִּנְחָה, וְלָקַחַת רָצוֹן, מִיֶּדְכֶם.	13 And this further ye do: ye cover the altar of the LORD with tears, with weeping, and with sighing, insomuch that He regardeth not the offering any more, neither receiveth it with good will at your hand.
2.14 יד  וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, עַל-מָה:  עַל כִּי-יְהוָה הֵעִיד בֵּינְךָ וּבֵין אֵשֶׁת נְעוּרֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה בָּגַדְתָּה בָּהּ, וְהִיא חֲבֶרְתְּךָ, וְאֵשֶׁת בְּרִיתֶךָ.	14 Yet ye say: 'Wherefore?' Because the LORD hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously, though she is thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.
2.15 טו  וְלֹא-אֶחָד עָשָׂה, וּשְׁאָר רוּחַ לוֹ, וּמָה הָאֶחָד, מְבַקֵּשׁ זֶרַע אֱלֹהִים; וְנִשְׁמַרְתֶּם, בְּרוּחֲכֶם, וּבְאֵשֶׁת נְעוּרֶיךָ, אַל-יִבְגֹּד.	15 And not one hath done so who had exuberance of spirit! For what seeketh the one? a seed given of God. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.
2.16 טז  כִּי-שָׂנֵא שַׁלַּח, אָמַר יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְכִסָּה חָמָס עַל-לְבוּשׁוֹ, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת; וְנִשְׁמַרְתֶּם בְּרוּחֲכֶם, וְלֹא תִבְגֹּדוּ.  {פ}	16 For I hate putting away, saith the LORD, the God of Israel, and him that covereth his garment with violence, saith the LORD of hosts; therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously. {P}
2.17 יז  הוֹגַעְתֶּם יְהוָה בְּדִבְרֵיכֶם, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם בַּמָּה הוֹגָעְנוּ:  בֶּאֱמָרְכֶם, כָּל-עֹשֵׂה רָע טוֹב בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה וּבָהֶם הוּא חָפֵץ, אוֹ אַיֵּה, אֱלֹהֵי הַמִּשְׁפָּט.	17 Ye have wearied the LORD with your words. Yet ye say: 'Wherein have we wearied Him?' In that ye say: 'Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the LORD, and He delighteth in them; or where is the God of justice?'
3.1 א  הִנְנִי שֹׁלֵחַ מַלְאָכִי, וּפִנָּה-דֶרֶךְ לְפָנָי; וּפִתְאֹם יָבוֹא אֶל-הֵיכָלוֹ הָאָדוֹן אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם מְבַקְשִׁים, וּמַלְאַךְ הַבְּרִית אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם חֲפֵצִים הִנֵּה-בָא--אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	1 Behold, I send My messenger, and he shall clear the way before Me; and the Lord, whom ye seek, will suddenly come to His temple, and the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in, behold, he cometh, saith the LORD of hosts.
3.2 ב  וּמִי מְכַלְכֵּל אֶת-יוֹם בּוֹאוֹ, וּמִי הָעֹמֵד בְּהֵרָאוֹתוֹ:  כִּי-הוּא כְּאֵשׁ מְצָרֵף, וּכְבֹרִית מְכַבְּסִים.	2 But who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap;
3.3 ג  וְיָשַׁב מְצָרֵף וּמְטַהֵר, כֶּסֶף, וְטִהַר אֶת-בְּנֵי-לֵוִי וְזִקַּק אֹתָם, כַּזָּהָב וְכַכָּסֶף; וְהָיוּ, לַיהוָה, מַגִּישֵׁי מִנְחָה, בִּצְדָקָה.	3 And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver; and there shall be they that shall offer unto the LORD offerings in righteousness.
3.4 ד  וְעָרְבָה, לַיהוָה, מִנְחַת יְהוּדָה, וִירוּשָׁלִָם--כִּימֵי עוֹלָם, וּכְשָׁנִים קַדְמֹנִיֹּת.	4 Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the LORD, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.
3.5 ה  וְקָרַבְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם, לַמִּשְׁפָּט, וְהָיִיתִי עֵד מְמַהֵר בַּמְכַשְּׁפִים וּבַמְנָאֲפִים, וּבַנִּשְׁבָּעִים לַשָּׁקֶר; וּבְעֹשְׁקֵי שְׂכַר-שָׂכִיר אַלְמָנָה וְיָתוֹם וּמַטֵּי-גֵר, וְלֹא יְרֵאוּנִי--אָמַר, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	5 And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers; and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not Me, saith the LORD of hosts.
3.6 ו  כִּי אֲנִי יְהוָה, לֹא שָׁנִיתִי; וְאַתֶּם בְּנֵי-יַעֲקֹב, לֹא כְלִיתֶם.	6 For I the LORD change not; and ye, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed.
3.7 ז  לְמִימֵי אֲבֹתֵיכֶם סַרְתֶּם מֵחֻקַּי, וְלֹא שְׁמַרְתֶּם--שׁוּבוּ אֵלַי וְאָשׁוּבָה אֲלֵיכֶם, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת; וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, בַּמֶּה נָשׁוּב.	7 From the days of your fathers ye have turned aside from Mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto Me, and I will return unto you, saith the LORD of hosts. But ye say: 'Wherein shall we return?'
3.8 ח  הֲיִקְבַּע אָדָם אֱלֹהִים, כִּי אַתֶּם קֹבְעִים אֹתִי, וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, בַּמֶּה קְבַעֲנוּךָ:  הַמַּעֲשֵׂר, וְהַתְּרוּמָה.	8 Will a man rob God? Yet ye rob Me. But ye say: 'Wherein have we robbed Thee?' In tithes and heave-offerings.
3.9 ט  בַּמְּאֵרָה אַתֶּם נֵאָרִים, וְאֹתִי אַתֶּם קֹבְעִים--הַגּוֹי, כֻּלּוֹ.	9 Ye are cursed with the curse, yet ye rob Me, even this whole nation.
3.10 י  הָבִיאוּ אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּעֲשֵׂר אֶל-בֵּית הָאוֹצָר, וִיהִי טֶרֶף בְּבֵיתִי, וּבְחָנוּנִי נָא בָּזֹאת, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת:  אִם-לֹא אֶפְתַּח לָכֶם, אֵת אֲרֻבּוֹת הַשָּׁמַיִם, וַהֲרִיקֹתִי לָכֶם בְּרָכָה, עַד-בְּלִי-דָי.	10 Bring ye the whole tithe into the store-house, that there may be food in My house, and try Me now herewith, saith the LORD of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall be more than sufficiency.
3.11 יא  וְגָעַרְתִּי לָכֶם בָּאֹכֵל, וְלֹא-יַשְׁחִת לָכֶם אֶת-פְּרִי הָאֲדָמָה; וְלֹא-תְשַׁכֵּל לָכֶם הַגֶּפֶן בַּשָּׂדֶה, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	11 And I will rebuke the devourer for your good, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your land; neither shall your vine cast its fruit before the time in the field, saith the LORD of hosts.
3.12 יב  וְאִשְּׁרוּ אֶתְכֶם, כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם:  כִּי-תִהְיוּ אַתֶּם אֶרֶץ חֵפֶץ, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {פ}	12 And all nations shall call you happy; for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of hosts. {P}
3.13 יג  חָזְקוּ עָלַי דִּבְרֵיכֶם, אָמַר יְהוָה; וַאֲמַרְתֶּם, מַה-נִּדְבַּרְנוּ עָלֶיךָ.	13 Your words have been all too strong against Me, saith the LORD. Yet ye say: 'Wherein have we spoken against thee?'
3.14 יד  אֲמַרְתֶּם, שָׁוְא עֲבֹד אֱלֹהִים; וּמַה-בֶּצַע, כִּי שָׁמַרְנוּ מִשְׁמַרְתּוֹ, וְכִי הָלַכְנוּ קְדֹרַנִּית, מִפְּנֵי יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.	14 Ye have said: 'It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept His charge, and that we have walked mournfully because of the LORD of hosts?
3.15 טו  וְעַתָּה, אֲנַחְנוּ מְאַשְּׁרִים זֵדִים; גַּם-נִבְנוּ עֹשֵׂי רִשְׁעָה, גַּם בָּחֲנוּ אֱלֹהִים וַיִּמָּלֵטוּ.	15 And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are built up; yea, they try God, and are delivered.'
3.16 טז  אָז נִדְבְּרוּ יִרְאֵי יְהוָה, אִישׁ אֶל-רֵעֵהוּ; וַיַּקְשֵׁב יְהוָה, וַיִּשְׁמָע, וַיִּכָּתֵב סֵפֶר זִכָּרוֹן לְפָנָיו לְיִרְאֵי יְהוָה, וּלְחֹשְׁבֵי שְׁמוֹ.	16 Then they that feared the LORD spoke one with another; and the LORD hearkened, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before Him, for them that feared the LORD, and that thought upon His name.
3.17 יז  וְהָיוּ לִי, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, לַיּוֹם, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה סְגֻלָּה; וְחָמַלְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם--כַּאֲשֶׁר יַחְמֹל אִישׁ, עַל-בְּנוֹ הָעֹבֵד אֹתוֹ.	17 And they shall be Mine, saith the LORD of hosts, in the day that I do make, even Mine own treasure; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.
3.18 יח  וְשַׁבְתֶּם, וּרְאִיתֶם, בֵּין צַדִּיק, לְרָשָׁע--בֵּין עֹבֵד אֱלֹהִים, לַאֲשֶׁר לֹא עֲבָדוֹ.  {פ}	18 Then shall ye again discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth Him not. {P}
4.1 א  כִּי-הִנֵּה הַיּוֹם בָּא, בֹּעֵר כַּתַּנּוּר; וְהָיוּ כָל-זֵדִים וְכָל-עֹשֵׂה רִשְׁעָה, קַשׁ, וְלִהַט אֹתָם הַיּוֹם הַבָּא אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יַעֲזֹב לָהֶם שֹׁרֶשׁ וְעָנָף.	19 For, behold, the day cometh, it burneth as a furnace; and all the proud, and all that work wickedness, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall set them ablaze, saith the LORD of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.
4.2 ב  וְזָרְחָה לָכֶם יִרְאֵי שְׁמִי, שֶׁמֶשׁ צְדָקָה, וּמַרְפֵּא, בִּכְנָפֶיהָ; וִיצָאתֶם וּפִשְׁתֶּם, כְּעֶגְלֵי מַרְבֵּק.	20 But unto you that fear My name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in its wings; and ye shall go forth, and gambol as calves of the stall.
4.3 ג  וְעַסּוֹתֶם רְשָׁעִים--כִּי-יִהְיוּ אֵפֶר, תַּחַת כַּפּוֹת רַגְלֵיכֶם:  בַּיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה, אָמַר יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת.  {פ}	21 And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I do make, saith the LORD of hosts. {P}
4.4 ד  זִכְרוּ, תּוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה עַבְדִּי, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתִי אוֹתוֹ בְחֹרֵב עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, חֻקִּים וּמִשְׁפָּטִים.	22 Remember ye the law of Moses My servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, even statutes and ordinances.
4.5 ה  הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי שֹׁלֵחַ לָכֶם, אֵת אֵלִיָּה הַנָּבִיא--לִפְנֵי, בּוֹא יוֹם יְהוָה, הַגָּדוֹל, וְהַנּוֹרָא.	23 Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and terrible day of the LORD.
4.6 ו  וְהֵשִׁיב לֵב-אָבוֹת עַל-בָּנִים, וְלֵב בָּנִים עַל-אֲבוֹתָם--פֶּן-אָבוֹא, וְהִכֵּיתִי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ חֵרֶם.  {ש}	24 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers; lest I come and smite the land with utter destruction. {P}
