1.1 א  מַשָּׂא, נִינְוֵה--סֵפֶר חֲזוֹן נַחוּם, הָאֶלְקֹשִׁי.    1 The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
1.2 ב  אֵל קַנּוֹא וְנֹקֵם יְהוָה, נֹקֵם יְהוָה וּבַעַל חֵמָה; נֹקֵם יְהוָה לְצָרָיו, וְנוֹטֵר הוּא לְאֹיְבָיו.    2 The LORD is a jealous and avenging God, the LORD avengeth and is full of wrath; the LORD taketh vengeance on His adversaries, and He reserveth wrath for His enemies.
1.3 ג  יְהוָה, אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם וגדול- (וּגְדָל-) כֹּחַ, וְנַקֵּה, לֹא יְנַקֶּה; יְהוָה, בְּסוּפָה וּבִשְׂעָרָה דַּרְכּוֹ, וְעָנָן, אֲבַק רַגְלָיו.    3 The LORD is long-suffering, and great in power, and will by no means clear the guilty; the LORD, in the whirlwind and in the storm is His way, and the clouds are the dust of His feet.
1.4 ד  גּוֹעֵר בַּיָּם וַיַּבְּשֵׁהוּ, וְכָל-הַנְּהָרוֹת הֶחֱרִיב; אֻמְלַל בָּשָׁן וְכַרְמֶל, וּפֶרַח לְבָנוֹן אֻמְלָל.    4 He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers; Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.
1.5 ה  הָרִים רָעֲשׁוּ מִמֶּנּוּ, וְהַגְּבָעוֹת הִתְמֹגָגוּ; וַתִּשָּׂא הָאָרֶץ מִפָּנָיו, וְתֵבֵל וְכָל-יוֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ.    5 The mountains quake at Him, and the hills melt; and the earth is upheaved at His presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.
1.6 ו  לִפְנֵי זַעְמוֹ מִי יַעֲמוֹד, וּמִי יָקוּם בַּחֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ; חֲמָתוֹ נִתְּכָה כָאֵשׁ, וְהַצֻּרִים נִתְּצוּ מִמֶּנּוּ.    6 Who can stand before His indignation? And who can abide in the fierceness of His anger? His fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are broken asunder before Him.
1.7 ז  טוֹב יְהוָה, לְמָעוֹז בְּיוֹם צָרָה; וְיֹדֵעַ, חֹסֵי בוֹ.    7 The LORD is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble; and He knoweth them that take refuge in Him.
1.8 ח  וּבְשֶׁטֶף עֹבֵר, כָּלָה יַעֲשֶׂה מְקוֹמָהּ; וְאֹיְבָיו, יְרַדֶּף-חֹשֶׁךְ.    8 But with an overrunning flood He will make a full end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue His enemies.
1.9 ט  מַה-תְּחַשְּׁבוּן, אֶל-יְהוָה--כָּלָה, הוּא עֹשֶׂה; לֹא-תָקוּם פַּעֲמַיִם, צָרָה.    9 What do ye devise against the LORD? He will make a full end; trouble shall not rise up the second time.
1.10 י  כִּי עַד-סִירִים סְבֻכִים, וּכְסָבְאָם סְבוּאִים; אֻכְּלוּ--כְּקַשׁ יָבֵשׁ, מָלֵא.    10 For though they be like tangled thorns, and be drunken according to their drink, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.
1.11 יא  מִמֵּךְ יָצָא, חֹשֵׁב עַל-יְהוָה רָעָה--יֹעֵץ, בְּלִיָּעַל.  {ס}    11 Out of thee came he forth, that deviseth evil against the LORD, that counselleth wickedness. {S}
1.12 יב  כֹּה אָמַר יְהוָה, אִם-שְׁלֵמִים וְכֵן רַבִּים, וְכֵן נָגוֹזּוּ, וְעָבָר; וְעִנִּתִךְ--לֹא אֲעַנֵּךְ, עוֹד.    12 Thus saith the LORD: Though they be in full strength, and likewise many, even so shall they be cut down, and he shall pass away; and though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.
1.13 יג  וְעַתָּה, אֶשְׁבֹּר מֹטֵהוּ מֵעָלָיִךְ; וּמוֹסְרֹתַיִךְ, אֲנַתֵּק.    13 And now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder.
1.14 יד  וְצִוָּה עָלֶיךָ יְהוָה, לֹא-יִזָּרַע מִשִּׁמְךָ עוֹד; מִבֵּית אֱלֹהֶיךָ אַכְרִית פֶּסֶל וּמַסֵּכָה, אָשִׂים קִבְרֶךָ--כִּי קַלּוֹתָ.  {פ}    14 And the LORD hath given commandment concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown; out of the house of thy god will I cut off the graven image and the molten image; I will make thy grave; for thou art become worthless. {P}
1.15 יה  הִנֵּה עַל-הֶהָרִים רַגְלֵי מְבַשֵּׂר, מַשְׁמִיעַ שָׁלוֹם--חָגִּי יְהוּדָה חַגַּיִךְ, שַׁלְּמִי נְדָרָיִךְ:  כִּי לֹא יוֹסִיף עוֹד לעבור- (לַעֲבָר-) בָּךְ בְּלִיַּעַל, כֻּלֹּה נִכְרָת.    1 Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that announceth peace! Keep thy feasts, O Judah, perform thy vows; for the wicked one shall no more pass through thee; he is utterly cut off.
2.1 א  עָלָה מֵפִיץ עַל-פָּנַיִךְ, נָצוֹר מְצוּרָה; צַפֵּה-דֶרֶךְ חַזֵּק מָתְנַיִם, אַמֵּץ כֹּחַ מְאֹד.    2 A maul is come up before thy face; guard the defences, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily!--
2.2 ב  כִּי שָׁב יְהוָה אֶת-גְּאוֹן יַעֲקֹב, כִּגְאוֹן יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי בְקָקוּם בֹּקְקִים, וּזְמֹרֵיהֶם שִׁחֵתוּ.    3 For the LORD restoreth the pride of Jacob, as the pride of Israel; for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine-branches.--
2.3 ג  מָגֵן גִּבֹּרֵיהוּ מְאָדָּם, אַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל מְתֻלָּעִים, בְּאֵשׁ-פְּלָדֹת הָרֶכֶב, בְּיוֹם הֲכִינוֹ; וְהַבְּרֹשִׁים, הָרְעָלוּ.    4 The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet; the chariots are fire of steel in the day of his preparation, and the cypress spears are made to quiver.
2.4 ד  בַּחוּצוֹת יִתְהוֹלְלוּ הָרֶכֶב, יִשְׁתַּקְשְׁקוּן בָּרְחֹבוֹת:  מַרְאֵיהֶן, כַּלַּפִּידִים--כַּבְּרָקִים, יְרוֹצֵצוּ.    5 The chariots rush madly in the streets, they jostle one against another in the broad places; the appearance of them is like torches, they run to and fro like the lightnings.
2.5 ה  יִזְכֹּר, אַדִּירָיו--יִכָּשְׁלוּ, בהלכותם (בַּהֲלִיכָתָם); יְמַהֲרוּ, חוֹמָתָהּ, וְהֻכַן, הַסֹּכֵךְ.    6 He bethinketh himself of his worthies; they stumble in their march; they make haste to the wall thereof, and the mantelet is prepared.
2.6 ו  שַׁעֲרֵי הַנְּהָרוֹת, נִפְתָּחוּ; וְהַהֵיכָל, נָמוֹג.    7 The gates of the rivers are opened, and the palace is dissolved.
2.7 ז  וְהֻצַּב, גֻּלְּתָה הֹעֲלָתָה; וְאַמְהֹתֶיהָ, מְנַהֲגוֹת כְּקוֹל יוֹנִים, מְתֹפְפֹת, עַל-לִבְבֵהֶן.    8 And the queen is uncovered, she is carried away, and her handmaids moan as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.
2.8 ח  וְנִינְוֵה כִבְרֵכַת-מַיִם, מִימֵי הִיא; וְהֵמָּה נָסִים, עִמְדוּ עֲמֹדוּ וְאֵין מַפְנֶה.    9 But Nineveh hath been from of old like a pool of water; yet they flee away; 'Stand, stand'; but none looketh back.
2.9 ט  בֹּזּוּ כֶסֶף, בֹּזּוּ זָהָב; וְאֵין קֵצֶה, לַתְּכוּנָה--כָּבֹד, מִכֹּל כְּלִי חֶמְדָּה.    10 Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold; for there is no end of the store, rich with all precious vessels.
2.10 י  בּוּקָה וּמְבוּקָה, וּמְבֻלָּקָה; וְלֵב נָמֵס וּפִק בִּרְכַּיִם, וְחַלְחָלָה בְּכָל-מָתְנַיִם, וּפְנֵי כֻלָּם, קִבְּצוּ פָארוּר.    11 She is empty, and void, and waste; and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and convulsion is in all loins, and the faces of them all have gathered blackness.
2.11 יא  אַיֵּה מְעוֹן אֲרָיוֹת, וּמִרְעֶה הוּא לַכְּפִרִים--אֲשֶׁר הָלַךְ אַרְיֵה לָבִיא שָׁם גּוּר אַרְיֵה, וְאֵין מַחֲרִיד.    12 Where is the den of the lions, which was the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion and the lioness walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?
2.12 יב  אַרְיֵה טֹרֵף בְּדֵי גֹרוֹתָיו, וּמְחַנֵּק לְלִבְאֹתָיו; וַיְמַלֵּא-טֶרֶף חֹרָיו, וּמְעֹנֹתָיו טְרֵפָה.    13 The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his caves with prey, and his dens with ravin.
2.13 יג  הִנְנִי אֵלַיִךְ, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וְהִבְעַרְתִּי בֶעָשָׁן רִכְבָּהּ, וּכְפִירַיִךְ תֹּאכַל חָרֶב; וְהִכְרַתִּי מֵאֶרֶץ טַרְפֵּךְ, וְלֹא-יִשָּׁמַע עוֹד קוֹל מַלְאָכֵכֵה.  {פ}    14 Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions; and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard. {P}
3.1 א  הוֹי, עִיר דָּמִים; כֻּלָּהּ, כַּחַשׁ פֶּרֶק מְלֵאָה--לֹא יָמִישׁ, טָרֶף.    1 Woe to the bloody city! It is all full of lies and rapine; the prey departeth not.
3.2 ב  קוֹל שׁוֹט, וְקוֹל רַעַשׁ אוֹפָן; וְסוּס דֹּהֵר, וּמֶרְכָּבָה מְרַקֵּדָה.    2 Hark! the whip, and hark! the rattling of the wheels; and prancing horses, and bounding chariots;
3.3 ג  פָּרָשׁ מַעֲלֶה, וְלַהַב חֶרֶב וּבְרַק חֲנִית, וְרֹב חָלָל, וְכֹבֶד פָּגֶר; וְאֵין קֵצֶה לַגְּוִיָּה, יכשלו (וְכָשְׁלוּ) בִּגְוִיָּתָם.    3 The horseman charging, and the flashing sword, and the glittering spear; and a multitude of slain, and a heap of carcases; and there is no end of the corpses, and they stumble upon their corpses;
3.4 ד  מֵרֹב זְנוּנֵי זוֹנָה, טוֹבַת חֵן בַּעֲלַת כְּשָׁפִים; הַמֹּכֶרֶת גּוֹיִם בִּזְנוּנֶיהָ, וּמִשְׁפָּחוֹת בִּכְשָׁפֶיהָ.    4 Because of the multitude of the harlotries of the well-favoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her harlotries, and families through her witchcrafts.
3.5 ה  הִנְנִי אֵלַיִךְ, נְאֻם יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת, וְגִלֵּיתִי שׁוּלַיִךְ, עַל-פָּנָיִךְ; וְהַרְאֵיתִי גוֹיִם מַעְרֵךְ, וּמַמְלָכוֹת קְלוֹנֵךְ.    5 Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will uncover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.
3.6 ו  וְהִשְׁלַכְתִּי עָלַיִךְ שִׁקֻּצִים, וְנִבַּלְתִּיךְ; וְשַׂמְתִּיךְ, כְּרֹאִי.    6 And I will cast detestable things upon thee, and make thee vile, and will make thee as dung.
3.7 ז  וְהָיָה כָל-רֹאַיִךְ, יִדּוֹד מִמֵּךְ, וְאָמַר שָׁדְּדָה נִינְוֵה, מִי יָנוּד לָהּ; מֵאַיִן אֲבַקֵּשׁ מְנַחֲמִים, לָךְ.    7 And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say: 'Nineveh is laid waste; who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?'
3.8 ח  הֲתֵיטְבִי, מִנֹּא אָמוֹן, הַיֹּשְׁבָה בַּיְאֹרִים, מַיִם סָבִיב לָהּ--אֲשֶׁר-חֵיל יָם, מִיָּם חוֹמָתָהּ.    8 Art thou better than No-amon, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round about her; whose rampart was the sea, and of the sea her wall?
3.9 ט  כּוּשׁ עָצְמָה וּמִצְרַיִם, וְאֵין קֵצֶה; פּוּט וְלוּבִים, הָיוּ בְּעֶזְרָתֵךְ.    9 Ethiopia and Egypt were thy strength, and it was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.
3.10 י  גַּם-הִיא, לַגֹּלָה הָלְכָה בַשֶּׁבִי--גַּם עֹלָלֶיהָ יְרֻטְּשׁוּ, בְּרֹאשׁ כָּל-חוּצוֹת; וְעַל-נִכְבַּדֶּיהָ יַדּוּ גוֹרָל, וְכָל-גְּדוֹלֶיהָ רֻתְּקוּ בַזִּקִּים.    10 Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity; her young children also were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets; and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.
3.11 יא  גַּם-אַתְּ תִּשְׁכְּרִי, תְּהִי נַעֲלָמָה; גַּם-אַתְּ תְּבַקְשִׁי מָעוֹז, מֵאוֹיֵב.    11 Thou also shalt be drunken, thou shalt swoon; thou also shalt seek a refuge because of the enemy.
3.12 יב  כָּל-מִבְצָרַיִךְ--תְּאֵנִים, עִם-בִּכּוּרִים; אִם-יִנּוֹעוּ, וְנָפְלוּ עַל-פִּי אוֹכֵל.    12 All thy fortresses shall be like fig-trees with the first-ripe figs: if they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater.
3.13 יג  הִנֵּה עַמֵּךְ נָשִׁים, בְּקִרְבֵּךְ, לְאֹיְבַיִךְ, פָּתוֹחַ נִפְתְּחוּ שַׁעֲרֵי אַרְצֵךְ; אָכְלָה אֵשׁ, בְּרִיחָיִךְ.    13 Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women; the gates of thy land are set wide open unto thine enemies; the fire hath devoured thy bars.
3.14 יד  מֵי מָצוֹר שַׁאֲבִי-לָךְ, חַזְּקִי מִבְצָרָיִךְ; בֹּאִי בַטִּיט וְרִמְסִי בַחֹמֶר, הַחֲזִיקִי מַלְבֵּן.    14 Draw thee water for the siege, strengthen thy fortresses; go into the clay, and tread the mortar, lay hold of the brickmould.
3.15 טו  שָׁם, תֹּאכְלֵךְ אֵשׁ--תַּכְרִיתֵךְ חֶרֶב, תֹּאכְלֵךְ כַּיָּלֶק; הִתְכַּבֵּד כַּיֶּלֶק, הִתְכַּבְּדִי כָּאַרְבֶּה.    15 There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off, it shall devour thee like the canker-worm; make thyself many as the canker-worm, make thyself many as the locusts.
3.16 טז  הִרְבֵּית, רֹכְלַיִךְ, מִכּוֹכְבֵי, הַשָּׁמָיִם; יֶלֶק פָּשַׁט, וַיָּעֹף.    16 Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven; the canker-worm spreadeth itself, and flieth away.
3.17 יז  מִנְּזָרַיִךְ, כָּאַרְבֶּה, וְטַפְסְרַיִךְ, כְּגוֹב גֹּבָי; הַחוֹנִים בַּגְּדֵרוֹת, בְּיוֹם קָרָה--שֶׁמֶשׁ זָרְחָה וְנוֹדַד, וְלֹא-נוֹדַע מְקוֹמוֹ אַיָּם.    17 Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy marshals as the swarms of grasshoppers, which camp in the walls in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.
3.18 יח  נָמוּ רֹעֶיךָ מֶלֶךְ אַשּׁוּר, יִשְׁכְּנוּ אַדִּירֶיךָ; נָפֹשׁוּ עַמְּךָ עַל-הֶהָרִים, וְאֵין מְקַבֵּץ.    18 Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria, thy worthies are at rest; thy people are scattered upon the mountains, and there is none to gather them.
3.19 יט  אֵין-כֵּהָה לְשִׁבְרֶךָ, נַחְלָה מַכָּתֶךָ; כֹּל שֹׁמְעֵי שִׁמְעֲךָ, תָּקְעוּ כַף עָלֶיךָ--כִּי עַל-מִי לֹא-עָבְרָה רָעָתְךָ, תָּמִיד.  {ש}    19 There is no assuaging of thy hurt, thy wound is grievous; all that hear the report of thee clap the hands over thee; for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually? {P}
