1.1 א  דִּבְרֵי נְחֶמְיָה, בֶּן-חֲכַלְיָה:  וַיְהִי בְחֹדֶשׁ-כִּסְלֵו שְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים, וַאֲנִי הָיִיתִי בְּשׁוּשַׁן הַבִּירָה.    1 The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah. Now it came to pass in the month Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the castle,
1.2 ב  וַיָּבֹא חֲנָנִי אֶחָד מֵאַחַי, הוּא וַאֲנָשִׁים--מִיהוּדָה; וָאֶשְׁאָלֵם עַל-הַיְּהוּדִים הַפְּלֵיטָה, אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁאֲרוּ מִן-הַשֶּׁבִי--וְעַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    2 that Hanani, one of my brethren, came out of Judah, he and certain men; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, that were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.
1.3 ג  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לִי--הַנִּשְׁאָרִים אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁאֲרוּ מִן-הַשְּׁבִי שָׁם בַּמְּדִינָה, בְּרָעָה גְדֹלָה וּבְחֶרְפָּה; וְחוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם מְפֹרָצֶת, וּשְׁעָרֶיהָ נִצְּתוּ בָאֵשׁ.    3 And they said unto me: 'The remnant that are left of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach; the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire.'
1.4 ד  וַיְהִי כְּשָׁמְעִי אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, יָשַׁבְתִּי וָאֶבְכֶּה, וָאֶתְאַבְּלָה, יָמִים; וָאֱהִי צָם וּמִתְפַּלֵּל, לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם.    4 And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days; and I fasted and prayed before the God of heaven,
1.5 ה  וָאֹמַר, אָנָּא יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם--הָאֵל הַגָּדוֹל, וְהַנּוֹרָא:  שֹׁמֵר הַבְּרִית וָחֶסֶד, לְאֹהֲבָיו וּלְשֹׁמְרֵי מִצְוֺתָיו.    5 and said: 'I beseech Thee, O LORD, the God of heaven, the great and awful God, that keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love Him and keep His commandments;
1.6 ו  תְּהִי נָא אָזְנְךָ-קַשֶּׁבֶת וְעֵינֶיךָ פְתוּחוֹת לִשְׁמֹעַ אֶל-תְּפִלַּת עַבְדְּךָ אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי מִתְפַּלֵּל לְפָנֶיךָ הַיּוֹם, יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה--עַל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲבָדֶיךָ; וּמִתְוַדֶּה, עַל-חַטֹּאות בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֲשֶׁר חָטָאנוּ לָךְ, וַאֲנִי וּבֵית-אָבִי, חָטָאנוּ.    6 let Thine ear now be attentive, and Thine eyes open, that Thou mayest hearken unto the prayer of Thy servant, which I pray before Thee at this time, day and night, for the children of Israel Thy servants, while I confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned against Thee; yea, I and my father's house have sinned.
1.7 ז  חֲבֹל, חָבַלְנוּ לָךְ; וְלֹא-שָׁמַרְנוּ אֶת-הַמִּצְוֺת, וְאֶת-הַחֻקִּים וְאֶת-הַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתָ, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה עַבְדֶּךָ.    7 We have dealt very corruptly against Thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the ordinances which Thou didst command Thy servant Moses.
1.8 ח  זְכָר-נָא, אֶת-הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר צִוִּיתָ אֶת-מֹשֶׁה עַבְדְּךָ, לֵאמֹר:  אַתֶּם תִּמְעָלוּ--אֲנִי, אָפִיץ אֶתְכֶם בָּעַמִּים.    8 Remember, I beseech Thee, the word that Thou didst command Thy servant Moses, saying: If ye deal treacherously, I will scatter you abroad among the peoples;
1.9 ט  וְשַׁבְתֶּם אֵלַי--וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם מִצְוֺתַי, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֹתָם:  אִם-יִהְיֶה נִדַּחֲכֶם בִּקְצֵה הַשָּׁמַיִם, מִשָּׁם אֲקַבְּצֵם, והבואתים (וַהֲבִיאֹתִים) אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתִּי לְשַׁכֵּן אֶת-שְׁמִי שָׁם.    9 but if ye return unto Me, and keep My commandments and do them, though your dispersed were in the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to cause My name to dwell there.
1.10 י  וְהֵם עֲבָדֶיךָ, וְעַמֶּךָ--אֲשֶׁר פָּדִיתָ בְּכֹחֲךָ הַגָּדוֹל, וּבְיָדְךָ הַחֲזָקָה.    10 Now these are Thy servants and Thy people, whom Thou hast redeemed by Thy great power, and by Thy strong hand.
1.11 יא  אָנָּא אֲדֹנָי, תְּהִי נָא אָזְנְךָ-קַשֶּׁבֶת אֶל-תְּפִלַּת עַבְדְּךָ וְאֶל-תְּפִלַּת עֲבָדֶיךָ הַחֲפֵצִים לְיִרְאָה אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ, וְהַצְלִיחָה-נָּא לְעַבְדְּךָ הַיּוֹם, וּתְנֵהוּ לְרַחֲמִים לִפְנֵי הָאִישׁ הַזֶּה; וַאֲנִי הָיִיתִי מַשְׁקֶה, לַמֶּלֶךְ.  {פ}    11 O Lord, I beseech Thee, let now Thine ear be attentive to the prayer of Thy servant, and to the prayer of Thy servants, who delight to fear Thy name; and prosper, I pray Thee, Thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man.' Now I was cupbearer to the king. {P}
2.1 א  וַיְהִי בְּחֹדֶשׁ נִיסָן, שְׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים לְאַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא הַמֶּלֶךְ--יַיִן לְפָנָיו; וָאֶשָּׂא אֶת-הַיַּיִן וָאֶתְּנָה לַמֶּלֶךְ, וְלֹא-הָיִיתִי רַע לְפָנָיו.    1 And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him, that I took up the wine, and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been beforetime sad in his presence.
2.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי הַמֶּלֶךְ מַדּוּעַ פָּנֶיךָ רָעִים, וְאַתָּה אֵינְךָ חוֹלֶה--אֵין זֶה, כִּי-אִם רֹעַ לֵב; וָאִירָא, הַרְבֵּה מְאֹד.    2 And the king said unto me: 'Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart.' Then I was very sore afraid.
2.3 ג  וָאֹמַר לַמֶּלֶךְ, הַמֶּלֶךְ לְעוֹלָם יִחְיֶה; מַדּוּעַ לֹא-יֵרְעוּ פָנַי, אֲשֶׁר הָעִיר בֵּית-קִבְרוֹת אֲבֹתַי חֲרֵבָה, וּשְׁעָרֶיהָ, אֻכְּלוּ בָאֵשׁ.  {ס}    3 And I said unto the king: 'Let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?' {S}
2.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, עַל-מַה-זֶּה אַתָּה מְבַקֵּשׁ; וָאֶתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-אֱלֹהֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם.    4 Then the king said unto me: 'For what dost thou make request?' So I prayed to the God of heaven.
2.5 ה  וָאֹמַר לַמֶּלֶךְ--אִם-עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ טוֹב, וְאִם-יִיטַב עַבְדְּךָ לְפָנֶיךָ:  אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁלָחֵנִי אֶל-יְהוּדָה, אֶל-עִיר קִבְרוֹת אֲבֹתַי--וְאֶבְנֶנָּה.    5 And I said unto the king: 'If it please the king, and if thy servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build it.'
2.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר לִי הַמֶּלֶךְ וְהַשֵּׁגַל יוֹשֶׁבֶת אֶצְלוֹ, עַד-מָתַי יִהְיֶה מַהֲלָכְךָ--וּמָתַי תָּשׁוּב; וַיִּיטַב לִפְנֵי-הַמֶּלֶךְ וַיִּשְׁלָחֵנִי, וָאֶתְּנָה לוֹ זְמָן.    6 And the king said unto me, the queen also sitting by him: 'For how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return?' So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.
2.7 ז  וָאוֹמַר, לַמֶּלֶךְ--אִם-עַל-הַמֶּלֶךְ טוֹב, אִגְּרוֹת יִתְּנוּ-לִי עַל-פַּחֲווֹת עֵבֶר הַנָּהָר:  אֲשֶׁר, יַעֲבִירוּנִי, עַד אֲשֶׁר-אָבוֹא, אֶל-יְהוּדָה.    7 Moreover I said unto the king: 'If it please the king, let letters be given me to the governors beyond the River, that they may let me pass through till I come unto Judah;
2.8 ח  וְאִגֶּרֶת אֶל-אָסָף שֹׁמֵר הַפַּרְדֵּס אֲשֶׁר לַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר יִתֶּן-לִי עֵצִים לְקָרוֹת אֶת-שַׁעֲרֵי הַבִּירָה אֲשֶׁר-לַבַּיִת וּלְחוֹמַת הָעִיר, וְלַבַּיִת, אֲשֶׁר-אָבוֹא אֵלָיו; וַיִּתֶּן-לִי הַמֶּלֶךְ, כְּיַד-אֱלֹהַי הַטּוֹבָה עָלָי.    8 and a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the king's park, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the castle which appertaineth to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into.' And the king granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.
2.9 ט  וָאָבוֹא, אֶל-פַּחֲווֹת עֵבֶר הַנָּהָר, וָאֶתְּנָה לָהֶם, אֵת אִגְּרוֹת הַמֶּלֶךְ; וַיִּשְׁלַח עִמִּי הַמֶּלֶךְ, שָׂרֵי חַיִל וּפָרָשִׁים.  {פ}    9 Then I came to the governors beyond the River, and gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent with me captains of the army and horsemen. {P}
2.10 י  וַיִּשְׁמַע סַנְבַלַּט הַחֹרֹנִי, וְטוֹבִיָּה הָעֶבֶד הָעַמֹּנִי, וַיֵּרַע לָהֶם, רָעָה גְדֹלָה:  אֲשֶׁר-בָּא אָדָם, לְבַקֵּשׁ טוֹבָה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.    10 And when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, for that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.
2.11 יא  וָאָבוֹא, אֶל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וָאֱהִי-שָׁם, יָמִים שְׁלֹשָׁה.    11 So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.
2.12 יב  וָאָקוּם לַיְלָה, אֲנִי וַאֲנָשִׁים מְעַט עִמִּי, וְלֹא-הִגַּדְתִּי לְאָדָם, מָה אֱלֹהַי נֹתֵן אֶל-לִבִּי לַעֲשׂוֹת לִירוּשָׁלִָם; וּבְהֵמָה, אֵין עִמִּי, כִּי אִם-הַבְּהֵמָה, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי רֹכֵב בָּהּ.    12 And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither told I any man what my God put into my heart to do for Jerusalem; neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.
2.13 יג  וָאֵצְאָה בְשַׁעַר-הַגַּיְא לַיְלָה, וְאֶל-פְּנֵי עֵין הַתַּנִּין, וְאֶל-שַׁעַר, הָאַשְׁפֹּת; וָאֱהִי שֹׂבֵר בְּחוֹמֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֲשֶׁר-המפרוצים (הֵם פְּרוּצִים), וּשְׁעָרֶיהָ, אֻכְּלוּ בָאֵשׁ.    13 And I went out by night by the valley gate, even toward the dragon's well, and to the dung gate, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire.
2.14 יד  וָאֶעֱבֹר אֶל-שַׁעַר הָעַיִן, וְאֶל-בְּרֵכַת הַמֶּלֶךְ; וְאֵין-מָקוֹם לַבְּהֵמָה, לַעֲבֹר תַּחְתָּי.    14 Then I went on to the fountain gate and to the king's pool; but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.
2.15 טו  וָאֱהִי עֹלֶה בַנַּחַל לַיְלָה, וָאֱהִי שֹׂבֵר בַּחוֹמָה; וָאָשׁוּב, וָאָבוֹא בְּשַׁעַר הַגַּיְא--וָאָשׁוּב.    15 Then went I up in the night in the valley, and viewed the wall; and I turned back, and entered by the valley gate, and so returned.
2.16 טז  וְהַסְּגָנִים, לֹא יָדְעוּ אָנָה הָלַכְתִּי, וּמָה, אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה; וְלַיְּהוּדִים וְלַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַחֹרִים וְלַסְּגָנִים, וּלְיֶתֶר עֹשֵׂה הַמְּלָאכָה--עַד-כֵּן, לֹא הִגַּדְתִּי.    16 And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.
2.17 יז  וָאוֹמַר אֲלֵהֶם, אַתֶּם רֹאִים הָרָעָה אֲשֶׁר אֲנַחְנוּ בָהּ, אֲשֶׁר יְרוּשָׁלִַם חֲרֵבָה, וּשְׁעָרֶיהָ נִצְּתוּ בָאֵשׁ:  לְכוּ, וְנִבְנֶה אֶת-חוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וְלֹא-נִהְיֶה עוֹד, חֶרְפָּה.    17 Then said I unto them: 'Ye see the evil case that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire; come and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.'
2.18 יח  וָאַגִּיד לָהֶם אֶת-יַד אֱלֹהַי, אֲשֶׁר-הִיא טוֹבָה עָלַי, וְאַף-דִּבְרֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר-לִי; וַיֹּאמְרוּ נָקוּם וּבָנִינוּ, וַיְחַזְּקוּ יְדֵיהֶם לַטּוֹבָה.  {פ}    18 And I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as also of the king's words that he had spoken unto me. And they said: 'Let us rise up and build.' So they strengthened their hands for the good work. {P}
2.19 יט  וַיִּשְׁמַע סַנְבַלַּט הַחֹרֹנִי וְטֹבִיָּה הָעֶבֶד הָעַמּוֹנִי, וְגֶשֶׁם הָעַרְבִי, וַיַּלְעִגוּ לָנוּ, וַיִּבְזוּ עָלֵינוּ; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מָה-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם עֹשִׂים--הַעַל הַמֶּלֶךְ, אַתֶּם מֹרְדִים.    19 But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said: 'What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the king?'
2.20 כ  וָאָשִׁיב אוֹתָם דָּבָר, וָאוֹמַר לָהֶם אֱלֹהֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם הוּא יַצְלִיחַ לָנוּ, וַאֲנַחְנוּ עֲבָדָיו, נָקוּם וּבָנִינוּ; וְלָכֶם, אֵין-חֵלֶק וּצְדָקָה וְזִכָּרוֹן--בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.    20 Then answered I them, and said unto them: 'The God of heaven, He will prosper us; therefore we His servants will arise and build; but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.'
3.1 א  וַיָּקָם אֶלְיָשִׁיב הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל וְאֶחָיו הַכֹּהֲנִים, וַיִּבְנוּ אֶת-שַׁעַר הַצֹּאן--הֵמָּה קִדְּשׁוּהוּ, וַיַּעֲמִידוּ דַּלְתֹתָיו; וְעַד-מִגְדַּל הַמֵּאָה קִדְּשׁוּהוּ, עַד מִגְדַּל חֲנַנְאֵל.  {ס}    1 Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto the tower of Hammeah they sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananel. {S}
3.2 ב  וְעַל-יָדוֹ בָנוּ, אַנְשֵׁי יְרֵחוֹ;  {ס}  וְעַל-יָדוֹ בָנָה, זַכּוּר בֶּן-אִמְרִי.  {ס}    2 And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. {S} And next to them builded Zaccur the son of Imri. {S}
3.3 ג  וְאֵת שַׁעַר הַדָּגִים, בָּנוּ בְּנֵי הַסְּנָאָה; הֵמָּה קֵרוּהוּ--וַיַּעֲמִידוּ דַּלְתֹתָיו, מַנְעוּלָיו וּבְרִיחָיו.  {ס}    3 And the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and the bars thereof. {S}
3.4 ד  וְעַל-יָדָם הֶחֱזִיק, מְרֵמוֹת בֶּן-אוּרִיָּה בֶּן-הַקּוֹץ,  {ס}  וְעַל-יָדָם הֶחֱזִיק, מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן-בֶּרֶכְיָה בֶּן-מְשֵׁיזַבְאֵל;  {ס}  וְעַל-יָדָם הֶחֱזִיק, צָדוֹק בֶּן-בַּעֲנָא.  {ס}    4 And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz. {S} And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel. {S} And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of Baana. {S}
3.5 ה  וְעַל-יָדָם, הֶחֱזִיקוּ הַתְּקוֹעִים; וְאַדִּירֵיהֶם לֹא-הֵבִיאוּ צַוָּרָם, בַּעֲבֹדַת אֲדֹנֵיהֶם.  {ס}    5 And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; and their nobles put not their necks to the work of their lord. {S}
3.6 ו  וְאֵת שַׁעַר הַיְשָׁנָה הֶחֱזִיקוּ, יוֹיָדָע בֶּן-פָּסֵחַ, וּמְשֻׁלָּם, בֶּן-בְּסוֹדְיָה; הֵמָּה קֵרוּהוּ--וַיַּעֲמִידוּ דַּלְתֹתָיו, וּמַנְעֻלָיו וּבְרִיחָיו.  {ס}    6 And the gate of the old city repaired Joiada the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, and the bolts thereof, and the bars thereof. {S}
3.7 ז  וְעַל-יָדָם הֶחֱזִיק מְלַטְיָה הַגִּבְעֹנִי, וְיָדוֹן הַמֵּרֹנֹתִי, אַנְשֵׁי גִבְעוֹן, וְהַמִּצְפָּה--לְכִסֵּא, פַּחַת עֵבֶר הַנָּהָר.  {ס}    7 And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, for them that appertained to the throne of the governor beyond the River. {S}
3.8 ח  עַל-יָדוֹ הֶחֱזִיק, עֻזִּיאֵל בֶּן-חַרְהֲיָה צוֹרְפִים,  {ס}  וְעַל-יָדוֹ הֶחֱזִיק, חֲנַנְיָה בֶּן-הָרַקָּחִים; וַיַּעַזְבוּ, יְרוּשָׁלִַם, עַד, הַחוֹמָה הָרְחָבָה.  {ס}    8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, goldsmiths. {S} And next unto him repaired Hananiah one of the perfumers, and they restored Jerusalem even unto the broad wall. {S}
3.9 ט  וְעַל-יָדָם הֶחֱזִיק, רְפָיָה בֶן-חוּר, שַׂר, חֲצִי פֶּלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִָם.  {ס}    9 And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem. {S}
3.10 י  וְעַל-יָדָם הֶחֱזִיק יְדָיָה בֶן-חֲרוּמַף, וְנֶגֶד בֵּיתוֹ;  {ס}  וְעַל-יָדוֹ הֶחֱזִיק, חַטּוּשׁ בֶּן-חֲשַׁבְנְיָה.    10 And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over against his house. {S} And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of Hashabneiah.
3.11 יא  מִדָּה שֵׁנִית, הֶחֱזִיק מַלְכִּיָּה בֶן-חָרִם, וְחַשּׁוּב, בֶּן-פַּחַת מוֹאָב; וְאֵת, מִגְדַּל הַתַּנּוּרִים.  {ס}    11 Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hasshub the son of Pahath-moab, repaired another portion, and the tower of the furnaces. {S}
3.12 יב  וְעַל-יָדוֹ הֶחֱזִיק, שַׁלּוּם בֶּן-הַלּוֹחֵשׁ, שַׂר, חֲצִי פֶּלֶךְ יְרוּשָׁלִָם; הוּא, וּבְנוֹתָיו.  {ס}    12 And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, he and his daughters. {S}
3.13 יג  אֵת שַׁעַר הַגַּיְא הֶחֱזִיק חָנוּן, וְיֹשְׁבֵי זָנוֹחַ--הֵמָּה בָנוּהוּ, וַיַּעֲמִידוּ דַּלְתֹתָיו מַנְעֻלָיו וּבְרִיחָיו; וְאֶלֶף אַמָּה בַּחוֹמָה, עַד שַׁעַר הָשְׁפוֹת.    13 The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits of the wall unto the dung gate.
3.14 יד  וְאֵת שַׁעַר הָאַשְׁפּוֹת, הֶחֱזִיק מַלְכִּיָּה בֶן-רֵכָב, שַׂר, פֶּלֶךְ בֵּית-הַכָּרֶם; הוּא יִבְנֶנּוּ--וְיַעֲמִיד דַּלְתֹתָיו, מַנְעֻלָיו וּבְרִיחָיו.  {ס}    14 And the dung gate repaired Malchijah the son of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth-cherem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and the bars thereof. {S}
3.15 טו  וְאֵת שַׁעַר הָעַיִן הֶחֱזִיק שַׁלּוּן בֶּן-כָּל-חֹזֶה, שַׂר פֶּלֶךְ הַמִּצְפָּה--הוּא יִבְנֶנּוּ וִיטַלְלֶנּוּ, ויעמידו (וְיַעֲמִיד) דַּלְתֹתָיו מַנְעֻלָיו וּבְרִיחָיו; וְאֵת חוֹמַת בְּרֵכַת הַשֶּׁלַח, לְגַן-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וְעַד-הַמַּעֲלוֹת, הַיּוֹרְדוֹת מֵעִיר דָּוִיד.  {ס}    15 And the fountain gate repaired Shallun the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the bolts thereof, and the bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden, even unto the stairs that go down from the city of David. {S}
3.16 טז  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק, נְחֶמְיָה בֶן-עַזְבּוּק, שַׂר, חֲצִי פֶּלֶךְ בֵּית-צוּר--עַד-נֶגֶד, קִבְרֵי דָוִיד, וְעַד-הַבְּרֵכָה הָעֲשׂוּיָה, וְעַד בֵּית הַגִּבֹּרִים.  {ס}    16 After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth-zur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of David, and unto the pool that was made, and unto the house of the mighty men. {S}
3.17 יז  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיקוּ הַלְוִיִּם, רְחוּם בֶּן-בָּנִי; עַל-יָדוֹ הֶחֱזִיק, חֲשַׁבְיָה שַׂר-חֲצִי-פֶלֶךְ קְעִילָה--לְפִלְכּוֹ.  {ס}    17 After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, for his district. {S}
3.18 יח  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיקוּ אֲחֵיהֶם, בַּוַּי בֶּן-חֵנָדָד, שַׂר, חֲצִי פֶּלֶךְ קְעִילָה.  {ס}    18 After him repaired their brethren, Bavvai the son of Henadad, the ruler of half the district of Keilah. {S}
3.19 יט  וַיְחַזֵּק עַל-יָדוֹ עֵזֶר בֶּן-יֵשׁוּעַ, שַׂר הַמִּצְפָּה--מִדָּה שֵׁנִית:  מִנֶּגֶד, עֲלֹת הַנֶּשֶׁק הַמִּקְצֹעַ.  {ס}    19 And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another portion, over against the ascent to the armoury at the Turning. {S}
3.20 כ  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱרָה הֶחֱזִיק בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-זבי (זַכַּי), מִדָּה שֵׁנִית:  מִן-הַמִּקְצוֹעַ--עַד-פֶּתַח בֵּית אֶלְיָשִׁיב, הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל.  {ס}    20 After him Baruch the son of Zaccai earnestly repaired another portion, from the Turning unto the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest. {S}
3.21 כא  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק, מְרֵמוֹת בֶּן-אוּרִיָּה בֶּן-הַקּוֹץ--מִדָּה שֵׁנִית:  מִפֶּתַח בֵּית אֶלְיָשִׁיב, וְעַד-תַּכְלִית בֵּית אֶלְיָשִׁיב.  {ס}    21 After him repaired Meremoth the son of Uriah the son of Hakkoz another portion, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib. {S}
3.22 כב  וְאַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיקוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים, אַנְשֵׁי הַכִּכָּר.    22 And after him repaired the priests, the men of the Plain.
3.23 כג  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק בִּנְיָמִן וְחַשּׁוּב, נֶגֶד בֵּיתָם;  {ס}  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק, עֲזַרְיָה בֶן-מַעֲשֵׂיָה בֶּן-עֲנָנְיָה--אֵצֶל בֵּיתוֹ.  {ס}    23 After them repaired Benjamin and Hasshub over against their house. {S} After them repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah beside his own house. {S}
3.24 כד  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק, בִּנּוּי בֶּן-חֵנָדָד--מִדָּה שֵׁנִית:  מִבֵּית עֲזַרְיָה, עַד-הַמִּקְצוֹעַ וְעַד-הַפִּנָּה.    24 After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another portion, from the house of Azariah unto the Turning and unto the corner.
3.25 כה  פָּלָל בֶּן-אוּזַי, מִנֶּגֶד הַמִּקְצוֹעַ, וְהַמִּגְדָּל הַיּוֹצֵא מִבֵּית הַמֶּלֶךְ הָעֶלְיוֹן, אֲשֶׁר לַחֲצַר הַמַּטָּרָה; אַחֲרָיו, פְּדָיָה בֶן-פַּרְעֹשׁ.  {ס}    25 Palal the son of Uzai repaired over against the Turning, and the tower that standeth out from the upper house of the king, which is by the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh repaired.-- {S}
3.26 כו  וְהַנְּתִינִים--הָיוּ יֹשְׁבִים, בָּעֹפֶל:  עַד נֶגֶד שַׁעַר הַמַּיִם, לַמִּזְרָח, וְהַמִּגְדָּל, הַיּוֹצֵא.  {ס}    26 Now the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that standeth out.-- {S}
3.27 כז  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיקוּ הַתְּקֹעִים, מִדָּה שֵׁנִית:  מִנֶּגֶד הַמִּגְדָּל הַגָּדוֹל, הַיּוֹצֵא, וְעַד, חוֹמַת הָעֹפֶל.    27 After him the Tekoites repaired another portion, over against the great tower that standeth out, and unto the wall of Ophel.
3.28 כח  מֵעַל שַׁעַר הַסּוּסִים, הֶחֱזִיקוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים--אִישׁ, לְנֶגֶד בֵּיתוֹ.  {ס}    28 Above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over against his own house. {S}
3.29 כט  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק צָדוֹק בֶּן-אִמֵּר, נֶגֶד בֵּיתוֹ;  {ס}  וְאַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק שְׁמַעְיָה בֶן-שְׁכַנְיָה, שֹׁמֵר שַׁעַר הַמִּזְרָח.  {ס}    29 After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his own house. {S} And after him repaired Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate. {S}
3.30 ל  אחרי (אַחֲרָיו) הֶחֱזִיק חֲנַנְיָה בֶן-שֶׁלֶמְיָה, וְחָנוּן בֶּן-צָלָף הַשִּׁשִּׁי--מִדָּה שֵׁנִי;  {ס}  אַחֲרָיו הֶחֱזִיק, מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן-בֶּרֶכְיָה--נֶגֶד, נִשְׁכָּתוֹ.  {ס}    30 After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another portion. {S} After him repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber. {S}
3.31 לא  אחרי (אַחֲרָיו) הֶחֱזִיק, מַלְכִּיָּה בֶּן-הַצֹּרְפִי--עַד-בֵּית הַנְּתִינִים, וְהָרֹכְלִים:  נֶגֶד שַׁעַר הַמִּפְקָד, וְעַד עֲלִיַּת הַפִּנָּה.    31 After him repaired Malchijah one of the goldsmiths unto the house of the Nethinim, and of the merchants, over against the gate of Hammiphkad, and to the upper chamber of the corner.
3.32 לב  וּבֵין עֲלִיַּת הַפִּנָּה לְשַׁעַר הַצֹּאן, הֶחֱזִיקוּ הַצֹּרְפִים וְהָרֹכְלִים.  {פ}    32 And between the upper chamber of the corner and the sheep gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants. {P}
4.1 א  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמַע סַנְבַלַּט, כִּי-אֲנַחְנוּ בוֹנִים אֶת-הַחוֹמָה, וַיִּחַר לוֹ, וַיִּכְעַס הַרְבֵּה; וַיַּלְעֵג, עַל-הַיְּהוּדִים.    33 But it came to pass that, when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.
4.2 ב  וַיֹּאמֶר לִפְנֵי אֶחָיו, וְחֵיל שֹׁמְרוֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר, מָה הַיְּהוּדִים הָאֲמֵלָלִים עֹשִׂים; הֲיַעַזְבוּ לָהֶם הֲיִזְבָּחוּ הַיְכַלּוּ בַיּוֹם, הַיְחַיּוּ אֶת-הָאֲבָנִים מֵעֲרֵמוֹת הֶעָפָר וְהֵמָּה שְׂרוּפוֹת.    34 And he spoke before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said: 'What do these feeble Jews? will they restore at will? will they sacrifice? will they make an end this day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, seeing they are burned?'
4.3 ג  וְטוֹבִיָּה הָעַמֹּנִי, אֶצְלוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר, גַּם אֲשֶׁר-הֵם בּוֹנִים--אִם-יַעֲלֶה שׁוּעָל, וּפָרַץ חוֹמַת אַבְנֵיהֶם.  {פ}    35 Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said: 'Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall break down their stone wall.' {P}
4.4 ד  שְׁמַע אֱלֹהֵינוּ כִּי-הָיִינוּ בוּזָה, וְהָשֵׁב חֶרְפָּתָם אֶל-רֹאשָׁם; וּתְנֵם לְבִזָּה, בְּאֶרֶץ שִׁבְיָה.    36 Hear, O our God; for we are despised; and turn back their reproach upon their own head, and give them up to spoiling in a land of captivity;
4.5 ה  וְאַל-תְּכַס, עַל-עֲוֺנָם, וְחַטָּאתָם, מִלְּפָנֶיךָ אַל-תִּמָּחֶה:  כִּי הִכְעִיסוּ, לְנֶגֶד הַבּוֹנִים.    37 and cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before Thee; for they have vexed Thee before the builders.
4.6 ו  וַנִּבְנֶה, אֶת-הַחוֹמָה, וַתִּקָּשֵׁר כָּל-הַחוֹמָה, עַד-חֶצְיָהּ; וַיְהִי לֵב לָעָם, לַעֲשׂוֹת.  {פ}    38 So we built the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto half the height thereof; for the people had a mind to work. {P}
4.7 ז  וַיְהִי כַאֲשֶׁר שָׁמַע סַנְבַלַּט וְטוֹבִיָּה וְהָעַרְבִים וְהָעַמֹּנִים וְהָאַשְׁדּוֹדִים, כִּי-עָלְתָה אֲרוּכָה לְחֹמוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם--כִּי-הֵחֵלּוּ הַפְּרֻצִים, לְהִסָּתֵם; וַיִּחַר לָהֶם, מְאֹד.    1 But it came to pass that, when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem went forward, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth;
4.8 ח  וַיִּקְשְׁרוּ כֻלָּם יַחְדָּו, לָבוֹא לְהִלָּחֵם בִּירוּשָׁלִָם, וְלַעֲשׂוֹת לוֹ, תּוֹעָה.    2 and they conspired all of them together to come and fight against Jerusalem, and to cause confusion therein.
4.9 ט  וַנִּתְפַּלֵּל, אֶל-אֱלֹהֵינוּ; וַנַּעֲמִיד מִשְׁמָר עֲלֵיהֶם יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, מִפְּנֵיהֶם.    3 But we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.
4.10 י   וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוּדָה, כָּשַׁל כֹּחַ הַסַּבָּל, וְהֶעָפָר, הַרְבֵּה; וַאֲנַחְנוּ לֹא נוּכַל, לִבְנוֹת בַּחוֹמָה.    4 And Judah said: 'The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build the wall.'
4.11 יא  וַיֹּאמְרוּ צָרֵינוּ, לֹא יֵדְעוּ וְלֹא יִרְאוּ, עַד אֲשֶׁר-נָבוֹא אֶל-תּוֹכָם, וַהֲרַגְנוּם; וְהִשְׁבַּתְנוּ, אֶת-הַמְּלָאכָה.    5 And our adversaries said: 'They shall not know, neither see, till we come into the midst of them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.'
4.12 יב  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר-בָּאוּ הַיְּהוּדִים, הַיֹּשְׁבִים אֶצְלָם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לָנוּ עֶשֶׂר פְּעָמִים, מִכָּל-הַמְּקֹמוֹת אֲשֶׁר-תָּשׁוּבוּ עָלֵינוּ.    6 And it came to pass that, when the Jews that dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times: 'Ye must return unto us from all places.'
4.13 יג  וָאַעֲמִיד מִתַּחְתְּיוֹת לַמָּקוֹם, מֵאַחֲרֵי לַחוֹמָה--בצחחיים (בַּצְּחִחִים); וָאַעֲמִיד אֶת-הָעָם לְמִשְׁפָּחוֹת, עִם-חַרְבֹתֵיהֶם רָמְחֵיהֶם וְקַשְּׁתֹתֵיהֶם.    7 Therefore set I in the lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in the open places, I even set the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows.
4.14 יד  וָאֵרֶא וָאָקוּם, וָאֹמַר אֶל-הַחֹרִים וְאֶל-הַסְּגָנִים וְאֶל-יֶתֶר הָעָם--אַל-תִּירְאוּ, מִפְּנֵיהֶם:  אֶת-אֲדֹנָי הַגָּדוֹל וְהַנּוֹרָא, זְכֹרוּ, וְהִלָּחֲמוּ עַל-אֲחֵיכֶם בְּנֵיכֶם וּבְנֹתֵיכֶם, נְשֵׁיכֶם וּבָתֵּיכֶם.  {פ}    8 And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people: 'Be not ye afraid of them; remember the Lord, who is great and awful, and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses.' {P}
4.15 טו  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר-שָׁמְעוּ אוֹיְבֵינוּ, כִּי-נוֹדַע לָנוּ, וַיָּפֶר הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶת-עֲצָתָם; ונשוב (וַנָּשָׁב) כֻּלָּנוּ אֶל-הַחוֹמָה, אִישׁ אֶל-מְלַאכְתּוֹ.    9 And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.
4.16 טז וַיְהִי מִן-הַיּוֹם הַהוּא, חֲצִי נְעָרַי עֹשִׂים בַּמְּלָאכָה, וְחֶצְיָם מַחֲזִיקִים וְהָרְמָחִים הַמָּגִנִּים, וְהַקְּשָׁתוֹת וְהַשִּׁרְיֹנִים; וְהַשָּׂרִים--אַחֲרֵי, כָּל-בֵּית יְהוּדָה.    10 And it came to pass from that time forth, that half of my servants wrought in the work, and half of them held the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the coats of mail; and the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.
4.17 יז  הַבּוֹנִים בַּחוֹמָה וְהַנֹּשְׂאִים בַּסֶּבֶל, עֹמְשִׂים; בְּאַחַת יָדוֹ עֹשֶׂה בַמְּלָאכָה, וְאַחַת מַחֲזֶקֶת הַשָּׁלַח.    11 They that builded the wall and they that bore burdens laded themselves, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other held his weapon;
4.18 יח  וְהַבּוֹנִים--אִישׁ חַרְבּוֹ אֲסוּרִים עַל-מָתְנָיו, וּבוֹנִים; וְהַתּוֹקֵעַ בַּשּׁוֹפָר, אֶצְלִי.    12 and the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And he that sounded the horn was by me.
4.19 יט  וָאֹמַר אֶל-הַחֹרִים וְאֶל-הַסְּגָנִים, וְאֶל-יֶתֶר הָעָם--הַמְּלָאכָה הַרְבֵּה, וּרְחָבָה; וַאֲנַחְנוּ, נִפְרָדִים עַל-הַחוֹמָה, רְחוֹקִים, אִישׁ מֵאָחִיו.    13 And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers and to the rest of the people: 'The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the wall, one far from another;
4.20 כ  בִּמְקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׁמְעוּ אֶת-קוֹל הַשּׁוֹפָר, שָׁמָּה, תִּקָּבְצוּ אֵלֵינוּ; אֱלֹהֵינוּ, יִלָּחֶם לָנוּ.    14 in what place soever ye hear the sound of the horn, resort ye thither unto us; our God will fight for us.'
4.21 כא  וַאֲנַחְנוּ, עֹשִׂים בַּמְּלָאכָה; וְחֶצְיָם, מַחֲזִיקִים בָּרְמָחִים, מֵעֲלוֹת הַשַּׁחַר, עַד צֵאת הַכּוֹכָבִים.    15 So we wrought in the work; and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.
4.22 כב  גַּם בָּעֵת הַהִיא, אָמַרְתִּי לָעָם--אִישׁ וְנַעֲרוֹ, יָלִינוּ בְּתוֹךְ יְרוּשָׁלִָם; וְהָיוּ-לָנוּ הַלַּיְלָה מִשְׁמָר, וְהַיּוֹם מְלָאכָה.    16 Likewise at the same time said I unto the people: 'Let every one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a guard to us, and may labour in the day.'
4.23 כג  וְאֵין אֲנִי וְאַחַי וּנְעָרַי, וְאַנְשֵׁי הַמִּשְׁמָר אֲשֶׁר אַחֲרַי--אֵין-אֲנַחְנוּ פֹשְׁטִים, בְּגָדֵינוּ; אִישׁ, שִׁלְחוֹ הַמָּיִם.  {ס}    17 So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard that followed me, none of us put off our clothes, every one that went to the water had his weapon. {S}
5.1 א  וַתְּהִי צַעֲקַת הָעָם וּנְשֵׁיהֶם, גְּדוֹלָה, אֶל-אֲחֵיהֶם, הַיְּהוּדִים.    1 Then there arose a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brethren the Jews.
5.2 ב  וְיֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר אֹמְרִים, בָּנֵינוּ וּבְנֹתֵינוּ אֲנַחְנוּ רַבִּים; וְנִקְחָה דָגָן, וְנֹאכְלָה וְנִחְיֶה.    2 For there were that said: 'We, our sons and our daughters, are many; let us get for them corn, that we may eat and live.'
5.3 ג  וְיֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר אֹמְרִים, שְׂדֹתֵינוּ וּכְרָמֵינוּ וּבָתֵּינוּ אֲנַחְנוּ עֹרְבִים; וְנִקְחָה דָגָן, בָּרָעָב.    3 Some also there were that said: 'We are mortgaging our fields, and our vineyards, and our houses; let us get corn, because of the dearth.'
5.4 ד  וְיֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר אֹמְרִים, לָוִינוּ כֶסֶף לְמִדַּת הַמֶּלֶךְ, שְׂדֹתֵינוּ, וּכְרָמֵינוּ.    4 There were also that said: 'We have borrowed money for the king's tribute upon our fields and our vineyards.
5.5 ה  וְעַתָּה, כִּבְשַׂר אַחֵינוּ בְּשָׂרֵנוּ, כִּבְנֵיהֶם, בָּנֵינוּ; וְהִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ כֹבְשִׁים אֶת-בָּנֵינוּ וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֵינוּ לַעֲבָדִים, וְיֵשׁ מִבְּנֹתֵינוּ נִכְבָּשׁוֹת וְאֵין לְאֵל יָדֵנוּ, וּשְׂדֹתֵינוּ וּכְרָמֵינוּ, לַאֲחֵרִים.    5 Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children; and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought into bondage already; neither is it in our power to help it; for other men have our fields and our vineyards.'
5.6 ו  וַיִּחַר לִי, מְאֹד, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְתִּי אֶת-זַעֲקָתָם, וְאֵת הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה.    6 And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.
5.7 ז  וַיִּמָּלֵךְ לִבִּי עָלַי, וָאָרִיבָה אֶת-הַחֹרִים וְאֶת-הַסְּגָנִים, וָאֹמְרָה לָהֶם, מַשָּׁא אִישׁ-בְּאָחִיו אַתֶּם נשאים (נֹשִׁים); וָאֶתֵּן עֲלֵיהֶם, קְהִלָּה גְדוֹלָה.    7 Then I consulted with myself, and contended with the nobles and the rulers, and said unto them: 'Ye lend upon pledge, every one to his brother.' And I held a great assembly against them.
5.8 ח  וָאֹמְרָה לָהֶם, אֲנַחְנוּ קָנִינוּ אֶת-אַחֵינוּ הַיְּהוּדִים הַנִּמְכָּרִים לַגּוֹיִם כְּדֵי בָנוּ, וְגַם-אַתֶּם תִּמְכְּרוּ אֶת-אֲחֵיכֶם, וְנִמְכְּרוּ-לָנוּ; וַיַּחֲרִישׁוּ, וְלֹא מָצְאוּ דָּבָר.  {ס}    8 And I said unto them: 'We after our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews, that sold themselves unto the heathen; and would ye nevertheless sell your brethren, and should they sell themselves unto us?' Then held they their peace, and found never a word. {S}
5.9 ט  ויאמר (וָאֹמַר), לֹא-טוֹב הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם עֹשִׂים:  הֲלוֹא בְּיִרְאַת אֱלֹהֵינוּ תֵּלֵכוּ, מֵחֶרְפַּת הַגּוֹיִם אוֹיְבֵינוּ.    9 Also I said: 'The thing that ye do is not good; ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?
5.10 י  וְגַם-אֲנִי אַחַי וּנְעָרַי, נֹשִׁים בָּהֶם כֶּסֶף וְדָגָן; נַעַזְבָה-נָּא, אֶת-הַמַּשָּׁא הַזֶּה.    10 And I likewise, my brethren and my servants, have lent them money and corn. I pray you, let us leave off this exaction.
5.11 יא  הָשִׁיבוּ נָא לָהֶם כְּהַיּוֹם, שְׂדֹתֵיהֶם כַּרְמֵיהֶם זֵיתֵיהֶם--וּבָתֵּיהֶם; וּמְאַת הַכֶּסֶף וְהַדָּגָן הַתִּירוֹשׁ וְהַיִּצְהָר, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם נֹשִׁים בָּהֶם.    11 Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their fields, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundred pieces of silver, and the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them.'
5.12 יב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ נָשִׁיב, וּמֵהֶם לֹא נְבַקֵּשׁ--כֵּן נַעֲשֶׂה, כַּאֲשֶׁר אַתָּה אוֹמֵר; וָאֶקְרָא, אֶת-הַכֹּהֲנִים, וָאַשְׁבִּיעֵם, לַעֲשׂוֹת כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    12 Then said they: 'We will restore them, and will require nothing of them; so will we do, even as thou sayest.' Then I called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.
5.13 יג  גַּם-חָצְנִי נָעַרְתִּי, וָאֹמְרָה כָּכָה יְנַעֵר הָאֱלֹהִים אֶת-כָּל-הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָקִים אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה מִבֵּיתוֹ וּמִיגִיעוֹ, וְכָכָה יִהְיֶה נָעוּר, וָרֵק; וַיֹּאמְרוּ כָל-הַקָּהָל אָמֵן, וַיְהַלְלוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, וַיַּעַשׂ הָעָם, כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.    13 Also I shook out my lap, and said: 'So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise; even thus be he shaken out, and emptied.' And all the congregation said: 'Amen', and praised the LORD. And the people did according to this promise.
5.14 יד  גַּם מִיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה אוֹתִי, לִהְיוֹת פֶּחָם בְּאֶרֶץ יְהוּדָה, מִשְּׁנַת עֶשְׂרִים וְעַד שְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם לְאַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא הַמֶּלֶךְ, שָׁנִים שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה--אֲנִי וְאַחַי, לֶחֶם הַפֶּחָה לֹא אָכַלְתִּי.    14 Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.
5.15 טו  וְהַפַּחוֹת הָרִאשֹׁנִים אֲשֶׁר-לְפָנַי הִכְבִּידוּ עַל-הָעָם, וַיִּקְחוּ מֵהֶם בְּלֶחֶם וָיַיִן אַחַר כֶּסֶף-שְׁקָלִים אַרְבָּעִים--גַּם נַעֲרֵיהֶם, שָׁלְטוּ עַל-הָעָם; וַאֲנִי לֹא-עָשִׂיתִי כֵן, מִפְּנֵי יִרְאַת אֱלֹהִים.    15 But the former governors that were before me laid burdens upon the people, and took of them for bread and wine above forty shekels of silver; yea, even their servants lorded over the people; but so did not I, because of the fear of God.
5.16 טז  וְגַם בִּמְלֶאכֶת הַחוֹמָה הַזֹּאת, הֶחֱזַקְתִּי, וְשָׂדֶה, לֹא קָנִינוּ; וְכָל-נְעָרַי--קְבוּצִים שָׁם, עַל-הַמְּלָאכָה.    16 Yea, also I set hand to the work of this wall, neither bought we any land; and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work.
5.17 יז  וְהַיְּהוּדִים וְהַסְּגָנִים מֵאָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אִישׁ, וְהַבָּאִים אֵלֵינוּ מִן-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר-סְבִיבֹתֵינוּ--עַל-שֻׁלְחָנִי.    17 Moreover there were at my table of the Jews and the rulers a hundred and fifty men, beside those that came unto us from among the nations that were round about us.
5.18 יח  וַאֲשֶׁר הָיָה נַעֲשֶׂה לְיוֹם אֶחָד, שׁוֹר אֶחָד צֹאן שֵׁשׁ-בְּרֻרוֹת וְצִפֳּרִים נַעֲשׂוּ-לִי, וּבֵין עֲשֶׂרֶת יָמִים בְּכָל-יַיִן, לְהַרְבֵּה; וְעִם-זֶה, לֶחֶם הַפֶּחָה לֹא בִקַּשְׁתִּי--כִּי-כָבְדָה הָעֲבֹדָה, עַל-הָעָם הַזֶּה.    18 Now that which was prepared for one day was one ox and six choice sheep, also fowls were prepared for me; and once in ten days store of all sorts of wine; yet for all this I demanded not the bread of the governor, because the service was heavy upon this people.
5.19 יט  זָכְרָה-לִּי אֱלֹהַי, לְטוֹבָה--כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי, עַל-הָעָם הַזֶּה.  {פ}    19 Remember unto me, O my God, for good, all that I have done for this people. {P}
6.1 א  וַיְהִי כַאֲשֶׁר נִשְׁמַע לְסַנְבַלַּט וְטוֹבִיָּה וּלְגֶשֶׁם הָעַרְבִי וּלְיֶתֶר אֹיְבֵינוּ, כִּי בָנִיתִי אֶת-הַחוֹמָה, וְלֹא-נוֹתַר בָּהּ, פָּרֶץ--גַּם עַד-הָעֵת הַהִיא, דְּלָתוֹת לֹא-הֶעֱמַדְתִּי בַשְּׁעָרִים.    1 Now it came to pass, when it was reported to Sanballat and Tobiah, and to Geshem the Arabian, and unto the rest of our enemies, that I had builded the wall, and that there was no breach left therein--though even unto that time I had not set up the doors in the gates--
6.2 ב  וַיִּשְׁלַח סַנְבַלַּט וְגֶשֶׁם אֵלַי לֵאמֹר, לְכָה וְנִוָּעֲדָה יַחְדָּו בַּכְּפִירִים בְּבִקְעַת אוֹנוֹ; וְהֵמָּה, חֹשְׁבִים, לַעֲשׂוֹת לִי, רָעָה.    2 that Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, saying: 'Come, let us meet together in one of the villages in the plain of Ono.' But they thought to do me mischief.
6.3 ג  וָאֶשְׁלְחָה עֲלֵיהֶם מַלְאָכִים, לֵאמֹר--מְלָאכָה גְדוֹלָה אֲנִי עֹשֶׂה, וְלֹא אוּכַל לָרֶדֶת; לָמָּה תִשְׁבַּת הַמְּלָאכָה כַּאֲשֶׁר אַרְפֶּהָ, וְיָרַדְתִּי אֲלֵיכֶם.    3 And I sent messengers unto them, saying: 'I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down; why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?'
6.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁלְחוּ אֵלַי כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה, אַרְבַּע פְּעָמִים; וָאָשִׁיב אוֹתָם, כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה.  {ס}    4 And they sent unto me four times after this sort; and I answered them after the same manner. {S}
6.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֵלַי סַנְבַלַּט כַּדָּבָר הַזֶּה, פַּעַם חֲמִישִׁית--אֶת-נַעֲרוֹ; וְאִגֶּרֶת פְּתוּחָה, בְּיָדוֹ.    5 Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand;
6.6 ו  כָּתוּב בָּהּ, בַּגּוֹיִם נִשְׁמָע וְגַשְׁמוּ אֹמֵר, אַתָּה וְהַיְּהוּדִים חֹשְׁבִים לִמְרוֹד, עַל-כֵּן אַתָּה בוֹנֶה הַחוֹמָה; וְאַתָּה, הֹוֶה לָהֶם לְמֶלֶךְ--כַּדְּבָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה.    6 wherein was written: 'It is reported among the nations, and Geshem saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel; for which cause thou buildest the wall; and thou wouldest be their king, even according to these words.
6.7 ז  וְגַם-נְבִיאִים הֶעֱמַדְתָּ לִקְרֹא עָלֶיךָ בִירוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר, מֶלֶךְ בִּיהוּדָה, וְעַתָּה יִשָּׁמַע לַמֶּלֶךְ, כַּדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וְעַתָּה לְכָה, וְנִוָּעֲצָה יַחְדָּו.  {ס}    7 And thou hast also appointed prophets to proclaim of thee at Jerusalem, saying: There is a king in Judah; and now shall it be reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together.' {S}
6.8 ח  וָאֶשְׁלְחָה אֵלָיו, לֵאמֹר--לֹא נִהְיָה כַּדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר אַתָּה אוֹמֵר:  כִּי מִלִּבְּךָ, אַתָּה בוֹדָאם.    8 Then I sent unto him, saying: 'There are no such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.'
6.9 ט  כִּי כֻלָּם, מְיָרְאִים אוֹתָנוּ לֵאמֹר, יִרְפּוּ יְדֵיהֶם מִן-הַמְּלָאכָה, וְלֹא תֵעָשֶׂה; וְעַתָּה, חַזֵּק אֶת-יָדָי.    9 For they all would have us afraid, saying: 'Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done.' But now, strengthen Thou my hands.
6.10 י  וַאֲנִי-בָאתִי, בֵּית שְׁמַעְיָה בֶן-דְּלָיָה בֶּן-מְהֵיטַבְאֵל--וְהוּא עָצוּר; וַיֹּאמֶר נִוָּעֵד אֶל-בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים אֶל-תּוֹךְ הַהֵיכָל, וְנִסְגְּרָה דַּלְתוֹת הַהֵיכָל--כִּי בָּאִים לְהָרְגֶךָ, וְלַיְלָה בָּאִים לְהָרְגֶךָ.    10 And as for me, I went unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabel, who was shut up; and he said: 'Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple; for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the night will they come to slay thee.'
6.11 יא  וָאֹמְרָה, הַאִישׁ כָּמוֹנִי יִבְרָח, וּמִי כָמוֹנִי אֲשֶׁר-יָבֹא אֶל-הַהֵיכָל, וָחָי; לֹא, אָבוֹא.    11 And I said: 'Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that, being such as I, could go into the temple and live? I will not go in.'
6.12 יב  וָאַכִּירָה, וְהִנֵּה לֹא-אֱלֹהִים שְׁלָחוֹ:  כִּי הַנְּבוּאָה דִּבֶּר עָלַי, וְטוֹבִיָּה וְסַנְבַלַּט שְׂכָרוֹ.    12 And I discerned, and, lo, God had not sent him; for he pronounced this prophecy against me, whereas Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
6.13 יג  לְמַעַן שָׂכוּר הוּא, לְמַעַן-אִירָא וְאֶעֱשֶׂה-כֵּן וְחָטָאתִי; וְהָיָה לָהֶם לְשֵׁם רָע, לְמַעַן יְחָרְפוּנִי.  {פ}    13 For this cause was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might taunt me. {P}
6.14 יד  זָכְרָה אֱלֹהַי לְטוֹבִיָּה וּלְסַנְבַלַּט, כְּמַעֲשָׂיו אֵלֶּה; וְגַם לְנוֹעַדְיָה הַנְּבִיאָה וּלְיֶתֶר הַנְּבִיאִים, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ מְיָרְאִים אוֹתִי.    14 Remember, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and also the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have me put in fear.
6.15 טו  וַתִּשְׁלַם, הַחוֹמָה, בְּעֶשְׂרִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה, לֶאֱלוּל--לַחֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנַיִם, יוֹם.  {פ}    15 So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty and two days. {P}
6.16 טז  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמְעוּ כָּל-אוֹיְבֵינוּ, וַיִּרְאוּ כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבֹתֵינוּ, וַיִּפְּלוּ מְאֹד בְּעֵינֵיהֶם; וַיֵּדְעוּ--כִּי מֵאֵת אֱלֹהֵינוּ, נֶעֶשְׂתָה הַמְּלָאכָה הַזֹּאת.    16 And it came to pass, when all our enemies heard thereof, that all the nations that were about us feared, and were much cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God.
6.17 יז  גַּם בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, מַרְבִּים חֹרֵי יְהוּדָה אִגְּרֹתֵיהֶם, הוֹלְכוֹת, עַל-טוֹבִיָּה; וַאֲשֶׁר לְטוֹבִיָּה, בָּאוֹת אֲלֵיהֶם.    17 Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them.
6.18 יח  כִּי-רַבִּים בִּיהוּדָה, בַּעֲלֵי שְׁבוּעָה לוֹ--כִּי-חָתָן הוּא, לִשְׁכַנְיָה בֶן-אָרַח; וִיהוֹחָנָן בְּנוֹ--לָקַח, אֶת-בַּת-מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן בֶּרֶכְיָה.    18 For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah; and his son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah to wife.
6.19 יט  גַּם טוֹבֹתָיו, הָיוּ אֹמְרִים לְפָנַי, וּדְבָרַי, הָיוּ מוֹצִיאִים לוֹ; אִגְּרוֹת שָׁלַח טוֹבִיָּה, לְיָרְאֵנִי.    19 Also they spoke of his good deeds before me, and reported my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.
7.1 א  וַיְהִי, כַּאֲשֶׁר נִבְנְתָה הַחוֹמָה, וָאַעֲמִיד, הַדְּלָתוֹת; וַיִּפָּקְדוּ הַשּׁוֹעֲרִים וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים, וְהַלְוִיִּם.    1 Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
7.2 ב  וָאֲצַוֶּה אֶת-חֲנָנִי אָחִי, וְאֶת-חֲנַנְיָה שַׂר הַבִּירָה--עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי-הוּא כְּאִישׁ אֱמֶת, וְיָרֵא אֶת-הָאֱלֹהִים מֵרַבִּים.    2 that I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the governor of the castle, charge over Jerusalem; for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many.
7.3 ג  ויאמר (וָאֹמַר) לָהֶם, לֹא יִפָּתְחוּ שַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם עַד-חֹם הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, וְעַד הֵם עֹמְדִים יָגִיפוּ הַדְּלָתוֹת, וֶאֱחֹזוּ; וְהַעֲמֵיד, מִשְׁמְרוֹת יֹשְׁבֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם--אִישׁ בְּמִשְׁמָרוֹ, וְאִישׁ נֶגֶד בֵּיתוֹ.    3 And I said unto them: 'Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand on guard, let them shut the doors, and bar ye them; and let watches be appointed of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against his house.'
7.4 ד  וְהָעִיר רַחֲבַת יָדַיִם, וּגְדֹלָה, וְהָעָם מְעַט, בְּתוֹכָהּ; וְאֵין בָּתִּים, בְּנוּיִם.    4 Now the city was wide and large; but the people were few therein, and the houses were not builded.
7.5 ה  וַיִּתֵּן אֱלֹהַי אֶל-לִבִּי, וָאֶקְבְּצָה אֶת-הַחֹרִים וְאֶת-הַסְּגָנִים וְאֶת-הָעָם לְהִתְיַחֵשׂ; וָאֶמְצָא, סֵפֶר הַיַּחַשׂ הָעוֹלִים בָּרִאשׁוֹנָה, וָאֶמְצָא, כָּתוּב בּוֹ.  {פ}    5 And my God put into my heart to gather together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found the book of the genealogy of them that came up at the first, and I found written therein: {P}
7.6 ו  אֵלֶּה בְּנֵי הַמְּדִינָה, הָעֹלִים מִשְּׁבִי הַגּוֹלָה, אֲשֶׁר הֶגְלָה, נְבוּכַדְנֶצַּר מֶלֶךְ בָּבֶל; וַיָּשׁוּבוּ לִירוּשָׁלִַם וְלִיהוּדָה, אִישׁ לְעִירוֹ.    6 These are the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and that returned unto Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his city;
7.7 ז  הַבָּאִים עִם-זְרֻבָּבֶל, יֵשׁוּעַ נְחֶמְיָה עֲזַרְיָה רַעַמְיָה נַחֲמָנִי מָרְדֳּכַי בִּלְשָׁן מִסְפֶּרֶת בִּגְוַי--נְחוּם בַּעֲנָה:  מִסְפַּר, אַנְשֵׁי עַם יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}    7 who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel: {S}
7.8 ח  בְּנֵי פַרְעֹשׁ--אַלְפַּיִם, מֵאָה וְשִׁבְעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    8 The children of Parosh, two thousand a hundred and seventy and two. {S}
7.9 ט  בְּנֵי שְׁפַטְיָה, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת שִׁבְעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    9 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two. {S}
7.10 י  בְּנֵי אָרַח, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    10 The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two. {S}
7.11 יא  בְּנֵי-פַחַת מוֹאָב לִבְנֵי יֵשׁוּעַ, וְיוֹאָב--אַלְפַּיִם, וּשְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת שְׁמֹנָה עָשָׂר.  {ס}    11 The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen. {S}
7.12 יב  בְּנֵי עֵילָם--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם חֲמִשִּׁים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    12 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. {S}
7.13 יג  בְּנֵי זַתּוּא, שְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    13 The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five. {S}
7.14 יד  בְּנֵי זַכָּי, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים.  {ס}    14 The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore. {S}
7.15 טו  בְּנֵי בִנּוּי, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    15 The children of Binnui, six hundred forty and eight. {S}
7.16 טז  בְּנֵי בֵבָי, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    16 The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight. {S}
7.17 יז  בְּנֵי עַזְגָּד--אַלְפַּיִם, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    17 The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two. {S}
7.18 יח  בְּנֵי, אֲדֹנִיקָם--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, שִׁשִּׁים וְשִׁבְעָה.  {ס}    18 The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven. {S}
7.19 יט  בְּנֵי בִגְוָי, אַלְפַּיִם שִׁשִּׁים וְשִׁבְעָה.  {ס}    19 The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven. {S}
7.20 כ  בְּנֵי עָדִין, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת חֲמִשִּׁים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    20 The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five. {S}
7.21 כא  בְּנֵי-אָטֵר לְחִזְקִיָּה, תִּשְׁעִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    21 The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety and eight. {S}
7.22 כב  בְּנֵי חָשֻׁם, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    22 The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight. {S}
7.23 כג  בְּנֵי בֵצָי, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    23 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four. {S}
7.24 כד  בְּנֵי חָרִיף, מֵאָה שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר.  {ס}    24 The children of Hariph, a hundred and twelve. {S}
7.25 כה  בְּנֵי גִבְעוֹן, תִּשְׁעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    25 The children of Gibeon, ninety and five. {S}
7.26 כו  אַנְשֵׁי בֵית-לֶחֶם וּנְטֹפָה, מֵאָה שְׁמֹנִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    26 The men of Beth-lehem and Netophah, a hundred fourscore and eight. {S}
7.27 כז  אַנְשֵׁי עֲנָתוֹת, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    27 The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty and eight. {S}
7.28 כח  אַנְשֵׁי בֵית-עַזְמָוֶת, אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    28 The men of Beth-azmaveth, forty and two. {S}
7.29 כט  אַנְשֵׁי קִרְיַת יְעָרִים כְּפִירָה וּבְאֵרוֹת, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    29 The men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty and three. {S}
7.30 ל  אַנְשֵׁי הָרָמָה וָגָבַע, שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת עֶשְׂרִים וְאֶחָד.  {ס}    30 The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty and one. {S}
7.31 לא  אַנְשֵׁי מִכְמָס, מֵאָה וְעֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    31 The men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty and two. {S}
7.32 לב  אַנְשֵׁי בֵית-אֵל וְהָעָי, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    32 The men of Beth-el and Ai, a hundred twenty and three. {S}
7.33 לג  אַנְשֵׁי נְבוֹ אַחֵר, חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    33 The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two. {S}
7.34 לד  בְּנֵי, עֵילָם אַחֵר--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם חֲמִשִּׁים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    34 The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. {S}
7.35 לה  בְּנֵי חָרִם, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת וְעֶשְׂרִים.  {ס}    35 The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty. {S}
7.36 לו  בְּנֵי יְרֵחוֹ, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת אַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    36 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five. {S}
7.37 לז  בְּנֵי-לֹד חָדִיד וְאֹנוֹ, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְעֶשְׂרִים וְאֶחָד.  {ס}    37 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and one. {S}
7.38 לח  בְּנֵי סְנָאָה--שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת וּשְׁלֹשִׁים.  {פ}    38 The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty. {P}
7.39 לט  הַכֹּהֲנִים:  בְּנֵי יְדַעְיָה לְבֵית יֵשׁוּעַ, תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת שִׁבְעִים וּשְׁלֹשָׁה.  {ס}    39 The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three. {S}
7.40 מ  בְּנֵי אִמֵּר, אֶלֶף חֲמִשִּׁים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    40 The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two. {S}
7.41 מא  בְּנֵי פַשְׁחוּר--אֶלֶף, מָאתַיִם אַרְבָּעִים וְשִׁבְעָה.  {ס}    41 The children of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven. {S}
7.42 מב  בְּנֵי חָרִם, אֶלֶף שִׁבְעָה עָשָׂר.  {פ}    42 The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen. {P}
7.43 מג  הַלְוִיִּם:  בְּנֵי-יֵשׁוּעַ לְקַדְמִיאֵל לִבְנֵי לְהוֹדְוָה, שִׁבְעִים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {ס}    43 The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the children of Hodeiah, seventy and four. {S}
7.44 מד  הַמְשֹׁרְרִים--בְּנֵי אָסָף, מֵאָה אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    44 The singers: the children of Asaph, a hundred forty and eight. {S}
7.45 מה  הַשֹּׁעֲרִים, בְּנֵי-שַׁלֻּם בְּנֵי-אָטֵר בְּנֵי-טַלְמֹן בְּנֵי-עַקּוּב, בְּנֵי חֲטִיטָא, בְּנֵי שֹׁבָי--מֵאָה, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁמֹנָה.  {ס}    45 The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, a hundred thirty and eight. {S}
7.46 מו  הַנְּתִינִים:  בְּנֵי-צִחָא בְנֵי-חֲשֻׂפָא, בְּנֵי טַבָּעוֹת.    46 The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth;
7.47 מז  בְּנֵי-קֵירֹס בְּנֵי-סִיעָא, בְּנֵי פָדוֹן.    47 the children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon;
7.48 מח  בְּנֵי-לְבָנָה בְנֵי-חֲגָבָא, בְּנֵי שַׁלְמָי.    48 the children of Lebanah, the children of Hagaba, the children of Salmai;
7.49 מט  בְּנֵי-חָנָן בְּנֵי-גִדֵּל, בְּנֵי-גָחַר.    49 the children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar;
7.50 נ  בְּנֵי-רְאָיָה בְנֵי-רְצִין, בְּנֵי נְקוֹדָא.    50 the children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda;
7.51 נא  בְּנֵי-גַזָּם בְּנֵי-עֻזָּא, בְּנֵי פָסֵחַ.    51 the children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Paseah;
7.52 נב  בְּנֵי-בֵסַי בְּנֵי-מְעוּנִים, בְּנֵי נפושסים (נְפִישְׁסִים).    52 the children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim;
7.53 נג  בְּנֵי-בַקְבּוּק בְּנֵי-חֲקוּפָא, בְּנֵי חַרְחוּר.  {ס}    53 the children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur; {S}
7.54 נד  בְּנֵי-בַצְלִית בְּנֵי-מְחִידָא, בְּנֵי חַרְשָׁא.    54 the children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha;
7.55 נה  בְּנֵי-  {ר}  בַרְקוֹס  {ס}  בְּנֵי-סִיסְרָא,  {ס}  בְּנֵי-תָמַח.  {ס}    55 the children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Temah;
7.56 נו  בְּנֵי  {ר}  נְצִיחַ,  {ס}  בְּנֵי חֲטִיפָא.  {ס}    56 the children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.
7.57 נז  בְּנֵי, עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה:  {ס}  בְּנֵי-  {ר}  סוֹטַי  {ס}  בְּנֵי-סֹפֶרֶת,  {ס}  בְּנֵי פְרִידָא.  {ס}    57 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida;
7.58 נח  בְּנֵי-  {ר}  יַעְלָא  {ס}  בְנֵי-דַרְקוֹן,  {ס}  בְּנֵי גִדֵּל.  {ס}    58 the children of Jala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel;
7.59 נט  בְּנֵי  {ר}  שְׁפַטְיָה  {ס}  בְנֵי-חַטִּיל,  {ס}  בְּנֵי פֹּכֶרֶת הַצְּבָיִים--  {ס}  בְּנֵי  {ר}  אָמוֹן.    59 the children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of Amon.
7.60 ס  כָּל-הַנְּתִינִים--וּבְנֵי, עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה:  שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת, תִּשְׁעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {פ}    60 All the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety and two. {P}
7.61 סא  וְאֵלֶּה, הָעוֹלִים מִתֵּל מֶלַח תֵּל חַרְשָׁא, כְּרוּב אַדּוֹן, וְאִמֵּר; וְלֹא יָכְלוּ, לְהַגִּיד בֵּית-אֲבֹתָם וְזַרְעָם--אִם מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, הֵם.    61 And these were they that went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but they could not tell their fathers' houses, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel:
7.62 סב  בְּנֵי-דְלָיָה בְנֵי-טוֹבִיָּה, בְּנֵי נְקוֹדָא--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, וְאַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.  {ס}    62 the children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two. {S}
7.63 סג  וּמִן-הַכֹּהֲנִים, בְּנֵי חֳבַיָּה בְּנֵי הַקּוֹץ:  בְּנֵי בַרְזִלַּי, אֲשֶׁר לָקַח מִבְּנוֹת בַּרְזִלַּי הַגִּלְעָדִי אִשָּׁה, וַיִּקָּרֵא, עַל-שְׁמָם.    63 And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name.
7.64 סד  אֵלֶּה, בִּקְשׁוּ כְתָבָם הַמִּתְיַחְשִׂים--וְלֹא נִמְצָא; וַיְגֹאֲלוּ, מִן-הַכְּהֻנָּה.    64 These sought their register, that is, the genealogy, but it was not found; therefore were they deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.
7.65 סה  וַיֹּאמֶר הַתִּרְשָׁתָא לָהֶם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יֹאכְלוּ מִקֹּדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים--עַד עֲמֹד הַכֹּהֵן, לְאוּרִים וְתֻמִּים.    65 And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim.
7.66 סו  כָּל-הַקָּהָל, כְּאֶחָד--אַרְבַּע רִבּוֹא, אַלְפַּיִם שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת וְשִׁשִּׁים.    66 The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,
7.67 סז  מִלְּבַד עַבְדֵיהֶם וְאַמְהֹתֵיהֶם, אֵלֶּה--שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים, שְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת שְׁלֹשִׁים וְשִׁבְעָה; וְלָהֶם, מְשֹׁרְרִים וּמְשֹׁרְרוֹת--מָאתַיִם, וְאַרְבָּעִים וַחֲמִשָּׁה.  {ס}    67 beside their men-servants and their maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven; and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and singing women. {S}
7.68 סח  גְּמַלִּים, אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת שְׁלֹשִׁים וַחֲמִשָּׁה;  {ס}  חֲמֹרִים--שֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וְעֶשְׂרִים.    68 Their camels, four hundred thirty and five; {S} their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
7.69 סט  וּמִקְצָת רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, נָתְנוּ לַמְּלָאכָה--הַתִּרְשָׁתָא נָתַן לָאוֹצָר, זָהָב דַּרְכְּמֹנִים אֶלֶף מִזְרָקוֹת חֲמִשִּׁים, כָּתְנוֹת כֹּהֲנִים, שְׁלֹשִׁים וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.    69 And some from among the heads of fathers' houses gave unto the work. The Tirshatha gave to the treasury a thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, five hundred and thirty priests' tunics.
7.70 ע  וּמֵרָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, נָתְנוּ לְאוֹצַר הַמְּלָאכָה--זָהָב, דַּרְכְּמוֹנִים שְׁתֵּי רִבּוֹת; וְכֶסֶף, מָנִים אַלְפַּיִם וּמָאתָיִם.    70 And some of the heads of fathers' houses gave into the treasury of the work twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand and two hundred pounds of silver.
7.71 עא  וַאֲשֶׁר נָתְנוּ, שְׁאֵרִית הָעָם--זָהָב דַּרְכְּמֹנִים שְׁתֵּי רִבּוֹא, וְכֶסֶף מָנִים אַלְפָּיִם; וְכָתְנֹת כֹּהֲנִים, שִׁשִּׁים וְשִׁבְעָה.  {פ}    71 And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand pounds of silver, and threescore and seven priests' tunics. {P}
7.72 עב  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וְהַשּׁוֹעֲרִים וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים וּמִן-הָעָם וְהַנְּתִינִים, וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל--בְּעָרֵיהֶם; וַיִּגַּע הַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּעָרֵיהֶם.    72 So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinim, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities. And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel were in their cities,
7.73 /
8.1 א  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ כָל-הָעָם, כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד, אֶל-הָרְחוֹב, אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי שַׁעַר-הַמָּיִם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לְעֶזְרָא הַסֹּפֵר--לְהָבִיא אֶת-סֵפֶר תּוֹרַת מֹשֶׁה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל.    1 all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the broad place that was before the water gate; and they spoke unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the Law of Moses, which the LORD had commanded to Israel.
8.2 ב  וַיָּבִיא עֶזְרָא הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַתּוֹרָה לִפְנֵי הַקָּהָל, מֵאִישׁ וְעַד-אִשָּׁה, וְכֹל, מֵבִין לִשְׁמֹעַ--בְּיוֹם אֶחָד, לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי.    2 And Ezra the priest brought the Law before the congregation, both men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.
8.3 ג  וַיִּקְרָא-בוֹ לִפְנֵי הָרְחוֹב אֲשֶׁר לִפְנֵי שַׁעַר-הַמַּיִם, מִן-הָאוֹר עַד-מַחֲצִית הַיּוֹם--נֶגֶד הָאֲנָשִׁים וְהַנָּשִׁים, וְהַמְּבִינִים; וְאָזְנֵי כָל-הָעָם, אֶל-סֵפֶר הַתּוֹרָה.    3 And he read therein before the broad place that was before the water gate from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women, and of those that could understand; and the ears of all the people were attentive unto the book of the Law.
8.4 ד  וַיַּעֲמֹד עֶזְרָא הַסֹּפֵר, עַל-מִגְדַּל-עֵץ אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ לַדָּבָר, וַיַּעֲמֹד אֶצְלוֹ מַתִּתְיָה וְשֶׁמַע וַעֲנָיָה וְאוּרִיָּה וְחִלְקִיָּה וּמַעֲשֵׂיָה, עַל-יְמִינוֹ; וּמִשְּׂמֹאלוֹ, פְּדָיָה וּמִישָׁאֵל וּמַלְכִּיָּה וְחָשֻׁם וְחַשְׁבַּדָּנָה--זְכַרְיָה מְשֻׁלָּם.  {פ}    4 And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Uriah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchijah, and Hashum, and Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam. {P}
8.5 ה  וַיִּפְתַּח עֶזְרָא הַסֵּפֶר לְעֵינֵי כָל-הָעָם, כִּי-מֵעַל כָּל-הָעָם הָיָה; וּכְפִתְחוֹ, עָמְדוּ כָל-הָעָם.    5 And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people--for he was above all the people--and when he opened it, all the people stood up.
8.6 ו  וַיְבָרֶךְ עֶזְרָא, אֶת-יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים הַגָּדוֹל; וַיַּעֲנוּ כָל-הָעָם אָמֵן אָמֵן, בְּמֹעַל יְדֵיהֶם, וַיִּקְּדוּ וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַיהוָה, אַפַּיִם אָרְצָה.    6 And Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God. And all the people answered: 'Amen, Amen', with the lifting up of their hands; and they bowed their heads, and fell down before the LORD with their faces to the ground.
8.7 ז  וְיֵשׁוּעַ וּבָנִי וְשֵׁרֵבְיָה יָמִין עַקּוּב שַׁבְּתַי הוֹדִיָּה מַעֲשֵׂיָה קְלִיטָא עֲזַרְיָה יוֹזָבָד חָנָן פְּלָאיָה, וְהַלְוִיִּם--מְבִינִים אֶת-הָעָם, לַתּוֹרָה; וְהָעָם, עַל-עָמְדָם.    7 Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, even the Levites, caused the people to understand the Law; and the people stood in their place.
8.8 ח  וַיִּקְרְאוּ בַסֵּפֶר בְּתוֹרַת הָאֱלֹהִים, מְפֹרָשׁ; וְשׂוֹם שֶׂכֶל, וַיָּבִינוּ בַּמִּקְרָא.  {ס}    8 And they read in the book, in the Law of God, distinctly; and they gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. {S}
8.9 ט  וַיֹּאמֶר נְחֶמְיָה הוּא הַתִּרְשָׁתָא וְעֶזְרָא הַכֹּהֵן הַסֹּפֵר וְהַלְוִיִּם הַמְּבִינִים אֶת-הָעָם לְכָל-הָעָם, הַיּוֹם קָדֹשׁ-הוּא לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם--אַל-תִּתְאַבְּלוּ, וְאַל-תִּבְכּוּ:  כִּי בוֹכִים כָּל-הָעָם, כְּשָׁמְעָם אֶת-דִּבְרֵי הַתּוֹרָה.    9 And Nehemiah, who was the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people: 'This day is holy unto the LORD your God; mourn not, nor weep.' For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the Law.
8.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם לְכוּ אִכְלוּ מַשְׁמַנִּים וּשְׁתוּ מַמְתַקִּים, וְשִׁלְחוּ מָנוֹת לְאֵין נָכוֹן לוֹ--כִּי-קָדוֹשׁ הַיּוֹם, לַאֲדֹנֵינוּ; וְאַל-תֵּעָצֵבוּ, כִּי-חֶדְוַת יְהוָה הִיא מָעֻזְּכֶם.    10 Then he said unto them: 'Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto him for whom nothing is prepared; for this day is holy unto our Lord; neither be ye grieved; for the joy of the LORD is your strength.'
8.11 יא  וְהַלְוִיִּם מַחְשִׁים לְכָל-הָעָם, לֵאמֹר הַסּוּ--כִּי הַיּוֹם, קָדֹשׁ; וְאַל-תֵּעָצֵבוּ.    11 So the Levites stilled all the people, saying: 'Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.'
8.12 יב  וַיֵּלְכוּ כָל-הָעָם לֶאֱכֹל וְלִשְׁתּוֹת, וּלְשַׁלַּח מָנוֹת, וְלַעֲשׂוֹת, שִׂמְחָה גְדוֹלָה:  כִּי הֵבִינוּ בַּדְּבָרִים, אֲשֶׁר הוֹדִיעוּ לָהֶם.  {ס}    12 And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared unto them. {S}
8.13 יג  וּבַיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי נֶאֶסְפוּ רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת לְכָל-הָעָם, הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, אֶל-עֶזְרָא, הַסֹּפֵר--וּלְהַשְׂכִּיל, אֶל-דִּבְרֵי הַתּוֹרָה.    13 And on the second day were gathered together the heads of fathers' houses of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even to give attention to the words of the Law.
8.14 יד  וַיִּמְצְאוּ, כָּתוּב בַּתּוֹרָה:  אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה, אֲשֶׁר יֵשְׁבוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בַּסֻּכּוֹת בֶּחָג בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי.    14 And they found written in the Law, how that the LORD had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month;
8.15 טו  וַאֲשֶׁר יַשְׁמִיעוּ, וְיַעֲבִירוּ קוֹל בְּכָל-עָרֵיהֶם וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם לֵאמֹר--צְאוּ הָהָר וְהָבִיאוּ עֲלֵי-זַיִת וַעֲלֵי-עֵץ שֶׁמֶן, וַעֲלֵי הֲדַס וַעֲלֵי תְמָרִים וַעֲלֵי עֵץ עָבֹת:  לַעֲשֹׂת סֻכֹּת, כַּכָּתוּב.  {פ}    15 and that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying: 'Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches, and branches of wild olive, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.' {P}
8.16 טז  וַיֵּצְאוּ הָעָם, וַיָּבִיאוּ, וַיַּעֲשׂוּ לָהֶם סֻכּוֹת אִישׁ עַל-גַּגּוֹ וּבְחַצְרֹתֵיהֶם, וּבְחַצְרוֹת בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים--וּבִרְחוֹב שַׁעַר הַמַּיִם, וּבִרְחוֹב שַׁעַר אֶפְרָיִם.    16 So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the broad place of the water gate, and in the broad place of the gate of Ephraim.
8.17 יז  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ כָל-הַקָּהָל הַשָּׁבִים מִן-הַשְּׁבִי סֻכּוֹת, וַיֵּשְׁבוּ בַסֻּכּוֹת--כִּי לֹא-עָשׂוּ מִימֵי יֵשׁוּעַ בִּן-נוּן כֵּן בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד הַיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַתְּהִי שִׂמְחָה, גְּדוֹלָה מְאֹד.    17 And all the congregation of them that were come back out of the captivity made booths, and dwelt in the booths; for since the days of Joshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done so. And there was very great gladness.
8.18 יח  וַיִּקְרָא בְּסֵפֶר תּוֹרַת הָאֱלֹהִים, יוֹם בְּיוֹם--מִן-הַיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן, עַד הַיּוֹם הָאַחֲרוֹן; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-חָג שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי עֲצֶרֶת כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.  {פ}    18 Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in the book of the Law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according unto the ordinance. {P}
8.1 א  וּבְיוֹם עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה לַחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, נֶאֶסְפוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּצוֹם וּבְשַׂקִּים, וַאֲדָמָה, עֲלֵיהֶם.    1 Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackcloth, and earth upon them.
9.2 ב  וַיִּבָּדְלוּ זֶרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִכֹּל בְּנֵי נֵכָר; וַיַּעַמְדוּ, וַיִּתְוַדּוּ עַל-חַטֹּאתֵיהֶם, וַעֲוֺנוֹת, אֲבֹתֵיהֶם.    2 And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.
9.3 ג  וַיָּקוּמוּ, עַל-עָמְדָם, וַיִּקְרְאוּ בְּסֵפֶר תּוֹרַת יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, רְבִעִית הַיּוֹם; וּרְבִעִית מִתְוַדִּים וּמִשְׁתַּחֲוִים, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.  {פ}    3 And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the Law of the LORD their God a fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confessed, and prostrated themselves before the LORD their God. {P}
9.4 ד  וַיָּקָם עַל-מַעֲלֵה הַלְוִיִּם, יֵשׁוּעַ וּבָנִי קַדְמִיאֵל שְׁבַנְיָה בֻּנִּי שֵׁרֵבְיָה--בָּנִי כְנָנִי; וַיִּזְעֲקוּ בְּקוֹל גָּדוֹל, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם.    4 Then stood up upon the platform of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto the LORD their God.
9.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הַלְוִיִּם יֵשׁוּעַ וְקַדְמִיאֵל בָּנִי חֲשַׁבְנְיָה שֵׁרֵבְיָה הוֹדִיָּה, שְׁבַנְיָה פְתַחְיָה, קוּמוּ בָּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, מִן-הָעוֹלָם עַד-הָעוֹלָם; וִיבָרְכוּ שֵׁם כְּבֹדֶךָ, וּמְרוֹמַם עַל-כָּל-בְּרָכָה וּתְהִלָּה.    5 Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said: 'Stand up and bless the LORD your God from everlasting to everlasting; and let them say: Blessed be Thy glorious Name, that is exalted above all blessing and praise.
9.6 ו  אַתָּה-הוּא יְהוָה, לְבַדֶּךָ--את (אַתָּה) עָשִׂיתָ אֶת-הַשָּׁמַיִם שְׁמֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם וְכָל-צְבָאָם הָאָרֶץ וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר עָלֶיהָ הַיַּמִּים וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר בָּהֶם, וְאַתָּה מְחַיֶּה אֶת-כֻּלָּם; וּצְבָא הַשָּׁמַיִם, לְךָ מִשְׁתַּחֲוִים.    6 Thou art the LORD, even Thou alone; Thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all things that are thereon, the seas and all that is in them, and Thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth Thee.
9.7 ז  אַתָּה-הוּא, יְהוָה הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַרְתָּ בְּאַבְרָם, וְהוֹצֵאתוֹ מֵאוּר כַּשְׂדִּים; וְשַׂמְתָּ שְּׁמוֹ, אַבְרָהָם.    7 Thou art the LORD the God, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham;
9.8 ח  וּמָצָאתָ אֶת-לְבָבוֹ, נֶאֱמָן לְפָנֶיךָ, וְכָרוֹת עִמּוֹ הַבְּרִית לָתֵת אֶת-אֶרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִי הַחִתִּי הָאֱמֹרִי וְהַפְּרִזִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי וְהַגִּרְגָּשִׁי, לָתֵת לְזַרְעוֹ; וַתָּקֶם, אֶת-דְּבָרֶיךָ, כִּי צַדִּיק, אָתָּה.    8 and foundest his heart faithful before Thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite, and the Girgashite, even to give it unto his seed, and hast performed Thy words; for Thou art righteous;
9.9 ט  וַתֵּרֶא אֶת-עֳנִי אֲבֹתֵינוּ, בְּמִצְרָיִם; וְאֶת-זַעֲקָתָם שָׁמַעְתָּ, עַל-יַם-סוּף.    9 And Thou sawest the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red Sea;
9.10 י  וַתִּתֵּן אֹתֹת וּמֹפְתִים בְּפַרְעֹה וּבְכָל-עֲבָדָיו, וּבְכָל-עַם אַרְצוֹ--כִּי יָדַעְתָּ, כִּי הֵזִידוּ עֲלֵיהֶם; וַתַּעַשׂ-לְךָ שֵׁם, כְּהַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    10 and didst show signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land; for Thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them; and didst get Thee a name, as it is this day.
9.11 יא  וְהַיָּם בָּקַעְתָּ לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַיַּעַבְרוּ בְתוֹךְ-הַיָּם בַּיַּבָּשָׁה; וְאֶת-רֹדְפֵיהֶם הִשְׁלַכְתָּ בִמְצוֹלֹת, כְּמוֹ-אֶבֶן--בְּמַיִם עַזִּים.    11 And Thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their pursuers Thou didst cast into the depths, as a stone into the mighty waters.
9.12 יב  וּבְעַמּוּד עָנָן, הִנְחִיתָם יוֹמָם; וּבְעַמּוּד אֵשׁ, לַיְלָה, לְהָאִיר לָהֶם, אֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר יֵלְכוּ-בָהּ.    12 Moreover in a pillar of cloud Thou didst lead them by day; and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them light in the way wherein they should go.
9.13 יג  וְעַל הַר-סִינַי יָרַדְתָּ, וְדַבֵּר עִמָּהֶם מִשָּׁמָיִם; וַתִּתֵּן לָהֶם מִשְׁפָּטִים יְשָׁרִים, וְתוֹרוֹת אֱמֶת--חֻקִּים וּמִצְוֺת, טוֹבִים.    13 Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spokest with them from heaven, and gavest them right ordinances and laws of truth, good statutes and commandments;
9.14 יד  וְאֶת-שַׁבַּת קָדְשְׁךָ, הוֹדַעְתָּ לָהֶם; וּמִצְווֹת וְחֻקִּים, וְתוֹרָה, צִוִּיתָ לָהֶם, בְּיַד מֹשֶׁה עַבְדֶּךָ.    14 and madest known unto them Thy holy sabbath, and didst command them commandments, and statutes, and a law, by the hand of Moses Thy servant;
9.15 טו  וְלֶחֶם מִשָּׁמַיִם נָתַתָּה לָהֶם, לִרְעָבָם, וּמַיִם מִסֶּלַע הוֹצֵאתָ לָהֶם, לִצְמָאָם; וַתֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, לָבוֹא לָרֶשֶׁת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-נָשָׂאתָ אֶת-יָדְךָ, לָתֵת לָהֶם.    15 and gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and didst command them that they should go in to possess the land which Thou hadst lifted up Thy hand to give them.
9.16 טז  וְהֵם וַאֲבֹתֵינוּ, הֵזִידוּ; וַיַּקְשׁוּ, אֶת-עָרְפָּם, וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, אֶל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ.    16 But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their neck, and hearkened not to Thy commandments,
9.17 יז  וַיְמָאֲנוּ לִשְׁמֹעַ, וְלֹא-זָכְרוּ נִפְלְאֹתֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ עִמָּהֶם, וַיַּקְשׁוּ אֶת-עָרְפָּם, וַיִּתְּנוּ-רֹאשׁ לָשׁוּב לְעַבְדֻתָם בְּמִרְיָם; וְאַתָּה אֱלוֹהַּ סְלִיחוֹת חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם, אֶרֶךְ-אַפַּיִם וְרַב-וחסד (חֶסֶד)--וְלֹא עֲזַבְתָּם.    17 and refused to hearken, neither were mindful of Thy wonders that Thou didst among them; but hardened their neck, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage; but Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, and forsookest them not.
9.18 יח  אַף, כִּי-עָשׂוּ לָהֶם עֵגֶל מַסֵּכָה, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, זֶה אֱלֹהֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר הֶעֶלְךָ מִמִּצְרָיִם; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, נֶאָצוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת.    18 Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said: 'This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great provocations;
9.19 יט  וְאַתָּה בְּרַחֲמֶיךָ הָרַבִּים, לֹא עֲזַבְתָּם בַּמִּדְבָּר; אֶת-עַמּוּד הֶעָנָן לֹא-סָר מֵעֲלֵיהֶם בְּיוֹמָם, לְהַנְחֹתָם בְּהַדֶּרֶךְ, וְאֶת-עַמּוּד הָאֵשׁ בְּלַיְלָה לְהָאִיר לָהֶם, וְאֶת-הַדֶּרֶךְ אֲשֶׁר יֵלְכוּ-בָהּ.    19 yet Thou in Thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the wilderness; the pillar of cloud departed not from over them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night, to show them light, and the way wherein they should go.
9.20 כ  וְרוּחֲךָ, הַטּוֹבָה, נָתַתָּ, לְהַשְׂכִּילָם; וּמַנְךָ לֹא-מָנַעְתָּ מִפִּיהֶם, וּמַיִם נָתַתָּה לָהֶם לִצְמָאָם.    20 Thou gavest also Thy good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not Thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.
9.21 כא  וְאַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה כִּלְכַּלְתָּם בַּמִּדְבָּר, לֹא חָסֵרוּ; שַׂלְמֹתֵיהֶם לֹא בָלוּ, וְרַגְלֵיהֶם לֹא בָצֵקוּ.    21 Yea, forty years didst Thou sustain them in the wilderness, and they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.
9.22 כב  וַתִּתֵּן לָהֶם מַמְלָכוֹת וַעֲמָמִים, וַתַּחְלְקֵם לְפֵאָה; וַיִּירְשׁוּ אֶת-אֶרֶץ סִיחוֹן, וְאֶת-אֶרֶץ מֶלֶךְ חֶשְׁבּוֹן, וְאֶת-אֶרֶץ, עוֹג מֶלֶךְ-הַבָּשָׁן.    22 Moreover Thou gavest them kingdoms and peoples, which Thou didst allot quarter by quarter; so they possessed the land of Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.
9.23 כג  וּבְנֵיהֶם הִרְבִּיתָ, כְּכֹכְבֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם; וַתְּבִיאֵם, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-אָמַרְתָּ לַאֲבֹתֵיהֶם, לָבוֹא לָרָשֶׁת.    23 Their children also didst Thou multiply as the stars of heaven, and didst bring them into the land, concerning which Thou didst say to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.
9.24 כד  וַיָּבֹאוּ הַבָּנִים, וַיִּירְשׁוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וַתַּכְנַע לִפְנֵיהֶם אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ הַכְּנַעֲנִים, וַתִּתְּנֵם בְּיָדָם; וְאֶת-מַלְכֵיהֶם וְאֶת-עַמְמֵי הָאָרֶץ, לַעֲשׂוֹת בָּהֶם כִּרְצוֹנָם.    24 So the children went in and possessed the land, and Thou didst subdue before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would.
9.25 כה  וַיִּלְכְּדוּ עָרִים בְּצוּרֹת, וַאֲדָמָה שְׁמֵנָה, וַיִּירְשׁוּ בָּתִּים מְלֵאִים-כָּל-טוּב בֹּרוֹת חֲצוּבִים כְּרָמִים וְזֵיתִים וְעֵץ מַאֲכָל, לָרֹב; וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׂבְּעוּ וַיַּשְׁמִינוּ, וַיִּתְעַדְּנוּ בְּטוּבְךָ הַגָּדוֹל.    25 And they took fortified cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns hewn out, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit-trees in abundance; so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and luxuriated in Thy great goodness.
9.26 כו  וַיַּמְרוּ וַיִּמְרְדוּ בָּךְ, וַיַּשְׁלִכוּ אֶת-תּוֹרָתְךָ אַחֲרֵי גַוָּם, וְאֶת-נְבִיאֶיךָ הָרָגוּ, אֲשֶׁר-הֵעִידוּ בָם לַהֲשִׁיבָם אֵלֶיךָ; וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, נֶאָצוֹת גְּדוֹלֹת.    26 Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against Thee, and cast Thy law behind their back, and slew Thy prophets that did forewarn them to turn them back unto Thee, and they wrought great provocations.
9.27 כז  וַתִּתְּנֵם בְּיַד צָרֵיהֶם, וַיָּצֵרוּ לָהֶם; וּבְעֵת צָרָתָם, יִצְעֲקוּ אֵלֶיךָ, וְאַתָּה מִשָּׁמַיִם תִּשְׁמָע, וּכְרַחֲמֶיךָ הָרַבִּים תִּתֵּן לָהֶם מוֹשִׁיעִים וְיוֹשִׁיעוּם מִיַּד צָרֵיהֶם.    27 Therefore Thou didst deliver them into the hand of their adversaries, who distressed them; and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto Thee, Thou heardest from heaven; and according to Thy manifold mercies Thou gavest them saviours who might save them out of the hand of their adversaries.
9.28 כח  וּכְנוֹחַ לָהֶם--יָשׁוּבוּ, לַעֲשׂוֹת רַע לְפָנֶיךָ; וַתַּעַזְבֵם בְּיַד אֹיְבֵיהֶם, וַיִּרְדּוּ בָהֶם, וַיָּשׁוּבוּ וַיִּזְעָקוּךָ, וְאַתָּה מִשָּׁמַיִם תִּשְׁמַע וְתַצִּילֵם כְּרַחֲמֶיךָ רַבּוֹת עִתִּים.    28 But after they had rest, they did evil again before Thee; therefore didst Thou leave them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them; yet when they returned, and cried unto Thee, many times didst Thou hear from heaven, and deliver them according to Thy mercies;
9.29 כט  וַתָּעַד בָּהֶם לַהֲשִׁיבָם אֶל-תּוֹרָתֶךָ, וְהֵמָּה הֵזִידוּ וְלֹא-שָׁמְעוּ לְמִצְוֺתֶיךָ וּבְמִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ חָטְאוּ-בָם, אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה אָדָם, וְחָיָה בָהֶם; וַיִּתְּנוּ כָתֵף סוֹרֶרֶת, וְעָרְפָּם הִקְשׁוּ וְלֹא שָׁמֵעוּ.    29 and didst forewarn them, that Thou mightest bring them back unto Thy law; yet they dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto Thy commandments, but sinned against Thine ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live by them, and presented a stubborn shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.
9.30 ל  וַתִּמְשֹׁךְ עֲלֵיהֶם שָׁנִים רַבּוֹת, וַתָּעַד בָּם בְּרוּחֲךָ בְּיַד-נְבִיאֶיךָ וְלֹא הֶאֱזִינוּ; וַתִּתְּנֵם, בְּיַד עַמֵּי הָאֲרָצֹת.    30 Yet many years didst Thou extend mercy unto them, and didst forewarn them by Thy spirit through Thy prophets; yet would they not give ear; therefore gavest Thou them into the hand of the peoples of the lands.
9.31 לא  וּבְרַחֲמֶיךָ הָרַבִּים לֹא-עֲשִׂיתָם כָּלָה, וְלֹא עֲזַבְתָּם:  כִּי אֵל-חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם, אָתָּה.    31 Nevertheless in Thy manifold mercies Thou didst not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for Thou art a gracious and merciful God.
9.32 לב  וְעַתָּה אֱלֹהֵינוּ הָאֵל הַגָּדוֹל הַגִּבּוֹר וְהַנּוֹרָא, שׁוֹמֵר הַבְּרִית וְהַחֶסֶד--אַל-יִמְעַט לְפָנֶיךָ אֵת כָּל-הַתְּלָאָה אֲשֶׁר-מְצָאַתְנוּ לִמְלָכֵינוּ לְשָׂרֵינוּ וּלְכֹהֲנֵינוּ וְלִנְבִיאֵינוּ וְלַאֲבֹתֵינוּ, וּלְכָל-עַמֶּךָ:  מִימֵי מַלְכֵי אַשּׁוּר, עַד הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה.    32 Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the awful God, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the travail seem little before Thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all Thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria unto this day.
9.33 לג  וְאַתָּה צַדִּיק, עַל כָּל-הַבָּא עָלֵינוּ:  כִּי-אֱמֶת עָשִׂיתָ, וַאֲנַחְנוּ הִרְשָׁעְנוּ.    33 Howbeit Thou art just in all that is come upon us; for Thou hast dealt truly, but we have done wickedly;
9.34 לד  וְאֶת-מְלָכֵינוּ שָׂרֵינוּ כֹּהֲנֵינוּ וַאֲבֹתֵינוּ, לֹא עָשׂוּ תּוֹרָתֶךָ; וְלֹא הִקְשִׁיבוּ, אֶל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ, וּלְעֵדְוֺתֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר הַעִידֹתָ בָּהֶם.    34 neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept Thy law, nor hearkened unto Thy commandments and Thy testimonies, wherewith Thou didst testify against them.
9.35 לה  וְהֵם בְּמַלְכוּתָם וּבְטוּבְךָ הָרָב אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּ לָהֶם, וּבְאֶרֶץ הָרְחָבָה וְהַשְּׁמֵנָה אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּ לִפְנֵיהֶם--לֹא עֲבָדוּךָ; וְלֹא-שָׁבוּ, מִמַּעַלְלֵיהֶם הָרָעִים.    35 For they have not served Thee in their kingdom, and in Thy great goodness that Thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which Thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works.
9.36 לו  הִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ הַיּוֹם, עֲבָדִים; וְהָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּה לַאֲבֹתֵינוּ, לֶאֱכֹל אֶת-פִּרְיָהּ וְאֶת-טוּבָהּ--הִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ עֲבָדִים, עָלֶיהָ.    36 Behold, we are servants this day, and as for the land that Thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are servants in it.
9.37 לז  וּתְבוּאָתָהּ מַרְבָּה, לַמְּלָכִים אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתָּה עָלֵינוּ--בְּחַטֹּאותֵינוּ; וְעַל גְּוִיֹּתֵנוּ מֹשְׁלִים וּבִבְהֶמְתֵּנוּ, כִּרְצוֹנָם, וּבְצָרָה גְדֹלָה, אֲנָחְנוּ.  {פ}    37 And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom Thou hast set over us because of our sins; also they have power over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.' {P}
9.38 /  
10.1 א  וְעַל, הַחֲתוּמִים:  נְחֶמְיָה הַתִּרְשָׁתָא בֶּן-חֲכַלְיָה, וְצִדְקִיָּה.    2 Now those that set their seal were: Nehemiah the Tirshatha, the son of Hachaliah, and Zedekiah;
10.2 ב  שְׂרָיָה עֲזַרְיָה, יִרְמְיָה.    3 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah;
10.3 ג  פַּשְׁחוּר אֲמַרְיָה, מַלְכִּיָּה.    4 Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah;
10.4 ד  חַטּוּשׁ שְׁבַנְיָה, מַלּוּךְ.    5 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch;
10.5 ה  חָרִם מְרֵמוֹת, עֹבַדְיָה.    6 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah;
10.6 ו  דָּנִיֵּאל גִּנְּתוֹן, בָּרוּךְ.    7 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch;
10.7 ז  מְשֻׁלָּם אֲבִיָּה, מִיָּמִן.    8 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin;
10.8 ח  מַעַזְיָה בִלְגַּי, שְׁמַעְיָה; אֵלֶּה, הַכֹּהֲנִים.  {ס}    9 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah. These were the priests. {S}
10.9 ט  וְהַלְוִיִּם:  וְיֵשׁוּעַ, בֶּן-אֲזַנְיָה, בִּנּוּי, מִבְּנֵי חֵנָדָד קַדְמִיאֵל.    10 And the Levites: Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;
10.10 י  וַאֲחֵיהֶם--שְׁבַנְיָה הוֹדִיָּה קְלִיטָא, פְּלָאיָה חָנָן.    11 and their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan;
10.11 יא מִיכָא רְחוֹב, חֲשַׁבְיָה.    12 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah; 
10.12 יב  זַכּוּר שֵׁרֵבְיָה, שְׁבַנְיָה.    13 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah;
10.13 יג  הוֹדִיָּה בָנִי, בְּנִינוּ.  {ס}    14 Hodiah, Bani, Beninu. {S}
10.14 יד  רָאשֵׁי, הָעָם:  פַּרְעֹשׁ פַּחַת מוֹאָב, עֵילָם זַתּוּא בָּנִי.    15 The chiefs of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani;
10.15 טו  בֻּנִּי עַזְגָּד, בֵּבָי.    16 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai;
10.16 טז  אֲדֹנִיָּה בִגְוַי, עָדִין.    17 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin;
10.17 יז  אָטֵר חִזְקִיָּה, עַזּוּר.    18 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur;
10.18 יח  הוֹדִיָּה חָשֻׁם, בֵּצָי.    19 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai;
10.19 יט  חָרִיף עֲנָתוֹת, נובי (נֵיבָי).    20 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai;
10.20 כ  מַגְפִּיעָשׁ מְשֻׁלָּם, חֵזִיר.    21 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir;
10.21 כא  מְשֵׁיזַבְאֵל צָדוֹק, יַדּוּעַ.    22 Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua;
10.22 כב  פְּלַטְיָה חָנָן, עֲנָיָה.    23 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah;
10.23 כג  הוֹשֵׁעַ חֲנַנְיָה, חַשּׁוּב.    24 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub;
10.24 כד  הַלּוֹחֵשׁ פִּלְחָא, שׁוֹבֵק.    25 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek;
10.25 כה  רְחוּם חֲשַׁבְנָה, מַעֲשֵׂיָה.    26 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah;
10.26 כו  וַאֲחִיָּה חָנָן, עָנָן.    27 and Ahiah, Hanan, Anan;
10.27 כז  מַלּוּךְ חָרִם, בַּעֲנָה.    28 Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
10.28 כח  וּשְׁאָר הָעָם הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם הַשּׁוֹעֲרִים הַמְשֹׁרְרִים הַנְּתִינִים, וְכָל-הַנִּבְדָּל מֵעַמֵּי הָאֲרָצוֹת אֶל-תּוֹרַת הָאֱלֹהִים, נְשֵׁיהֶם, בְּנֵיהֶם וּבְנֹתֵיהֶם:  כֹּל, יוֹדֵעַ מֵבִין.    29 And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinim, and all they that had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one that had knowledge and understanding;
10.29 כט  מַחֲזִיקִים עַל-אֲחֵיהֶם, אַדִּירֵיהֶם, וּבָאִים בְּאָלָה וּבִשְׁבוּעָה לָלֶכֶת בְּתוֹרַת הָאֱלֹהִים, אֲשֶׁר נִתְּנָה בְּיַד מֹשֶׁה עֶבֶד-הָאֱלֹהִים; וְלִשְׁמוֹר וְלַעֲשׂוֹת, אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה אֲדֹנֵינוּ, וּמִשְׁפָּטָיו, וְחֻקָּיו.    30 they cleaved to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the LORD our Lord, and His ordinances and His statutes;
10.30 ל  וַאֲשֶׁר לֹא-נִתֵּן בְּנֹתֵינוּ, לְעַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ; וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֵיהֶם, לֹא נִקַּח לְבָנֵינוּ.    31 and that we would not give our daughters unto the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for our sons;
10.31 לא  וְעַמֵּי הָאָרֶץ הַמְבִיאִים אֶת-הַמַּקָּחוֹת וְכָל-שֶׁבֶר בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת, לִמְכּוֹר--לֹא-נִקַּח מֵהֶם בַּשַּׁבָּת, וּבְיוֹם קֹדֶשׁ; וְנִטֹּשׁ אֶת-הַשָּׁנָה הַשְּׁבִיעִית, וּמַשָּׁא כָל-יָד.    32 and if the peoples of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy of them on the sabbath, or on a holy day; and that we would forego the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.
10.32 לב  וְהֶעֱמַדְנוּ עָלֵינוּ מִצְוֺת, לָתֵת עָלֵינוּ שְׁלִישִׁית הַשֶּׁקֶל בַּשָּׁנָה, לַעֲבֹדַת, בֵּית אֱלֹהֵינוּ.    33 Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God;
10.33 לג  לְלֶחֶם הַמַּעֲרֶכֶת וּמִנְחַת הַתָּמִיד וּלְעוֹלַת הַתָּמִיד הַשַּׁבָּתוֹת הֶחֳדָשִׁים לַמּוֹעֲדִים, וְלַקֳּדָשִׁים וְלַחַטָּאוֹת--לְכַפֵּר, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְכֹל, מְלֶאכֶת בֵּית-אֱלֹהֵינוּ.  {ס}    34 for the showbread, and for the continual meal-offering, and for the continual burnt-offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for the appointed seasons, and for the holy things, and for the sin-offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God. {S}
10.34 לד  וְהַגּוֹרָלוֹת הִפַּלְנוּ עַל-קֻרְבַּן הָעֵצִים, הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם וְהָעָם--לְהָבִיא לְבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ לְבֵית-אֲבֹתֵינוּ לְעִתִּים מְזֻמָּנִים, שָׁנָה בְשָׁנָה:  לְבַעֵר, עַל-מִזְבַּח יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, כַּכָּתוּב, בַּתּוֹרָה.    35 And we cast lots, the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood-offering, to bring it into the house of our God, according to our fathers' houses, at times appointed, year by year, to burn upon the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the Law;
10.35 לה  וּלְהָבִיא אֶת-בִּכּוּרֵי אַדְמָתֵנוּ, וּבִכּוּרֵי כָּל-פְּרִי כָל-עֵץ--שָׁנָה בְשָׁנָה:  לְבֵית, יְהוָה.    36 and to bring the first-fruits of our land, and the first-fruits of all fruit of all manner of trees, year by year, unto the house of the LORD;
10.36 לו  וְאֶת-בְּכֹרוֹת בָּנֵינוּ וּבְהֶמְתֵּנוּ, כַּכָּתוּב בַּתּוֹרָה; וְאֶת-בְּכוֹרֵי בְקָרֵינוּ וְצֹאנֵינוּ, לְהָבִיא לְבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ, לַכֹּהֲנִים, הַמְשָׁרְתִים בְּבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ.    37 also the first-born of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written in the Law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in the house of our God;
10.37 לז  וְאֶת-רֵאשִׁית עֲרִיסֹתֵינוּ וּתְרוּמֹתֵינוּ וּפְרִי כָל-עֵץ תִּירוֹשׁ וְיִצְהָר, נָבִיא לַכֹּהֲנִים אֶל-לִשְׁכוֹת בֵּית-אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וּמַעְשַׂר אַדְמָתֵנוּ, לַלְוִיִּם; וְהֵם, הַלְוִיִּם, הַמְעַשְּׂרִים, בְּכֹל עָרֵי עֲבֹדָתֵנוּ.    38 and that we should bring the first of our dough, and our heave-offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees, the wine and the oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our land unto the Levites; for they, the Levites, take the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.
10.38 לח  וְהָיָה הַכֹּהֵן בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן עִם-הַלְוִיִּם, בַּעְשֵׂר הַלְוִיִּם; וְהַלְוִיִּם יַעֲלוּ אֶת-מַעֲשַׂר הַמַּעֲשֵׂר, לְבֵית אֱלֹהֵינוּ, אֶל-הַלְּשָׁכוֹת, לְבֵית הָאוֹצָר.    39 And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, when the Levites take tithes; and the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure-house.
10.39 לט  כִּי אֶל-הַלְּשָׁכוֹת יָבִיאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבְנֵי הַלֵּוִי, אֶת-תְּרוּמַת הַדָּגָן הַתִּירוֹשׁ וְהַיִּצְהָר, וְשָׁם כְּלֵי הַמִּקְדָּשׁ, וְהַכֹּהֲנִים הַמְשָׁרְתִים וְהַשּׁוֹעֲרִים וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים; וְלֹא נַעֲזֹב, אֶת-בֵּית אֱלֹהֵינוּ.    40 For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring the heave-offering of the corn, of the wine, and of the oil, unto the chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the singers; and we will not forsake the house of our God.
11.1 א  וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׂרֵי-הָעָם, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וּשְׁאָר הָעָם הִפִּילוּ גוֹרָלוֹת לְהָבִיא אֶחָד מִן-הָעֲשָׂרָה, לָשֶׁבֶת בִּירוּשָׁלִַם עִיר הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וְתֵשַׁע הַיָּדוֹת, בֶּעָרִים.    1 And the princes of the people dwelt in Jerusalem; the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts in the other cities.
11.2 ב  וַיְבָרְכוּ, הָעָם--לְכֹל, הָאֲנָשִׁים, הַמִּתְנַדְּבִים, לָשֶׁבֶת בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.  {פ}    2 And the people blessed all the men that willingly offered themselves to dwell in Jerusalem. {P}
11.3 ג  וְאֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי הַמְּדִינָה, אֲשֶׁר יָשְׁבוּ בִּירוּשָׁלִָם; וּבְעָרֵי יְהוּדָה, יָשְׁבוּ אִישׁ בַּאֲחֻזָּתוֹ בְּעָרֵיהֶם, יִשְׂרָאֵל הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם וְהַנְּתִינִים, וּבְנֵי עַבְדֵי שְׁלֹמֹה.    3 Now these are the chiefs of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem; but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their cities, to wit, Israelites, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants.
11.4 ד  וּבִירוּשָׁלִַם, יָשְׁבוּ, מִבְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, וּמִבְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן:  מִבְּנֵי יְהוּדָה עֲתָיָה בֶן-עֻזִּיָּה בֶּן-זְכַרְיָה בֶן-אֲמַרְיָה, בֶּן-שְׁפַטְיָה בֶן-מַהֲלַלְאֵל--מִבְּנֵי-פָרֶץ.    4 And in Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the children of Perez;
11.5 ה  וּמַעֲשֵׂיָה בֶן-בָּרוּךְ בֶּן-כָּל-חֹזֶה בֶּן-חֲזָיָה בֶן-עֲדָיָה בֶן-יוֹיָרִיב, בֶּן-זְכַרְיָה--בֶּן-הַשִּׁלֹנִי.    5 and Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.
11.6 ו  כָּל-בְּנֵי-פֶרֶץ, הַיֹּשְׁבִים בִּירוּשָׁלִָם--אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת שִׁשִּׁים וּשְׁמֹנָה, אַנְשֵׁי-חָיִל.  {ס}    6 All the sons of Perez that dwelt in Jerusalem were four hundred threescore and eight valiant men. {S}
11.7 ז  וְאֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן:  סַלֻּא בֶּן-מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן-יוֹעֵד בֶּן-פְּדָיָה בֶן-קוֹלָיָה בֶן-מַעֲשֵׂיָה, בֶּן-אִיתִיאֵל--בֶּן-יְשַׁעְיָה.    7 And these are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.
11.8 ח  וְאַחֲרָיו, גַּבַּי סַלָּי--תְּשַׁע מֵאוֹת, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה.    8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.
11.9 ט  וְיוֹאֵל בֶּן-זִכְרִי, פָּקִיד עֲלֵיהֶם; וִיהוּדָה בֶן-הַסְּנוּאָה עַל-הָעִיר, מִשְׁנֶה.  {פ}    9 And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer; and Judah the son of Hassenuah was second over the city. {P}
11.10 י  מִן-הַכֹּהֲנִים:  יְדַעְיָה בֶן-יוֹיָרִיב, יָכִין.    10 Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin,
11.11 יא  שְׂרָיָה בֶן-חִלְקִיָּה בֶּן-מְשֻׁלָּם בֶּן-צָדוֹק, בֶּן-מְרָיוֹת בֶּן-אֲחִיטוּב--נְגִד, בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.    11 Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God,
11.12 יב  וַאֲחֵיהֶם, עֹשֵׂה הַמְּלָאכָה לַבַּיִת--שְׁמֹנֶה מֵאוֹת, עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁנָיִם; וַעֲדָיָה בֶּן-יְרֹחָם בֶּן-פְּלַלְיָה בֶּן-אַמְצִי בֶן-זְכַרְיָה, בֶּן-פַּשְׁחוּר בֶּן-מַלְכִּיָּה.    12 and their brethren that did the work of the house, eight hundred twenty and two; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,
11.13 יג  וְאֶחָיו רָאשִׁים לְאָבוֹת, מָאתַיִם אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁנָיִם; וַעֲמַשְׁסַי בֶּן-עֲזַרְאֵל בֶּן-אַחְזַי בֶּן-מְשִׁלֵּמוֹת, בֶּן-אִמֵּר.    13 and his brethren, chiefs of fathers' houses, two hundred forty and two; and Amashsai the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
11.14 יד  וַאֲחֵיהֶם גִּבֹּרֵי חַיִל, מֵאָה עֶשְׂרִים וּשְׁמֹנָה; וּפָקִיד עֲלֵיהֶם, זַבְדִּיאֵל בֶּן-הַגְּדוֹלִים.  {ס}    14 and their brethren, mighty men of valour, a hundred twenty and eight; and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of Haggedolim. {S}
11.15 טו  וּמִן-הַלְוִיִּם:  שְׁמַעְיָה בֶן-חַשּׁוּב בֶּן-עַזְרִיקָם בֶּן-חֲשַׁבְיָה, בֶּן-בּוּנִּי.    15 And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;
11.16 טז  וְשַׁבְּתַי וְיוֹזָבָד עַל-הַמְּלָאכָה הַחִיצֹנָה, לְבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים, מֵרָאשֵׁי, הַלְוִיִּם.    16 and Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chiefs of the Levites, who had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God;
11.17 יז  וּמַתַּנְיָה בֶן-מִיכָא בֶּן-זַבְדִּי בֶן-אָסָף רֹאשׁ, הַתְּחִלָּה יְהוֹדֶה לַתְּפִלָּה, וּבַקְבֻּקְיָה, מִשְׁנֶה מֵאֶחָיו; וְעַבְדָּא, בֶּן-שַׁמּוּעַ, בֶּן-גָּלָל, בֶּן-ידיתון (יְדוּתוּן).    17 and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the chief to begin the thanksgiving in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second among his brethren; and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
11.18 יח  כָּל-הַלְוִיִּם בְּעִיר הַקֹּדֶשׁ, מָאתַיִם שְׁמֹנִים וְאַרְבָּעָה.  {פ}    18 All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and four. {P}
11.19 יט  וְהַשּׁוֹעֲרִים עַקּוּב טַלְמוֹן, וַאֲחֵיהֶם הַשֹּׁמְרִים בַּשְּׁעָרִים--מֵאָה, שִׁבְעִים וּשְׁנָיִם.    19 Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren, that kept watch at the gates, were a hundred seventy and two.
11.20 כ  וּשְׁאָר יִשְׂרָאֵל הַכֹּהֲנִים הַלְוִיִּם, בְּכָל-עָרֵי יְהוּדָה, אִישׁ, בְּנַחֲלָתוֹ.    20 And the residue of Israel, of the priests, the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.
11.21 כא  וְהַנְּתִינִים, יֹשְׁבִים בָּעֹפֶל; וְצִיחָא וְגִשְׁפָּא, עַל-הַנְּתִינִים.  {פ}    21 But the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel; and Ziha and Gishpa were over the Nethinim. {P}
11.22 כב  וּפְקִיד הַלְוִיִּם, בִּירוּשָׁלִַם--עֻזִּי בֶן-בָּנִי בֶּן-חֲשַׁבְיָה, בֶּן-מַתַּנְיָה בֶּן-מִיכָא:  מִבְּנֵי אָסָף הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, לְנֶגֶד מְלֶאכֶת בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים.    22 The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, over the business of the house of God.
11.23 כג  כִּי-מִצְוַת הַמֶּלֶךְ, עֲלֵיהֶם; וַאֲמָנָה עַל-הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ.    23 For there was a commandment from the king concerning them, and a sure ordinance concerning the singers, as every day required.
11.24 כד  וּפְתַחְיָה בֶן-מְשֵׁיזַבְאֵל מִבְּנֵי-זֶרַח בֶּן-יְהוּדָה, לְיַד הַמֶּלֶךְ, לְכָל-דָּבָר, לָעָם.    24 And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the people.
11.25 כה  וְאֶל-הַחֲצֵרִים, בִּשְׂדֹתָם--מִבְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, יָשְׁבוּ בְּקִרְיַת הָאַרְבַּע וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, וּבְדִיבֹן וּבְנֹתֶיהָ, וּבִיקַּבְצְאֵל וַחֲצֵרֶיהָ.    25 And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt in Kiriath-arba and the towns thereof, and in Dibon and the towns thereof, and in Jekabzeel and the villages thereof;
11.26 כו  וּבְיֵשׁוּעַ וּבְמֹלָדָה, וּבְבֵית פָּלֶט.    26 and in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and Beth-pelet;
11.27 כז  וּבַחֲצַר שׁוּעָל וּבִבְאֵר שֶׁבַע, וּבְנֹתֶיהָ.    27 and in Hazar-shual, and in Beer-sheba and the towns thereof;
11.28 כח  וּבְצִקְלַג וּבִמְכֹנָה, וּבִבְנֹתֶיהָ.    28 and in Ziklag, and in Meconah and in the towns thereof;
11.29 כט  וּבְעֵין רִמּוֹן וּבְצָרְעָה, וּבְיַרְמוּת.    29 and in En-rimmon, and in Zorah, and in Jarmuth;
11.30 ל  זָנֹחַ עֲדֻלָּם, וְחַצְרֵיהֶם, לָכִישׁ וּשְׂדֹתֶיהָ, עֲזֵקָה וּבְנֹתֶיהָ; וַיַּחֲנוּ מִבְּאֵר-שֶׁבַע, עַד-גֵּיא הִנֹּם.    30 Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and the fields thereof, Azekah and the towns thereof. So they encamped from Beer-sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.
11.31 לא  וּבְנֵי בִנְיָמִן, מִגָּבַע, מִכְמָשׂ וְעַיָּה, וּבֵית-אֵל וּבְנֹתֶיהָ.    31 And the children of Benjamin from Geba onward, at Michmas and Aijah, and at Beth-el and the towns thereof;
11.32 לב  עֲנָתוֹת נֹב, עֲנָנְיָה.    32 at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah;
11.33 לג  חָצוֹר רָמָה, גִּתָּיִם.    33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim;
11.34 לד  חָדִיד צְבֹעִים, נְבַלָּט.    34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat;
11.35 לה  לֹד וְאוֹנוֹ, גֵּי הַחֲרָשִׁים.    35 Lod, and Ono, Ge-harashim.
11.36 לו  וּמִן-הַלְוִיִּם--מַחְלְקוֹת יְהוּדָה, לְבִנְיָמִין.  {פ}    36 And of the Levites, certain courses in Judah were joined to Benjamin. {P}
12.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם, אֲשֶׁר עָלוּ עִם-זְרֻבָּבֶל בֶּן-שְׁאַלְתִּיאֵל וְיֵשׁוּעַ:  שְׂרָיָה יִרְמְיָה, עֶזְרָא.    1 Now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra;
12.2 ב  אֲמַרְיָה מַלּוּךְ, חַטּוּשׁ.    2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush;
12.3 ג  שְׁכַנְיָה רְחֻם, מְרֵמֹת.    3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth;
12.4 ד  עִדּוֹא גִנְּתוֹי, אֲבִיָּה.    4 Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah;
12.5 ה  מִיָּמִין מַעַדְיָה, בִּלְגָּה.    5 Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah;
12.6 ו  שְׁמַעְיָה וְיוֹיָרִיב, יְדַעְיָה.    6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah;
12.7 ז  סַלּוּ עָמוֹק, חִלְקִיָּה יְדַעְיָה; אֵלֶּה רָאשֵׁי הַכֹּהֲנִים וַאֲחֵיהֶם, בִּימֵי יֵשׁוּעַ.  {פ}    7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs of the priests and their brethren in the days of Jeshua. {P}
12.8 ח  וְהַלְוִיִּם, יֵשׁוּעַ בִּנּוּי קַדְמִיאֵל שֵׁרֵבְיָה--יְהוּדָה מַתַּנְיָה:  עַל-הֻיְּדוֹת, הוּא וְאֶחָיו.    8 Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who was over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren.
12.9 ט  וּבַקְבֻּקְיָה וענו (וְעֻנִּי) אֲחֵיהֶם לְנֶגְדָּם, לְמִשְׁמָרוֹת.    9 Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, were over against them in wards.
12.10 י  וְיֵשׁוּעַ, הוֹלִיד אֶת-יוֹיָקִים; וְיוֹיָקִים הוֹלִיד אֶת-אֶלְיָשִׁיב, וְאֶלְיָשִׁיב אֶת-יוֹיָדָע.    10 And Jeshua begot Joiakim, and Joiakim begot Eliashib, and Eliashib begot Joiada,
12.11 יא  וְיוֹיָדָע הוֹלִיד אֶת-יוֹנָתָן, וְיוֹנָתָן הוֹלִיד אֶת-יַדּוּעַ.    11 and Joiada begot Jonathan and Jonathan begot Jaddua.
12.12 יב  וּבִימֵי, יוֹיָקִים, הָיוּ כֹהֲנִים, רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת:  לִשְׂרָיָה מְרָיָה, לְיִרְמְיָה חֲנַנְיָה.    12 And in the days of Joiakim were priests, heads of fathers' houses: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
12.13 יג  לְעֶזְרָא מְשֻׁלָּם, לַאֲמַרְיָה יְהוֹחָנָן.    13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
12.14 יד  למלוכי (לִמְלִיכוּ), יוֹנָתָן, לִשְׁבַנְיָה, יוֹסֵף.    14 of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
12.15 טו  לְחָרִם עַדְנָא, לִמְרָיוֹת חֶלְקָי.    15 of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
12.16 טז  לעדיא (לְעִדּוֹא) זְכַרְיָה, לְגִנְּתוֹן מְשֻׁלָּם.    16 of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
12.17 יז  לַאֲבִיָּה, זִכְרִי; לְמִנְיָמִין--לְמוֹעַדְיָה, פִּלְטָי.    17 of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin; of Moadiah, Piltai;
12.18 יח  לְבִלְגָּה שַׁמּוּעַ, לִשְׁמַעְיָה יְהוֹנָתָן.    18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
12.19 יט  וּלְיוֹיָרִיב מַתְּנַי, לִידַעְיָה עֻזִּי.    19 and of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
12.20 כ  לְסַלַּי קַלָּי, לְעָמוֹק עֵבֶר.    20 of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
12.21 כא  לְחִלְקִיָּה חֲשַׁבְיָה, לִידַעְיָה נְתַנְאֵל.    21 of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
12.22 כב  הַלְוִיִּם בִּימֵי אֶלְיָשִׁיב יוֹיָדָע וְיוֹחָנָן, וְיַדּוּעַ--כְּתוּבִים, רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת; וְהַכֹּהֲנִים, עַל-מַלְכוּת דָּרְיָוֶשׁ הַפָּרְסִי.  {פ}    22 The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded heads of fathers' houses; also the priests, in the reign of Darius the Persian. {P}
12.23 כג  בְּנֵי לֵוִי, רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, כְּתוּבִים, עַל-סֵפֶר דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים--וְעַד-יְמֵי, יוֹחָנָן בֶּן-אֶלְיָשִׁיב.    23 The sons of Levi, heads of fathers' houses, were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.
12.24 כד  וְרָאשֵׁי הַלְוִיִּם חֲשַׁבְיָה שֵׁרֵבְיָה וְיֵשׁוּעַ בֶּן-קַדְמִיאֵל, וַאֲחֵיהֶם לְנֶגְדָּם, לְהַלֵּל לְהוֹדוֹת, בְּמִצְוַת דָּוִיד אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים--מִשְׁמָר, לְעֻמַּת מִשְׁמָר.    24 And the chiefs of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise and give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, ward against ward.
12.25 כה  מַתַּנְיָה וּבַקְבֻּקְיָה עֹבַדְיָה מְשֻׁלָּם, טַלְמוֹן עַקּוּב--שֹׁמְרִים שׁוֹעֲרִים מִשְׁמָר, בַּאֲסֻפֵּי הַשְּׁעָרִים.    25 Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the ward at the store-houses of the gates.
12.26 כו  אֵלֶּה, בִּימֵי יוֹיָקִים בֶּן-יֵשׁוּעַ בֶּן-יוֹצָדָק, וּבִימֵי נְחֶמְיָה הַפֶּחָה, וְעֶזְרָא הַכֹּהֵן הַסּוֹפֵר.  {פ}    26 These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest the scribe. {P}
12.27 כז  וּבַחֲנֻכַּת חוֹמַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בִּקְשׁוּ אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם מִכָּל-מְקוֹמֹתָם, לַהֲבִיאָם, לִירוּשָׁלִָם--לַעֲשֹׂת חֲנֻכָּה וְשִׂמְחָה וּבְתוֹדוֹת וּבְשִׁיר, מְצִלְתַּיִם נְבָלִים וּבְכִנֹּרוֹת.    27 And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.
12.28 כח  וַיֵּאָסְפוּ, בְּנֵי הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, וּמִן-הַכִּכָּר סְבִיבוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, וּמִן-חַצְרֵי נְטֹפָתִי.    28 And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the Plain round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of the Netophathites;
12.29 כט  וּמִבֵּית, הַגִּלְגָּל, וּמִשְּׂדוֹת גֶּבַע, וְעַזְמָוֶת:  כִּי חֲצֵרִים, בָּנוּ לָהֶם הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, סְבִיבוֹת, יְרוּשָׁלִָם.    29 also from Beth-gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth; for the singers had builded them villages round about Jerusalem.
12.30 ל  וַיִּטַּהֲרוּ, הַכֹּהֲנִים וְהַלְוִיִּם; וַיְטַהֲרוּ, אֶת-הָעָם, וְאֶת-הַשְּׁעָרִים, וְאֶת-הַחוֹמָה.    30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves; and they purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.
12.31 לא  וָאַעֲלֶה אֶת-שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, מֵעַל לַחוֹמָה; וָאַעֲמִידָה שְׁתֵּי תוֹדֹת גְּדוֹלֹת וְתַהֲלֻכֹת לַיָּמִין, מֵעַל לַחוֹמָה, לְשַׁעַר, הָאַשְׁפֹּת.    31 Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and appointed two great companies that gave thanks and went in procession: on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate;
12.32 לב  וַיֵּלֶךְ אַחֲרֵיהֶם הוֹשַׁעְיָה, וַחֲצִי שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה.    32 and after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah;
12.33 לג  וַעֲזַרְיָה עֶזְרָא, וּמְשֻׁלָּם.    33 and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,
12.34 לד  יְהוּדָה, וּבִנְיָמִן, וּשְׁמַעְיָה, וְיִרְמְיָה.  {ס}    34 Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah; {S}
12.35 לה  וּמִבְּנֵי הַכֹּהֲנִים, בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת--זְכַרְיָה בֶן-יוֹנָתָן בֶּן-שְׁמַעְיָה, בֶּן-מַתַּנְיָה בֶּן-מִיכָיָה, בֶּן-זַכּוּר, בֶּן-אָסָף.    35 and certain of the priests' sons with trumpets: Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph;
12.36 לו  וְאֶחָיו שְׁמַעְיָה וַעֲזַרְאֵל מִלְלַי גִּלְלַי מָעַי נְתַנְאֵל וִיהוּדָה, חֲנָנִי, בִּכְלֵי-שִׁיר דָּוִיד, אִישׁ הָאֱלֹהִים; וְעֶזְרָא הַסּוֹפֵר, לִפְנֵיהֶם.    36 and his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God; and Ezra the scribe was before them;
12.37 לז  וְעַל שַׁעַר הָעַיִן וְנֶגְדָּם, עָלוּ עַל-מַעֲלוֹת עִיר דָּוִיד, בַּמַּעֲלֶה, לַחוֹמָה:  מֵעַל לְבֵית דָּוִיד, וְעַד שַׁעַר הַמַּיִם מִזְרָח.    37 and by the fountain gate, and straight before them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the wall, above the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward.
12.38 לח  וְהַתּוֹדָה הַשֵּׁנִית הַהוֹלֶכֶת לְמוֹאל, וַאֲנִי אַחֲרֶיהָ; וַחֲצִי הָעָם מֵעַל לְהַחוֹמָה, מֵעַל לְמִגְדַּל הַתַּנּוּרִים, וְעַד, הַחוֹמָה הָרְחָבָה.    38 And the other company of them that gave thanks went to meet them, and I after them, with the half of the people, upon the wall, above the tower of the furnaces, even unto the broad wall;
12.39 לט  וּמֵעַל לְשַׁעַר-אֶפְרַיִם וְעַל-שַׁעַר הַיְשָׁנָה וְעַל-שַׁעַר הַדָּגִים, וּמִגְדַּל חֲנַנְאֵל וּמִגְדַּל הַמֵּאָה, וְעַד, שַׁעַר הַצֹּאן; וְעָמְדוּ, בְּשַׁעַר הַמַּטָּרָה.    39 and above the gate of Ephraim, and by the gate of the old city and by the fish gate, and the tower of Hananel, and the tower of Hammeah, even unto the sheep gate; and they stood still in the gate of the guard.
12.40 מ  וַתַּעֲמֹדְנָה שְׁתֵּי הַתּוֹדֹת, בְּבֵית הָאֱלֹהִים; וַאֲנִי, וַחֲצִי הַסְּגָנִים עִמִּי.    40 So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me;
12.41 מא  וְהַכֹּהֲנִים אֶלְיָקִים מַעֲשֵׂיָה מִנְיָמִין מִיכָיָה אֶלְיוֹעֵינַי, זְכַרְיָה חֲנַנְיָה--בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת.    41 and the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;
12.42 מב  וּמַעֲשֵׂיָה וּשְׁמַעְיָה וְאֶלְעָזָר וְעֻזִּי, וִיהוֹחָנָן וּמַלְכִּיָּה--וְעֵילָם וָעָזֶר; וַיַּשְׁמִיעוּ, הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, וְיִזְרַחְיָה, הַפָּקִיד.    42 and Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.
12.43 מג  וַיִּזְבְּחוּ בַיּוֹם-הַהוּא זְבָחִים גְּדוֹלִים וַיִּשְׂמָחוּ, כִּי הָאֱלֹהִים שִׂמְּחָם שִׂמְחָה גְדוֹלָה, וְגַם הַנָּשִׁים וְהַיְלָדִים, שָׂמֵחוּ; וַתִּשָּׁמַע שִׂמְחַת יְרוּשָׁלִַם, מֵרָחוֹק.    43 And they offered great sacrifices that day, and rejoiced; for God had made them rejoice with great joy; and the women also and the children rejoiced; so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.
12.44 מד  וַיִּפָּקְדוּ בַיּוֹם הַהוּא אֲנָשִׁים עַל-הַנְּשָׁכוֹת, לָאוֹצָרוֹת לַתְּרוּמוֹת לָרֵאשִׁית וְלַמַּעַשְׂרוֹת--לִכְנוֹס בָּהֶם לִשְׂדֵי הֶעָרִים מְנָאוֹת הַתּוֹרָה, לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם:  כִּי שִׂמְחַת יְהוּדָה, עַל-הַכֹּהֲנִים וְעַל-הַלְוִיִּם הָעֹמְדִים.    44 And on that day were men appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the heave-offerings, for the first-fruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them, according to the fields of the cities, the portions appointed by the law for the priests and Levites; for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites that took their stations.
12.45 מה  וַיִּשְׁמְרוּ מִשְׁמֶרֶת אֱלֹהֵיהֶם, וּמִשְׁמֶרֶת הַטָּהֳרָה, וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים, וְהַשֹּׁעֲרִים--כְּמִצְוַת דָּוִיד, שְׁלֹמֹה בְנוֹ.    45 And they kept the ward of their God, and the ward of the purification, and so did the singers and the porters, according to the commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.
12.46 מו  כִּי-בִימֵי דָוִיד וְאָסָף, מִקֶּדֶם--ראש (רָאשֵׁי), הַמְשֹׁרְרִים, וְשִׁיר-תְּהִלָּה וְהֹדוֹת, לֵאלֹהִים.    46 For in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.
12.47 מז  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל בִּימֵי זְרֻבָּבֶל וּבִימֵי נְחֶמְיָה, נֹתְנִים מְנָיוֹת הַמְשֹׁרְרִים וְהַשֹּׁעֲרִים--דְּבַר-יוֹם בְּיוֹמוֹ; וּמַקְדִּשִׁים, לַלְוִיִּם, וְהַלְוִיִּם, מַקְדִּשִׁים לִבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן.  {פ}    47 And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, as every day required; and they hallowed for the Levites; and the Levites hallowed for the sons of Aaron. {P}
12.1 א  בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, נִקְרָא בְּסֵפֶר מֹשֶׁה--בְּאָזְנֵי הָעָם; וְנִמְצָא, כָּתוּב בּוֹ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָבוֹא עַמֹּנִי וּמוֹאָבִי בִּקְהַל הָאֱלֹהִים, עַד-עוֹלָם.    1 On that day they read in the book of Moses in the hearing of the people; and therein was found written, that an Ammonite and a Moabite should not enter into the assembly of God for ever;
13.2 ב  כִּי לֹא קִדְּמוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּלֶּחֶם וּבַמָּיִם; וַיִּשְׂכֹּר עָלָיו אֶת-בִּלְעָם לְקַלְלוֹ, וַיַּהֲפֹךְ אֱלֹהֵינוּ הַקְּלָלָה לִבְרָכָה.    2 because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, to curse them; howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.
13.3 ג  וַיְהִי, כְּשָׁמְעָם אֶת-הַתּוֹרָה; וַיַּבְדִּילוּ כָל-עֵרֶב, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל.    3 And it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel all the alien mixture.
13.4 ד  וְלִפְנֵי מִזֶּה--אֶלְיָשִׁיב הַכֹּהֵן, נָתוּן בְּלִשְׁכַּת בֵּית-אֱלֹהֵינוּ:  קָרוֹב, לְטוֹבִיָּה.    4 Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God, being allied unto Tobiah,
13.5 ה  וַיַּעַשׂ לוֹ לִשְׁכָּה גְדוֹלָה, וְשָׁם הָיוּ לְפָנִים נֹתְנִים אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה הַלְּבוֹנָה וְהַכֵּלִים וּמַעְשַׂר הַדָּגָן הַתִּירוֹשׁ וְהַיִּצְהָר--מִצְוַת הַלְוִיִּם, וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים וְהַשּׁוֹעֲרִים; וּתְרוּמַת, הַכֹּהֲנִים.    5 had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the meal-offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the wine, and the oil, which were given by commandment to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the heave-offerings for the priests.
13.6 ו  וּבְכָל-זֶה, לֹא הָיִיתִי בִּירוּשָׁלִָם:  כִּי בִּשְׁנַת שְׁלֹשִׁים וּשְׁתַּיִם לְאַרְתַּחְשַׁסְתְּא מֶלֶךְ-בָּבֶל, בָּאתִי אֶל-הַמֶּלֶךְ, וּלְקֵץ יָמִים, נִשְׁאַלְתִּי מִן-הַמֶּלֶךְ.    6 But in all this time I was not at Jerusalem; for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon I went unto the king, and after certain days asked I leave of the king;
13.7 ז  וָאָבוֹא, לִירוּשָׁלִָם; וָאָבִינָה בָרָעָה, אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה אֶלְיָשִׁיב לְטוֹבִיָּה--לַעֲשׂוֹת לוֹ נִשְׁכָּה, בְּחַצְרֵי בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים.    7 and I came to Jerusalem, and understood the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.
13.8 ח  וַיֵּרַע לִי, מְאֹד; וָאַשְׁלִיכָה אֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי בֵית-טוֹבִיָּה, הַחוּץ--מִן-הַלִּשְׁכָּה.    8 And it grieved me sore; therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.
13.9 ט  וָאֹמְרָה, וַיְטַהֲרוּ הַלְּשָׁכוֹת; וָאָשִׁיבָה שָּׁם, כְּלֵי בֵּית הָאֱלֹהִים, אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה, וְהַלְּבוֹנָה.  {פ}    9 Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers; and thither brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with the meal-offerings and the frankincense. {P}
13.10 י  וָאֵדְעָה, כִּי-מְנָיוֹת הַלְוִיִּם לֹא נִתָּנָה; וַיִּבְרְחוּ אִישׁ-לְשָׂדֵהוּ הַלְוִיִּם וְהַמְשֹׁרְרִים, עֹשֵׂי הַמְּלָאכָה.    10 And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them; so that the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field.
13.11 יא  וָאָרִיבָה, אֶת-הַסְּגָנִים, וָאֹמְרָה, מַדּוּעַ נֶעֱזַב בֵּית-הָאֱלֹהִים; וָאֶקְבְּצֵם, וָאַעֲמִדֵם עַל-עָמְדָם.    11 Then contended I with the rulers, and said: 'Why is the house of God forsaken?' And I gathered them together, and set them in their place.
13.12 יב  וְכָל-יְהוּדָה, הֵבִיאוּ מַעְשַׂר הַדָּגָן וְהַתִּירוֹשׁ וְהַיִּצְהָר--לָאוֹצָרוֹת.    12 Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the wine and the oil unto the treasuries.
13.13 יג  וָאוֹצְרָה עַל-אוֹצָרוֹת שֶׁלֶמְיָה הַכֹּהֵן וְצָדוֹק הַסּוֹפֵר, וּפְדָיָה מִן-הַלְוִיִּם, וְעַל-יָדָם, חָנָן בֶּן-זַכּוּר בֶּן-מַתַּנְיָה:  כִּי נֶאֱמָנִים נֶחְשָׁבוּ, וַעֲלֵיהֶם לַחֲלֹק לַאֲחֵיהֶם.  {פ}    13 And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah; and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah; for they were counted faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their brethren. {P}
13.14 יד  זָכְרָה-לִּי אֱלֹהַי, עַל-זֹאת; וְאַל-תֶּמַח חֲסָדַי, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי בְּבֵית אֱלֹהַי--וּבְמִשְׁמָרָיו.    14 Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the wards thereof.
13.15 טו  בַּיָּמִים הָהֵמָּה רָאִיתִי בִיהוּדָה דֹּרְכִים-גִּתּוֹת בַּשַּׁבָּת וּמְבִיאִים הָעֲרֵמוֹת וְעֹמְסִים עַל-הַחֲמֹרִים וְאַף-יַיִן עֲנָבִים וּתְאֵנִים, וְכָל-מַשָּׂא, וּמְבִיאִים יְרוּשָׁלִַם, בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת; וָאָעִיד, בְּיוֹם מִכְרָם צָיִד.    15 In those days saw I in Judah some treading winepresses on the sabbath, and bringing in heaps of corn, and lading asses therewith; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and I forewarned them in the day wherein they sold victuals.
13.16 טז  וְהַצֹּרִים יָשְׁבוּ בָהּ, מְבִיאִים דָּאג וְכָל-מֶכֶר; וּמוֹכְרִים בַּשַּׁבָּת לִבְנֵי יְהוּדָה, וּבִירוּשָׁלִָם.    16 There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, who brought in fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.
13.17 יז  וָאָרִיבָה, אֵת חֹרֵי יְהוּדָה; וָאֹמְרָה לָהֶם, מָה-הַדָּבָר הָרָע הַזֶּה אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם עֹשִׂים, וּמְחַלְּלִים, אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת.    17 Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them: 'What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?
13.18 יח  הֲלוֹא כֹה עָשׂוּ, אֲבֹתֵיכֶם--וַיָּבֵא אֱלֹהֵינוּ עָלֵינוּ אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת, וְעַל הָעִיר הַזֹּאת; וְאַתֶּם מוֹסִיפִים חָרוֹן, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְחַלֵּל, אֶת-הַשַּׁבָּת.  {פ}    18 Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.' {P}
13.19 יט  וַיְהִי כַּאֲשֶׁר צָלְלוּ שַׁעֲרֵי יְרוּשָׁלִַם לִפְנֵי הַשַּׁבָּת, וָאֹמְרָה וַיִּסָּגְרוּ הַדְּלָתוֹת, וָאֹמְרָה, אֲשֶׁר לֹא יִפְתָּחוּם עַד אַחַר הַשַּׁבָּת; וּמִנְּעָרַי, הֶעֱמַדְתִּי עַל-הַשְּׁעָרִים--לֹא-יָבוֹא מַשָּׂא, בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת.    19 And it came to pass that, when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the doors should be shut, and commanded that they should not be opened till after the sabbath; and some of my servants set I over the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.
13.20 כ  וַיָּלִינוּ הָרֹכְלִים וּמֹכְרֵי כָל-מִמְכָּר, מִחוּץ לִירוּשָׁלִָם--פַּעַם וּשְׁתָּיִם.    20 So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.
13.21 כא  וָאָעִידָה בָהֶם, וָאֹמְרָה אֲלֵיהֶם מַדּוּעַ אַתֶּם לֵנִים נֶגֶד הַחוֹמָה--אִם-תִּשְׁנוּ, יָד אֶשְׁלַח בָּכֶם; מִן-הָעֵת הַהִיא, לֹא-בָאוּ בַּשַּׁבָּת.  {ס}    21 Then I forewarned them, and said unto them: 'Why lodge ye about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you.' From that time forth came they no more on the sabbath. {S}
13.22 כב  וָאֹמְרָה לַלְוִיִּם, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיוּ מִטַּהֲרִים וּבָאִים שֹׁמְרִים הַשְּׁעָרִים--לְקַדֵּשׁ, אֶת-יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת; גַּם-זֹאת זָכְרָה-לִּי אֱלֹהַי, וְחוּסָה עָלַי כְּרֹב חַסְדֶּךָ.  {פ}    22 And I commanded the Levites that they should purify themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember unto me, O my God, this also, and spare me according to the greatness of Thy mercy. {P}
13.23 כג  גַּם בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם, רָאִיתִי אֶת-הַיְּהוּדִים הֹשִׁיבוּ נָשִׁים אשדודיות (אַשְׁדֳּדִיּוֹת), עמוניות (עַמֳּנִיּוֹת), מוֹאֲבִיּוֹת.    23 In those days also saw I the Jews that had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab;
13.24 כד  וּבְנֵיהֶם, חֲצִי מְדַבֵּר אַשְׁדּוֹדִית, וְאֵינָם מַכִּירִים, לְדַבֵּר יְהוּדִית--וְכִלְשׁוֹן, עַם וָעָם.    24 and their children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but according to the language of each people.
13.25 כה  וָאָרִיב עִמָּם וָאֲקַלְלֵם, וָאַכֶּה מֵהֶם אֲנָשִׁים וָאֶמְרְטֵם; וָאַשְׁבִּיעֵם בֵּאלֹהִים, אִם-תִּתְּנוּ בְנֹתֵיכֶם לִבְנֵיהֶם, וְאִם-תִּשְׂאוּ מִבְּנֹתֵיהֶם, לִבְנֵיכֶם וְלָכֶם.    25 And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God: 'Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters for your sons, or for yourselves.
13.26 כו  הֲלוֹא עַל-אֵלֶּה חָטָא-שְׁלֹמֹה מֶלֶךְ יִשְׂרָאֵל וּבַגּוֹיִם הָרַבִּים לֹא-הָיָה מֶלֶךְ כָּמֹהוּ, וְאָהוּב לֵאלֹהָיו הָיָה, וַיִּתְּנֵהוּ אֱלֹהִים, מֶלֶךְ עַל-כָּל-יִשְׂרָאֵל:  גַּם-אוֹתוֹ הֶחֱטִיאוּ, הַנָּשִׁים הַנָּכְרִיּוֹת.    26 Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, and he was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel; nevertheless even him did the foreign women cause to sin.
13.27 כז  וְלָכֶם הֲנִשְׁמַע, לַעֲשֹׂת אֵת כָּל-הָרָעָה הַגְּדוֹלָה הַזֹּאת--לִמְעֹל, בֵּאלֹהֵינוּ:  לְהֹשִׁיב, נָשִׁים נָכְרִיּוֹת.    27 Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to break faith with our God in marrying foreign women?'
13.28 כח  וּמִבְּנֵי יוֹיָדָע בֶּן-אֶלְיָשִׁיב הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדוֹל, חָתָן לְסַנְבַלַּט הַחֹרֹנִי; וָאַבְרִיחֵהוּ, מֵעָלָי.    28 And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite; therefore I chased him from me.
13.29 כט  זָכְרָה לָהֶם, אֱלֹהָי:  עַל גָּאֳלֵי הַכְּהֻנָּה, וּבְרִית הַכְּהֻנָּה וְהַלְוִיִּם.    29 Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.
13.30 ל  וְטִהַרְתִּים, מִכָּל-נֵכָר; וָאַעֲמִידָה מִשְׁמָרוֹת לַכֹּהֲנִים וְלַלְוִיִּם, אִישׁ בִּמְלַאכְתּוֹ.    30 Thus cleansed I them from everything foreign, and appointed wards for the priests and for the Levites, every one in his work;
13.31 לא  וּלְקֻרְבַּן הָעֵצִים בְּעִתִּים מְזֻמָּנוֹת, וְלַבִּכּוּרִים; זָכְרָה-לִּי אֱלֹהַי, לְטוֹבָה.  {ש}    31 and for the wood-offering, at times appointed, and for the first-fruits. Remember me, O my God, for good. {P}
