1.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה בְּמִדְבַּר סִינַי, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד:  בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית, לְצֵאתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם--לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying:
1.2 ב  שְׂאוּ, אֶת-רֹאשׁ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם--בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת, כָּל-זָכָר לְגֻלְגְּלֹתָם.	2 'Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, every male, by their polls;
1.3 ג  מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, כָּל-יֹצֵא צָבָא בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל--תִּפְקְדוּ אֹתָם לְצִבְאֹתָם, אַתָּה וְאַהֲרֹן.	3 from twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: ye shall number them by their hosts, even thou and Aaron.
1.4 ד  וְאִתְּכֶם יִהְיוּ, אִישׁ אִישׁ לַמַּטֶּה--אִישׁ רֹאשׁ לְבֵית-אֲבֹתָיו, הוּא.	4 And with you there shall be a man of every tribe, every one head of his fathers' house.
1.5 ה  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר יַעַמְדוּ אִתְּכֶם:  לִרְאוּבֵן, אֱלִיצוּר בֶּן-שְׁדֵיאוּר.	5 And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of Reuben, Elizur the son of Shedeur.
1.6 ו  לְשִׁמְעוֹן, שְׁלֻמִיאֵל בֶּן-צוּרִישַׁדָּי.	6 Of Simeon, Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
1.7 ז  לִיהוּדָה, נַחְשׁוֹן בֶּן-עַמִּינָדָב.	7 Of Judah, Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
1.8 ח  לְיִשָּׂשכָר, נְתַנְאֵל בֶּן-צוּעָר.	8 Of Issachar, Nethanel the son of Zuar.
1.9 ט  לִזְבוּלֻן, אֱלִיאָב בֶּן-חֵלֹן.	9 Of Zebulun, Eliab the son of Helon.
1.10 י  לִבְנֵי יוֹסֵף--לְאֶפְרַיִם, אֱלִישָׁמָע בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד; לִמְנַשֶּׁה, גַּמְלִיאֵל בֶּן-פְּדָהצוּר.	10 Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim, Elishama the son of Ammihud; of Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
1.11 יא  לְבִנְיָמִן, אֲבִידָן בֶּן-גִּדְעֹנִי.	11 Of Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gideoni.
1.12 יב  לְדָן, אֲחִיעֶזֶר בֶּן-עַמִּישַׁדָּי.	12 Of Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
1.13 יג  לְאָשֵׁר, פַּגְעִיאֵל בֶּן-עָכְרָן.	13 Of Asher, Pagiel the son of Ochran.
1.14 יד  לְגָד, אֶלְיָסָף בֶּן-דְּעוּאֵל.	14 Of Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
1.15 טו  לְנַפְתָּלִי, אֲחִירַע בֶּן-עֵינָן.	15 Of Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan.'
1.16 טז  אֵלֶּה קריאי (קְרוּאֵי) הָעֵדָה, נְשִׂיאֵי מַטּוֹת אֲבוֹתָם:  רָאשֵׁי אַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הֵם.	16 These were the elect of the congregation, the princes of the tribes of their fathers; they were the heads of the thousands of Israel.
1.17 יז  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן, אֵת הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר נִקְּבוּ בְּשֵׁמֹת.	17 And Moses and Aaron took these men that are pointed out by name.
1.18 יח  וְאֵת כָּל-הָעֵדָה הִקְהִילוּ, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי, וַיִּתְיַלְדוּ עַל-מִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--לְגֻלְגְּלֹתָם.	18 And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
1.19 יט  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה; וַיִּפְקְדֵם, בְּמִדְבַּר סִינָי.  {ס}	19 As the LORD commanded Moses, so did he number them in the wilderness of Sinai. {S}
1.20 כ  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-רְאוּבֵן בְּכֹר יִשְׂרָאֵל, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת, לְגֻלְגְּלֹתָם--כָּל-זָכָר מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, כֹּל יֹצֵא צָבָא.	20 And the children of Reuben, Israel's first-born, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.21 כא  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה רְאוּבֵן--שִׁשָּׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	21 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Reuben, were forty and six thousand and five hundred. {P}
1.22 כב  לִבְנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  פְּקֻדָיו, בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת לְגֻלְגְּלֹתָם--כָּל-זָכָר מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, כֹּל יֹצֵא צָבָא.	22 Of the children of Simeon, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, those that were numbered thereof, according to the number of names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.23 כג  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה שִׁמְעוֹן--תִּשְׁעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	23 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred. {P}
1.24 כד  לִבְנֵי גָד, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	24 Of the children of Gad, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.25 כה  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה גָד--חֲמִשָּׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים.  {פ}	25 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty. {P}
1.26 כו  לִבְנֵי יְהוּדָה, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	26 Of the children of Judah, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.27 כז  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה--אַרְבָּעָה וְשִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	27 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred. {P}
1.28 כח  לִבְנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	28 Of the children of Issachar, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.29 כט  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה יִשָּׂשכָר--אַרְבָּעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	29 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred. {P}
1.30 ל  לִבְנֵי זְבוּלֻן, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	30 Of the children of Zebulun, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.31 לא  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה זְבוּלֻן--שִׁבְעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	31 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred. {P}
1.32 לב  לִבְנֵי יוֹסֵף לִבְנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	32 Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.33 לג  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה אֶפְרָיִם--אַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	33 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred. {P}
1.34 לד  לִבְנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	34 Of the children of Manasseh, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.35 לה  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה--שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, וּמָאתָיִם.  {פ}	35 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred. {P}
1.36 לו  לִבְנֵי בִנְיָמִן, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	36 Of the children of Benjamin, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.37 לז  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה בִנְיָמִן--חֲמִשָּׁה וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	37 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred. {P}
1.38 לח  לִבְנֵי דָן, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	38 Of the children of Dan, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.39 לט  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה דָן--שְׁנַיִם וְשִׁשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	39 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Dan, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred. {P}
1.40 מ  לִבְנֵי אָשֵׁר, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	40 Of the children of Asher, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.41 מא  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה אָשֵׁר--אֶחָד וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	41 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred. {P}
1.42 מב  בְּנֵי נַפְתָּלִי, תּוֹלְדֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--כֹּל, יֹצֵא צָבָא.	42 Of the children of Naphtali, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1.43 מג  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמַטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי--שְׁלֹשָׁה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.  {פ}	43 those that were numbered of them, of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred. {P}
1.44 מד  אֵלֶּה הַפְּקֻדִים אֲשֶׁר פָּקַד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, וּנְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, אִישׁ:  אִישׁ-אֶחָד לְבֵית-אֲבֹתָיו, הָיוּ.	44 These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men; they were each one for his fathers' house.
1.45 מה  וַיִּהְיוּ כָּל-פְּקוּדֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, כָּל-יֹצֵא צָבָא בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	45 And all those that were numbered of the children of Israel by their fathers' houses, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel;
1.46 מו  וַיִּהְיוּ, כָּל-הַפְּקֻדִים--שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף, וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים; וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת, וַחֲמִשִּׁים.	46 even all those that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
1.47 מז  וְהַלְוִיִּם, לְמַטֵּה אֲבֹתָם--לֹא הָתְפָּקְדוּ, בְּתוֹכָם.  {פ}	47 But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them. {P}
1.48 מח  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	48 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
1.49 מט  אַךְ אֶת-מַטֵּה לֵוִי לֹא תִפְקֹד, וְאֶת-רֹאשָׁם לֹא תִשָּׂא, בְּתוֹךְ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	49 'Howbeit the tribe of Levi thou shalt not number, neither shalt thou take the sum of them among the children of Israel;
1.50 נ  וְאַתָּה הַפְקֵד אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם עַל-מִשְׁכַּן הָעֵדֻת וְעַל כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְעַל כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ--הֵמָּה יִשְׂאוּ אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְהֵם יְשָׁרְתֻהוּ; וְסָבִיב לַמִּשְׁכָּן, יַחֲנוּ.	50 but appoint thou the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all the furniture thereof, and over all that belongeth to it; they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the furniture thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
1.51 נא  וּבִנְסֹעַ הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יוֹרִידוּ אֹתוֹ הַלְוִיִּם, וּבַחֲנֹת הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יָקִימוּ אֹתוֹ הַלְוִיִּם; וְהַזָּר הַקָּרֵב, יוּמָת.	51 And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up; and the common man that draweth nigh shall be put to death.
1.52 נב  וְחָנוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִישׁ עַל-מַחֲנֵהוּ וְאִישׁ עַל-דִּגְלוֹ, לְצִבְאֹתָם.	52 And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man with his own camp, and every man with his own standard, according to their hosts.
1.53 נג  וְהַלְוִיִּם יַחֲנוּ סָבִיב, לְמִשְׁכַּן הָעֵדֻת, וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה קֶצֶף, עַל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְשָׁמְרוּ, הַלְוִיִּם, אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת, מִשְׁכַּן הָעֵדוּת.	53 But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of the testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel; and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of the testimony.'
1.54 נד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה--כֵּן עָשׂוּ.  {פ}	54 Thus did the children of Israel; according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they. {P}
2.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
2.2 ב  אִישׁ עַל-דִּגְלוֹ בְאֹתֹת לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם, יַחֲנוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  מִנֶּגֶד, סָבִיב לְאֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד יַחֲנוּ.	2 'The children of Israel shall pitch by their fathers' houses; every man with his own standard, according to the ensigns; a good way off shall they pitch round about the tent of meeting.
2.3 ג  וְהַחֹנִים קֵדְמָה מִזְרָחָה, דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה יְהוּדָה לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי יְהוּדָה, נַחְשׁוֹן בֶּן-עַמִּינָדָב.	3 Now those that pitch on the east side toward the sunrising shall be they of the standard of the camp of Judah, according to their hosts; the prince of the children of Judah being Nahshon the son of Amminadab,
2.4 ד  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--אַרְבָּעָה וְשִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.	4 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred;
2.5 ה  וְהַחֹנִים עָלָיו, מַטֵּה יִשָּׂשכָר; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר, נְתַנְאֵל בֶּן-צוּעָר.	5 and those that pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar; the prince of the children of Issachar being Nethanel the son of Zuar,
2.6 ו  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדָיו--אַרְבָּעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.	6 and his host, even those that were numbered thereof, fifty and four thousand and four hundred;
2.7 ז  מַטֵּה, זְבוּלֻן; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי זְבוּלֻן, אֱלִיאָב בֶּן-חֵלֹן.	7 and the tribe of Zebulun; the prince of the children of Zebulun being Eliab the son of Helon,
2.8 ח  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדָיו--שִׁבְעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.	8 and his host, and those that were numbered thereof, fifty and seven thousand and four hundred;
2.9 ט  כָּל-הַפְּקֻדִים לְמַחֲנֵה יְהוּדָה, מְאַת אֶלֶף וּשְׁמֹנִים אֶלֶף וְשֵׁשֶׁת-אֲלָפִים וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת--לְצִבְאֹתָם; רִאשֹׁנָה, יִסָּעוּ.  {ס}	9 all that were numbered of the camp of Judah being a hundred thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred, according to their hosts; they shall set forth first. {S}
2.10 י  דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה רְאוּבֵן תֵּימָנָה, לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן, אֱלִיצוּר בֶּן-שְׁדֵיאוּר.	10 On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben according to their hosts; the prince of the children of Reuben being Elizur the son of Shedeur,
2.11 יא  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדָיו--שִׁשָּׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	11 and his host, and those that were numbered thereof, forty and six thousand and five hundred;
2.12 יב  וְהַחוֹנִם עָלָיו, מַטֵּה שִׁמְעוֹן; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, שְׁלֻמִיאֵל בֶּן-צוּרִישַׁדָּי.	12 and those that pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Simeon; the prince of the children of Simeon being Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai,
2.13 יג  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--תִּשְׁעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת.	13 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and nine thousand and three hundred;
2.14 יד  וּמַטֵּה, גָּד; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי גָד, אֶלְיָסָף בֶּן-רְעוּאֵל.	14 and the tribe of Gad; the prince of the children of Gad being Eliasaph the son of Reuel,
2.15 טו  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--חֲמִשָּׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים.	15 and his host, even those that were numbered of them, forty and five thousand and six hundred and fifty;
2.16 טז  כָּל-הַפְּקֻדִים לְמַחֲנֵה רְאוּבֵן, מְאַת אֶלֶף וְאֶחָד וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים--לְצִבְאֹתָם; וּשְׁנִיִּם, יִסָּעוּ.  {ס}	16 all that were numbered of the camp of Reuben being a hundred thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty, according to their hosts; and they shall set forth second. {S}
2.17 יז  וְנָסַע אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד מַחֲנֵה הַלְוִיִּם, בְּתוֹךְ הַמַּחֲנֹת; כַּאֲשֶׁר יַחֲנוּ כֵּן יִסָּעוּ, אִישׁ עַל-יָדוֹ לְדִגְלֵיהֶם.  {ס}	17 Then the tent of meeting, with the camp of the Levites, shall set forward in the midst of the camps; as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place, by their standards. {S}
2.18 יח  דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה אֶפְרַיִם לְצִבְאֹתָם, יָמָּה; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, אֱלִישָׁמָע בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד.	18 On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their hosts; the prince of the children of Ephraim being Elishama the son of Ammihud,
2.19 יט  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--אַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	19 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred;
2.20 כ  וְעָלָיו, מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, גַּמְלִיאֵל בֶּן-פְּדָהצוּר.	20 and next unto him shall be the tribe of Manasseh; the prince of the children of Manasseh being Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur,
2.21 כא  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, וּמָאתָיִם.	21 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and two hundred;
2.22 כב  וּמַטֵּה, בִּנְיָמִן; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי בִנְיָמִן, אֲבִידָן בֶּן-גִּדְעֹנִי.	22 and the tribe of Benjamin; the prince of the children of Benjamin being Abidan the son of Gideoni,
2.23 כג  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--חֲמִשָּׁה וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.	23 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, thirty and five thousand and four hundred;
2.24 כד  כָּל-הַפְּקֻדִים לְמַחֲנֵה אֶפְרַיִם, מְאַת אֶלֶף וּשְׁמֹנַת-אֲלָפִים וּמֵאָה--לְצִבְאֹתָם; וּשְׁלִשִׁים, יִסָּעוּ.  {ס}	24 all that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim being a hundred thousand and eight thousand and a hundred, according to their hosts; and they shall set forth third. {S}
2.25 כה  דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה דָן צָפֹנָה, לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי דָן, אֲחִיעֶזֶר בֶּן-עַמִּישַׁדָּי.	25 On the north side shall be the standard of the camp of Dan according to their hosts; the prince of the children of Dan being Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai,
2.26 כו  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--שְׁנַיִם וְשִׁשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת.	26 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, threescore and two thousand and seven hundred;
2.27 כז  וְהַחֹנִים עָלָיו, מַטֵּה אָשֵׁר; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי אָשֵׁר, פַּגְעִיאֵל בֶּן-עָכְרָן.	27 and those that pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Asher; the prince of the children of Asher being Pagiel the son of Ochran,
2.28 כח  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--אֶחָד וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	28 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, forty and one thousand and five hundred;
2.29 כט  וּמַטֵּה, נַפְתָּלִי; וְנָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי נַפְתָּלִי, אֲחִירַע בֶּן-עֵינָן.	29 and the tribe of Naphtali; the prince of the children of Naphtali being Ahira the son of Enan,
2.30 ל  וּצְבָאוֹ, וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם--שְׁלֹשָׁה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.	30 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and three thousand and four hundred;
2.31 לא  כָּל-הַפְּקֻדִים, לְמַחֲנֵה דָן--מְאַת אֶלֶף וְשִׁבְעָה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת; לָאַחֲרֹנָה יִסְעוּ, לְדִגְלֵיהֶם.  {פ}	31 all that were numbered of the camp of Dan being a hundred thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred; they shall set forth hindmost by their standards.' {P}
2.32 לב  אֵלֶּה פְּקוּדֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  כָּל-פְּקוּדֵי הַמַּחֲנֹת, לְצִבְאֹתָם--שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף וּשְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים.	32 These are they that were numbered of the children of Israel by their fathers' houses; all that were numbered of the camps according to their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
2.33 לג  וְהַלְוִיִּם--לֹא הָתְפָּקְדוּ, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	33 But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses.
2.34 לד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן-חָנוּ לְדִגְלֵיהֶם וְכֵן נָסָעוּ--אִישׁ לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָיו, עַל-בֵּית אֲבֹתָיו.  {פ}	34 Thus did the children of Israel: according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so they pitched by their standards, and so they set forward, each one according to its families, and according to its fathers' houses. {P}
3.1 א  וְאֵלֶּה תּוֹלְדֹת אַהֲרֹן, וּמֹשֶׁה:  בְּיוֹם, דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה--בְּהַר סִינָי.	1 Now these are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the LORD spoke with Moses in mount Sinai.
3.2 ב  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי-אַהֲרֹן, הַבְּכֹר נָדָב, וַאֲבִיהוּא, אֶלְעָזָר וְאִיתָמָר.	2 And these are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the first-born, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
3.3 ג  אֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן, הַכֹּהֲנִים, הַמְּשֻׁחִים--אֲשֶׁר-מִלֵּא יָדָם, לְכַהֵן.	3 These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests that were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.
3.4 ד  וַיָּמָת נָדָב וַאֲבִיהוּא לִפְנֵי יְהוָה בְּהַקְרִבָם אֵשׁ זָרָה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בְּמִדְבַּר סִינַי, וּבָנִים, לֹא-הָיוּ לָהֶם; וַיְכַהֵן אֶלְעָזָר וְאִיתָמָר, עַל-פְּנֵי אַהֲרֹן אֲבִיהֶם.  {פ}	4 And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, when they offered strange fire before the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children; and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office in the presence of Aaron their father. {P}
3.5 ה  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	5 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
3.6 ו  הַקְרֵב, אֶת-מַטֵּה לֵוִי, וְהַעֲמַדְתָּ אֹתוֹ, לִפְנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן; וְשֵׁרְתוּ, אֹתוֹ.	6 'Bring the tribe of Levi near, and set them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.
3.7 ז  וְשָׁמְרוּ אֶת-מִשְׁמַרְתּוֹ, וְאֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת כָּל-הָעֵדָה, לִפְנֵי, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--לַעֲבֹד, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	7 And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tent of meeting, to do the service of the tabernacle.
3.8 ח  וְשָׁמְרוּ, אֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְאֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לַעֲבֹד, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	8 And they shall keep all the furniture of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.
3.9 ט  וְנָתַתָּה, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, לְאַהֲרֹן, וּלְבָנָיו:  נְתוּנִם נְתוּנִם הֵמָּה לוֹ, מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	9 And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons; they are wholly given unto him from the children of Israel.
3.10 י  וְאֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-בָּנָיו תִּפְקֹד, וְשָׁמְרוּ אֶת-כְּהֻנָּתָם; וְהַזָּר הַקָּרֵב, יוּמָת.  {פ}	10 And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, that they may keep their priesthood; and the common man that draweth nigh shall be put to death.' {P}
3.11 יא  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	11 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
3.12 יב  וַאֲנִי הִנֵּה לָקַחְתִּי אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, מִתּוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, תַּחַת כָּל-בְּכוֹר פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם, מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהָיוּ לִי, הַלְוִיִּם.	12 'And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of every first-born that openeth the womb among the children of Israel; and the Levites shall be Mine;
3.13 יג  כִּי לִי, כָּל-בְּכוֹר--בְּיוֹם הַכֹּתִי כָל-בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם הִקְדַּשְׁתִּי לִי כָל-בְּכוֹר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאָדָם עַד-בְּהֵמָה:  לִי יִהְיוּ, אֲנִי יְהוָה.  {פ}	13 for all the first-born are Mine: on the day that I smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto Me all the first-born in Israel, both man and beast, Mine they shall be: I am the LORD.' {P}
3.14 יד  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בְּמִדְבַּר סִינַי לֵאמֹר.	14 And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying:
3.15 טו  פְּקֹד אֶת-בְּנֵי לֵוִי, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  כָּל-זָכָר מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ וָמַעְלָה, תִּפְקְדֵם.	15 'Number the children of Levi by their fathers' houses, by their families; every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them.'
3.16 טז  וַיִּפְקֹד אֹתָם מֹשֶׁה, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר, צֻוָּה.	16 And Moses numbered them according to the word of the LORD, as he was commanded.
3.17 יז  וַיִּהְיוּ-אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-לֵוִי, בִּשְׁמֹתָם--גֵּרְשׁוֹן, וּקְהָת וּמְרָרִי.	17 And these were the sons of Levi by their names: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
3.18 יח  וְאֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת בְּנֵי-גֵרְשׁוֹן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לִבְנִי, וְשִׁמְעִי.	18 And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei.
3.19 יט  וּבְנֵי קְהָת, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--עַמְרָם וְיִצְהָר, חֶבְרוֹן וְעֻזִּיאֵל.	19 And the sons of Kohath by their families: Amram and Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel.
3.20 כ  וּבְנֵי מְרָרִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--מַחְלִי וּמוּשִׁי; אֵלֶּה הֵם מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַלֵּוִי, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם.	20 And the sons of Merari by their families: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their fathers' houses.
3.21 כא  לְגֵרְשׁוֹן--מִשְׁפַּחַת הַלִּבְנִי, וּמִשְׁפַּחַת הַשִּׁמְעִי; אֵלֶּה הֵם, מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי.	21 Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimeites; these are the families of the Gershonites.
3.22 כב  פְּקֻדֵיהֶם בְּמִסְפַּר כָּל-זָכָר, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ וָמָעְלָה; פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	22 Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.
3.23 כג  מִשְׁפְּחֹת, הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי, אַחֲרֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן יַחֲנוּ, יָמָּה.	23 The families of the Gershonites were to pitch behind the tabernacle westward;
3.24 כד  וּנְשִׂיא בֵית-אָב, לַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי, אֶלְיָסָף, בֶּן-לָאֵל.	24 the prince of the fathers' house of the Gershonites being Eliasaph the son of Lael,
3.25 כה  וּמִשְׁמֶרֶת בְּנֵי-גֵרְשׁוֹן בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְהָאֹהֶל; מִכְסֵהוּ--וּמָסַךְ, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	25 and the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting the tabernacle, and the Tent, the covering thereof, and the screen for the door of the tent of meeting,
3.26 כו  וְקַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר, וְאֶת-מָסַךְ פֶּתַח הֶחָצֵר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְעַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, סָבִיב; וְאֵת, מֵיתָרָיו, לְכֹל, עֲבֹדָתוֹ.  {ס}	26 and the hangings of the court, and the screen for the door of the court--which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar, round about--and the cords of it, even whatsoever pertaineth to the service thereof. {S}
3.27 כז  וְלִקְהָת, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַעַמְרָמִי וּמִשְׁפַּחַת הַיִּצְהָרִי, וּמִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶבְרֹנִי, וּמִשְׁפַּחַת הָעָזִּיאֵלִי; אֵלֶּה הֵם, מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַקְּהָתִי.	27 And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites; these are the families of the Kohathites:
3.28 כח  בְּמִסְפַּר, כָּל-זָכָר, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ, וָמָעְלָה--שְׁמֹנַת אֲלָפִים וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	28 according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, eight thousand and six hundred, keepers of the charge of the sanctuary.
3.29 כט  מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי-קְהָת, יַחֲנוּ, עַל יֶרֶךְ הַמִּשְׁכָּן, תֵּימָנָה.	29 The families of the sons of Kohath were to pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward;
3.30 ל  וּנְשִׂיא בֵית-אָב, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹת הַקְּהָתִי, אֱלִיצָפָן, בֶּן-עֻזִּיאֵל.	30 the prince of the fathers' house of the families of the Kohathites being Elizaphan the son of Uzziel,
3.31 לא  וּמִשְׁמַרְתָּם, הָאָרֹן וְהַשֻּׁלְחָן וְהַמְּנֹרָה וְהַמִּזְבְּחֹת, וּכְלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ, אֲשֶׁר יְשָׁרְתוּ בָּהֶם; וְהַמָּסָךְ--וְכֹל, עֲבֹדָתוֹ.	31 and their charge the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith the priests minister, and the screen, and all that pertaineth to the service thereof;
3.32 לב  וּנְשִׂיא נְשִׂיאֵי הַלֵּוִי, אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, פְּקֻדַּת, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	32 Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest being prince of the princes of the Levites, and having the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary.
3.33 לג  לִמְרָרִי--מִשְׁפַּחַת הַמַּחְלִי, וּמִשְׁפַּחַת הַמּוּשִׁי; אֵלֶּה הֵם, מִשְׁפְּחֹת מְרָרִי.	33 Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites; these are the families of Merari.
3.34 לד  וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם בְּמִסְפַּר כָּל-זָכָר, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ וָמָעְלָה--שֵׁשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וּמָאתָיִם.	34 And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred;
3.35 לה  וּנְשִׂיא בֵית-אָב לְמִשְׁפְּחֹת מְרָרִי, צוּרִיאֵל בֶּן-אֲבִיחָיִל; עַל יֶרֶךְ הַמִּשְׁכָּן יַחֲנוּ, צָפֹנָה.	35 the prince of the fathers' house of the families of Merari being Zuriel the son of Abihail; they were to pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward;
3.36 לו  וּפְקֻדַּת מִשְׁמֶרֶת, בְּנֵי מְרָרִי--קַרְשֵׁי הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וּבְרִיחָיו וְעַמֻּדָיו וַאֲדָנָיו; וְכָל-כֵּלָיו--וְכֹל, עֲבֹדָתוֹ.	36 the appointed charge of the sons of Merari being the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the instruments thereof, and all that pertaineth to the service thereof;
3.37 לז  וְעַמֻּדֵי הֶחָצֵר סָבִיב, וְאַדְנֵיהֶם; וִיתֵדֹתָם, וּמֵיתְרֵיהֶם.	37 and the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.
3.38 לח  וְהַחֹנִים לִפְנֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן קֵדְמָה לִפְנֵי אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד מִזְרָחָה מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, שֹׁמְרִים מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַמִּקְדָּשׁ, לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהַזָּר הַקָּרֵב, יוּמָת.	38 And those that were to pitch before the tabernacle eastward, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrising, were Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary, even the charge for the children of Israel; and the common man that drew nigh was to be put to death.
3.39 לט  כָּל-פְּקוּדֵי הַלְוִיִּם אֲשֶׁר פָּקַד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם:  כָּל-זָכָר מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ וָמַעְלָה, שְׁנַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים אָלֶף.  {ס}	39 All that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of the LORD, by their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two thousand. {S}
3.40 מ  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, פְּקֹד כָּל-בְּכֹר זָכָר לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ, וָמָעְלָה; וְשָׂא, אֵת מִסְפַּר שְׁמֹתָם.	40 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Number all the first-born males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.
3.41 מא  וְלָקַחְתָּ אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם לִי אֲנִי יְהוָה, תַּחַת כָּל-בְּכֹר בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְאֵת, בֶּהֱמַת הַלְוִיִּם, תַּחַת כָּל-בְּכוֹר, בְּבֶהֱמַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	41 And thou shalt take the Levites for Me, even the LORD, instead of all the first-born among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel.'
3.42 מב  וַיִּפְקֹד מֹשֶׁה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֹתוֹ, אֶת-כָּל-בְּכוֹר, בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	42 And Moses numbered, as the LORD commanded him, all the first-born among the children of Israel.
3.43 מג  וַיְהִי כָל-בְּכוֹר זָכָר בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמֹת, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ וָמַעְלָה--לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם:  שְׁנַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, שְׁלֹשָׁה וְשִׁבְעִים וּמָאתָיִם.  {פ}	43 And all the first-born males according to the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen. {P}
3.44 מד  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	44 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
3.45 מה  קַח אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, תַּחַת כָּל-בְּכוֹר בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-בֶּהֱמַת הַלְוִיִּם, תַּחַת בְּהֶמְתָּם; וְהָיוּ-לִי הַלְוִיִּם, אֲנִי יְהוָה.	45 'Take the Levites instead of all the first-born among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be Mine, even the LORD'S.
3.46 מו  וְאֵת פְּדוּיֵי הַשְּׁלֹשָׁה, וְהַשִּׁבְעִים וְהַמָּאתָיִם--הָעֹדְפִים, עַל-הַלְוִיִּם, מִבְּכוֹר, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	46 And as for the redemption of the two hundred and three score and thirteen of the first-born of the children of Israel, that are over and above the number of the Levites,
3.47 מז  וְלָקַחְתָּ, חֲמֵשֶׁת חֲמֵשֶׁת שְׁקָלִים--לַגֻּלְגֹּלֶת:  בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ תִּקָּח, עֶשְׂרִים גֵּרָה הַשָּׁקֶל.	47 thou shalt take five shekels apiece by the poll; after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them--the shekel is twenty gerahs.
3.48 מח  וְנָתַתָּה הַכֶּסֶף, לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו--פְּדוּיֵי, הָעֹדְפִים בָּהֶם.	48 And thou shalt give the money wherewith they that remain over of them are redeemed unto Aaron and to his sons.'
3.49 מט  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה, אֵת כֶּסֶף הַפִּדְיוֹם--מֵאֵת, הָעֹדְפִים, עַל, פְּדוּיֵי הַלְוִיִּם.	49 And Moses took the redemption-money from them that were over and above them that were redeemed by the Levites;
3.50 נ  מֵאֵת, בְּכוֹר בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לָקַח אֶת-הַכָּסֶף:  חֲמִשָּׁה וְשִׁשִּׁים וּשְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת, וָאֶלֶף--בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	50 from the first-born of the children of Israel took he the money: a thousand three hundred and threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
3.51 נא  וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה אֶת-כֶּסֶף הַפְּדֻיִם, לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו--עַל-פִּי יְהוָה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	51 And Moses gave the redemption-money unto Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of the LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
4.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
4.2 ב  נָשֹׂא, אֶת-רֹאשׁ בְּנֵי קְהָת, מִתּוֹךְ, בְּנֵי לֵוִי--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם.	2 'Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
4.3 ג  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וְעַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--כָּל-בָּא, לַצָּבָא, לַעֲשׂוֹת מְלָאכָה, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	3 from thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all that enter upon the service, to do work in the tent of meeting.
4.4 ד  זֹאת עֲבֹדַת בְּנֵי-קְהָת, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--קֹדֶשׁ, הַקֳּדָשִׁים.	4 This is the service of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting, about the most holy things:
4.5 ה  וּבָא אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, בִּנְסֹעַ הַמַּחֲנֶה, וְהוֹרִדוּ, אֵת פָּרֹכֶת הַמָּסָךְ; וְכִסּוּ-בָהּ--אֵת, אֲרֹן הָעֵדֻת.	5 when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall go in, and his sons, and they shall take down the veil of the screen, and cover the ark of the testimony with it;
4.6 ו  וְנָתְנוּ עָלָיו, כְּסוּי עוֹר תַּחַשׁ, וּפָרְשׂוּ בֶגֶד-כְּלִיל תְּכֵלֶת, מִלְמָעְלָה; וְשָׂמוּ, בַּדָּיו.	6 and shall put thereon a covering of sealskin, and shall spread over it a cloth all of blue, and shall set the staves thereof.
4.7 ז  וְעַל שֻׁלְחַן הַפָּנִים, יִפְרְשׂוּ בֶּגֶד תְּכֵלֶת, וְנָתְנוּ עָלָיו אֶת-הַקְּעָרֹת וְאֶת-הַכַּפֹּת וְאֶת-הַמְּנַקִּיֹּת, וְאֵת קְשׂוֹת הַנָּסֶךְ; וְלֶחֶם הַתָּמִיד, עָלָיו יִהְיֶה.	7 And upon the table of showbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the pans, and the bowls, and the jars wherewith to pour out; and the continual bread shall remain thereon.
4.8 ח  וּפָרְשׂוּ עֲלֵיהֶם, בֶּגֶד תּוֹלַעַת שָׁנִי, וְכִסּוּ אֹתוֹ, בְּמִכְסֵה עוֹר תָּחַשׁ; וְשָׂמוּ, אֶת-בַּדָּיו.	8 And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of sealskin, and shall set the staves thereof.
4.9 ט  וְלָקְחוּ בֶּגֶד תְּכֵלֶת, וְכִסּוּ אֶת-מְנֹרַת הַמָּאוֹר וְאֶת-נֵרֹתֶיהָ, וְאֶת-מַלְקָחֶיהָ, וְאֶת-מַחְתֹּתֶיהָ; וְאֵת כָּל-כְּלֵי שַׁמְנָהּ, אֲשֶׁר יְשָׁרְתוּ-לָהּ בָּהֶם.	9 And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the light, and its lamps, and its tongs, and its snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it.
4.10 י  וְנָתְנוּ אֹתָהּ וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלֶיהָ, אֶל-מִכְסֵה עוֹר תָּחַשׁ; וְנָתְנוּ, עַל-הַמּוֹט.	10 And they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of sealskin, and shall put it upon a bar.
4.11 יא  וְעַל מִזְבַּח הַזָּהָב, יִפְרְשׂוּ בֶּגֶד תְּכֵלֶת, וְכִסּוּ אֹתוֹ, בְּמִכְסֵה עוֹר תָּחַשׁ; וְשָׂמוּ, אֶת-בַּדָּיו.	11 And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of sealskin, and shall set the staves thereof.
4.12 יב  וְלָקְחוּ אֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי הַשָּׁרֵת אֲשֶׁר יְשָׁרְתוּ-בָם בַּקֹּדֶשׁ, וְנָתְנוּ אֶל-בֶּגֶד תְּכֵלֶת, וְכִסּוּ אוֹתָם, בְּמִכְסֵה עוֹר תָּחַשׁ; וְנָתְנוּ, עַל-הַמּוֹט.	12 And they shall take all the vessels of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of sealskin, and shall put them on a bar.
4.13 יג  וְדִשְּׁנוּ, אֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וּפָרְשׂוּ עָלָיו, בֶּגֶד אַרְגָּמָן.	13 And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon.
4.14 יד  וְנָתְנוּ עָלָיו אֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו אֲשֶׁר יְשָׁרְתוּ עָלָיו בָּהֶם, אֶת-הַמַּחְתֹּת אֶת-הַמִּזְלָגֹת וְאֶת-הַיָּעִים וְאֶת-הַמִּזְרָקֹת--כֹּל, כְּלֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וּפָרְשׂוּ עָלָיו, כְּסוּי עוֹר תַּחַשׁ--וְשָׂמוּ בַדָּיו.	14 And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, the fire-pans, the flesh-hooks, and the shovels, and the basins, all the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of sealskin, and set the staves thereof.
4.15 טו  וְכִלָּה אַהֲרֹן-וּבָנָיו לְכַסֹּת אֶת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְאֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ, בִּנְסֹעַ הַמַּחֲנֶה, וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן יָבֹאוּ בְנֵי-קְהָת לָשֵׂאת, וְלֹא-יִגְּעוּ אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ וָמֵתוּ; אֵלֶּה מַשָּׂא בְנֵי-קְהָת, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	15 And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the holy furniture, and all the holy vessels, as the camp is to set forward--after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear them; but they shall not touch the holy things, lest they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting.
4.16 טז  וּפְקֻדַּת אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, שֶׁמֶן הַמָּאוֹר וּקְטֹרֶת הַסַּמִּים, וּמִנְחַת הַתָּמִיד, וְשֶׁמֶן הַמִּשְׁחָה:  פְּקֻדַּת, כָּל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ, בְּקֹדֶשׁ, וּבְכֵלָיו.  {פ}	16 And the charge of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the continual meal-offering, and the anointing oil: he shall have the charge of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein is, whether it be the sanctuary, or the furniture thereof.' {P}
4.17 יז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	17 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
4.18 יח  אַל-תַּכְרִיתוּ, אֶת-שֵׁבֶט מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַקְּהָתִי, מִתּוֹךְ, הַלְוִיִּם.	18 'Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites;
4.19 יט  וְזֹאת עֲשׂוּ לָהֶם, וְחָיוּ וְלֹא יָמֻתוּ, בְּגִשְׁתָּם, אֶת-קֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים:  אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו, יָבֹאוּ, וְשָׂמוּ אוֹתָם אִישׁ אִישׁ עַל-עֲבֹדָתוֹ, וְאֶל-מַשָּׂאוֹ.	19 but thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden;
4.20 כ  וְלֹא-יָבֹאוּ לִרְאוֹת כְּבַלַּע אֶת-הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וָמֵתוּ.  {פ}	20 but they shall not go in to see the holy things as they are being covered, lest they die.' {P}
4.21 כא  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	21 And the LORD spoke unto Moses saying:
4.22 כב  נָשֹׂא, אֶת-רֹאשׁ בְּנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן--גַּם-הֵם:  לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	22 'Take the sum of the sons of Gershon also, by their fathers' houses, by their families;
4.23 כג  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, עַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--תִּפְקֹד אוֹתָם:  כָּל-הַבָּא לִצְבֹא צָבָא, לַעֲבֹד עֲבֹדָה בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	23 from thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou number them: all that enter in to wait upon the service, to do service in the tent of meeting.
4.24 כד  זֹאת עֲבֹדַת, מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי--לַעֲבֹד, וּלְמַשָּׂא.	24 This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, in serving and in bearing burdens:
4.25 כה  וְנָשְׂאוּ אֶת-יְרִיעֹת הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וְאֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, מִכְסֵהוּ, וּמִכְסֵה הַתַּחַשׁ אֲשֶׁר-עָלָיו מִלְמָעְלָה; וְאֶת-מָסַךְ--פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	25 they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tent of meeting, its covering, and the covering of sealskin that is above upon it, and the screen for the door of the tent of meeting;
4.26 כו  וְאֵת קַלְעֵי הֶחָצֵר וְאֶת-מָסַךְ פֶּתַח שַׁעַר הֶחָצֵר, אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן וְעַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ סָבִיב, וְאֵת מֵיתְרֵיהֶם, וְאֶת-כָּל-כְּלֵי עֲבֹדָתָם; וְאֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר יֵעָשֶׂה לָהֶם, וְעָבָדוּ.	26 and the hangings of the court, and the screen for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and whatsoever there may be to do with them, therein shall they serve.
4.27 כז  עַל-פִּי אַהֲרֹן וּבָנָיו תִּהְיֶה, כָּל-עֲבֹדַת בְּנֵי הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי, לְכָל-מַשָּׂאָם, וּלְכֹל עֲבֹדָתָם; וּפְקַדְתֶּם עֲלֵהֶם בְּמִשְׁמֶרֶת, אֵת כָּל-מַשָּׂאָם.	27 At the commandment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burden, and in all their service; and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burden.
4.28 כח  זֹאת עֲבֹדַת, מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי--בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וּמִשְׁמַרְתָּם--בְּיַד אִיתָמָר, בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן.  {ס}	28 This is the service of the families of the sons of the Gershonites in the tent of meeting; and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. {S}
4.29 כט  בְּנֵי, מְרָרִי--לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם לְבֵית-אֲבֹתָם, תִּפְקֹד אֹתָם.	29 As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them by their families, by their fathers' houses;
4.30 ל  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וְעַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--תִּפְקְדֵם:  כָּל-הַבָּא, לַצָּבָא, לַעֲבֹד, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	30 from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth upon the service, to do the work of the tent of meeting.
4.31 לא  וְזֹאת מִשְׁמֶרֶת מַשָּׂאָם, לְכָל-עֲבֹדָתָם בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד:  קַרְשֵׁי, הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וּבְרִיחָיו, וְעַמּוּדָיו וַאֲדָנָיו.	31 And this is the charge of their burden, according to all their service in the tent of meeting: the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof;
4.32 לב  וְעַמּוּדֵי הֶחָצֵר סָבִיב וְאַדְנֵיהֶם, וִיתֵדֹתָם וּמֵיתְרֵיהֶם, לְכָל-כְּלֵיהֶם, וּלְכֹל עֲבֹדָתָם; וּבְשֵׁמֹת תִּפְקְדוּ, אֶת-כְּלֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת מַשָּׂאָם.	32 and the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, even all their appurtenance, and all that pertaineth to their service; and by name ye shall appoint the instruments of the charge of their burden.
4.33 לג  זֹאת עֲבֹדַת, מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, לְכָל-עֲבֹדָתָם, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--בְּיַד, אִיתָמָר, בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן, הַכֹּהֵן.	33 This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tent of meeting, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.'
4.34 לד  וַיִּפְקֹד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן וּנְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה, אֶת-בְּנֵי הַקְּהָתִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, וּלְבֵית אֲבֹתָם.	34 And Moses and Aaron and the princes of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families, and by their fathers' houses,
4.35 לה  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וְעַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--כָּל-הַבָּא, לַצָּבָא, לַעֲבֹדָה, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	35 from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entered upon the service, for service in the tent of meeting.
4.36 לו  וַיִּהְיוּ פְקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--אַלְפַּיִם, שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים.	36 And those that were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
4.37 לז  אֵלֶּה פְקוּדֵי מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַקְּהָתִי, כָּל-הָעֹבֵד בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, אֲשֶׁר פָּקַד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {ס}	37 These are they that were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, of all that did serve in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses. {S}
4.38 לח  וּפְקוּדֵי, בְּנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן, לְמִשְׁפְּחוֹתָם, וּלְבֵית אֲבֹתָם.	38 And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, by their families, and by their fathers' houses,
4.39 לט  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וְעַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--כָּל-הַבָּא, לַצָּבָא, לַעֲבֹדָה, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	39 from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entered upon the service, for service in the tent of meeting,
4.40 מ  וַיִּהְיוּ, פְּקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם--אַלְפַּיִם, וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת וּשְׁלֹשִׁים.	40 even those that were numbered of them, by their families, by their fathers' houses, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
4.41 מא  אֵלֶּה פְקוּדֵי, מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן, כָּל-הָעֹבֵד, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--אֲשֶׁר פָּקַד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה.	41 These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all that did serve in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of the LORD.
4.42 מב  וּפְקוּדֵי, מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם.	42 And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
4.43 מג  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וְעַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה--כָּל-הַבָּא, לַצָּבָא, לַעֲבֹדָה, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	43 from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entered upon the service, for service in the tent of meeting,
4.44 מד  וַיִּהְיוּ פְקֻדֵיהֶם, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--שְׁלֹשֶׁת אֲלָפִים, וּמָאתָיִם.	44 even those that were numbered of them by their families, were three thousand and two hundred.
4.45 מה  אֵלֶּה פְקוּדֵי, מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי מְרָרִי, אֲשֶׁר פָּקַד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	45 These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
4.46 מו  כָּל-הַפְּקֻדִים אֲשֶׁר פָּקַד מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, וּנְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם:  לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם, וּלְבֵית אֲבֹתָם.	46 All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the princes of Israel numbered, by their families, and by their fathers' houses,
4.47 מז  מִבֶּן שְׁלֹשִׁים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, וְעַד בֶּן-חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה:  כָּל-הַבָּא, לַעֲבֹד עֲבֹדַת עֲבֹדָה וַעֲבֹדַת מַשָּׂא--בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	47 from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entered in to do the work of service, and the work of bearing burdens in the tent of meeting,
4.48 מח  וַיִּהְיוּ, פְּקֻדֵיהֶם--שְׁמֹנַת אֲלָפִים, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת וּשְׁמֹנִים.	48 even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.
4.49 מט  עַל-פִּי יְהוָה פָּקַד אוֹתָם, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה--אִישׁ אִישׁ עַל-עֲבֹדָתוֹ, וְעַל-מַשָּׂאוֹ; וּפְקֻדָיו, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	49 According to the commandment of the LORD they were appointed by the hand of Moses, every one to his service, and to his burden; they were also numbered, as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
5.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
5.2 ב  צַו, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וִישַׁלְּחוּ מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה, כָּל-צָרוּעַ וְכָל-זָב; וְכֹל, טָמֵא לָנָפֶשׁ.	2 'Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that hath an issue, and whosoever is unclean by the dead;
5.3 ג  מִזָּכָר עַד-נְקֵבָה תְּשַׁלֵּחוּ, אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה תְּשַׁלְּחוּם; וְלֹא יְטַמְּאוּ אֶת-מַחֲנֵיהֶם, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי שֹׁכֵן בְּתוֹכָם.	3 both male and female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camp, in the midst whereof I dwell.'
5.4 ד  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ-כֵן, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְשַׁלְּחוּ אוֹתָם, אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן עָשׂוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	4 And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp; as the LORD spoke unto Moses, so did the children of Israel. {P}
5.5 ה  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	5 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
5.6 ו  דַּבֵּר, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִישׁ אוֹ-אִשָּׁה כִּי יַעֲשׂוּ מִכָּל-חַטֹּאת הָאָדָם, לִמְעֹל מַעַל בַּיהוָה; וְאָשְׁמָה, הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא.	6 Speak unto the children of Israel: When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to commit a trespass against the LORD, and that soul be guilty;
5.7 ז  וְהִתְוַדּוּ, אֶת-חַטָּאתָם אֲשֶׁר עָשׂוּ, וְהֵשִׁיב אֶת-אֲשָׁמוֹ בְּרֹאשׁוֹ, וַחֲמִישִׁתוֹ יֹסֵף עָלָיו; וְנָתַן, לַאֲשֶׁר אָשַׁם לוֹ.	7 then they shall confess their sin which they have done; and he shall make restitution for his guilt in full, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him in respect of whom he hath been guilty.
5.8 ח  וְאִם-אֵין לָאִישׁ גֹּאֵל, לְהָשִׁיב הָאָשָׁם אֵלָיו--הָאָשָׁם הַמּוּשָׁב לַיהוָה, לַכֹּהֵן:  מִלְּבַד, אֵיל הַכִּפֻּרִים, אֲשֶׁר יְכַפֶּר-בּוֹ, עָלָיו.	8 But if the man have no kinsman to whom restitution may be made for the guilt, the restitution for guilt which is made shall be the LORD'S, even the priest's; besides the ram of the atonement, whereby atonement shall be made for him.
5.9 ט  וְכָל-תְּרוּמָה לְכָל-קָדְשֵׁי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר-יַקְרִיבוּ לַכֹּהֵן--לוֹ יִהְיֶה.	9 And every heave-offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they present unto the priest, shall be his.
5.10 י  וְאִישׁ אֶת-קֳדָשָׁיו, לוֹ יִהְיוּ; אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִתֵּן לַכֹּהֵן, לוֹ יִהְיֶה.  {פ}	10 And every man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it shall be his. {P}
5.11 יא  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	11 and the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
5.12 יב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  אִישׁ אִישׁ כִּי-תִשְׂטֶה אִשְׁתּוֹ, וּמָעֲלָה בוֹ מָעַל.	12 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: If any man's wife go aside, and act unfaithfully against him,
5.13 יג  וְשָׁכַב אִישׁ אֹתָהּ, שִׁכְבַת-זֶרַע, וְנֶעְלַם מֵעֵינֵי אִישָׁהּ, וְנִסְתְּרָה וְהִיא נִטְמָאָה; וְעֵד אֵין בָּהּ, וְהִוא לֹא נִתְפָּשָׂה.	13 and a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, she being defiled secretly, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken in the act;
5.14 יד  וְעָבַר עָלָיו רוּחַ-קִנְאָה וְקִנֵּא אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ, וְהִוא נִטְמָאָה; אוֹ-עָבַר עָלָיו רוּחַ-קִנְאָה וְקִנֵּא אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ, וְהִיא לֹא נִטְמָאָה.	14 and the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled; or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled;
5.15 טו  וְהֵבִיא הָאִישׁ אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ, אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן, וְהֵבִיא אֶת-קָרְבָּנָהּ עָלֶיהָ, עֲשִׂירִת הָאֵיפָה קֶמַח שְׂעֹרִים; לֹא-יִצֹק עָלָיו שֶׁמֶן, וְלֹא-יִתֵּן עָלָיו לְבֹנָה--כִּי-מִנְחַת קְנָאֹת הוּא, מִנְחַת זִכָּרוֹן מַזְכֶּרֶת עָוֺן.	15 then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is a meal-offering of jealousy, a meal-offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.
5.16 טז  וְהִקְרִיב אֹתָהּ, הַכֹּהֵן; וְהֶעֱמִדָהּ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	16 And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the LORD.
5.17 יז  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מַיִם קְדֹשִׁים, בִּכְלִי-חָרֶשׂ; וּמִן-הֶעָפָר, אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה בְּקַרְקַע הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יִקַּח הַכֹּהֵן, וְנָתַן אֶל-הַמָּיִם.	17 And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the water.
5.18 יח  וְהֶעֱמִיד הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וּפָרַע אֶת-רֹאשׁ הָאִשָּׁה, וְנָתַן עַל-כַּפֶּיהָ אֵת מִנְחַת הַזִּכָּרוֹן מִנְחַת קְנָאֹת הִוא; וּבְיַד הַכֹּהֵן יִהְיוּ, מֵי הַמָּרִים הַמְאָרְרִים.	18 And the priest shall set the woman before the LORD, and let the hair of the woman's head go loose, and put the meal-offering of memorial in her hands, which is the meal-offering of jealousy; and the priest shall have in his hand the water of bitterness that causeth the curse.
5.19 יט  וְהִשְׁבִּיעַ אֹתָהּ הַכֹּהֵן, וְאָמַר אֶל-הָאִשָּׁה אִם-לֹא שָׁכַב אִישׁ אֹתָךְ, וְאִם-לֹא שָׂטִית טֻמְאָה, תַּחַת אִישֵׁךְ--הִנָּקִי, מִמֵּי הַמָּרִים הַמְאָרְרִים הָאֵלֶּה.	19 And the priest shall cause her to swear, and shall say unto the woman: 'If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness, being under thy husband, be thou free from this water of bitterness that causeth the curse;
5.20 כ  וְאַתְּ, כִּי שָׂטִית תַּחַת אִישֵׁךְ--וְכִי נִטְמֵאת; וַיִּתֵּן אִישׁ בָּךְ אֶת-שְׁכָבְתּוֹ, מִבַּלְעֲדֵי אִישֵׁךְ.	20 but if thou hast gone aside, being under thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and some man have lain with thee besides thy husband--
5.21 כא  וְהִשְׁבִּיעַ הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה, בִּשְׁבֻעַת הָאָלָה, וְאָמַר הַכֹּהֵן לָאִשָּׁה, יִתֵּן יְהוָה אוֹתָךְ לְאָלָה וְלִשְׁבֻעָה בְּתוֹךְ עַמֵּךְ--בְּתֵת יְהוָה אֶת-יְרֵכֵךְ נֹפֶלֶת, וְאֶת-בִּטְנֵךְ צָבָה.	21 then the priest shall cause the woman to swear with the oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman--the LORD make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the LORD doth make thy thigh to fall away, and thy belly to swell;
5.22 כב  וּבָאוּ הַמַּיִם הַמְאָרְרִים הָאֵלֶּה, בְּמֵעַיִךְ, לַצְבּוֹת בֶּטֶן, וְלַנְפִּל יָרֵךְ; וְאָמְרָה הָאִשָּׁה, אָמֵן אָמֵן.	22 and this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, and make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to fall away'; and the woman shall say: 'Amen, Amen.'
5.23 כג  וְכָתַב אֶת-הָאָלֹת הָאֵלֶּה, הַכֹּהֵן--בַּסֵּפֶר; וּמָחָה, אֶל-מֵי הַמָּרִים.	23 And the priest shall write these curses in a scroll, and he shall blot them out into the water of bitterness.
5.24 כד  וְהִשְׁקָה, אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה, אֶת-מֵי הַמָּרִים, הַמְאָרְרִים; וּבָאוּ בָהּ הַמַּיִם הַמְאָרְרִים, לְמָרִים.	24 And he shall make the woman drink the water of bitterness that causeth the curse; and the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her and become bitter.
5.25 כה  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן מִיַּד הָאִשָּׁה, אֵת מִנְחַת הַקְּנָאֹת; וְהֵנִיף אֶת-הַמִּנְחָה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְהִקְרִיב אֹתָהּ אֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	25 And the priest shall take the meal-offering of jealousy out of the woman's hand, and shall wave the meal-offering before the LORD, and bring it unto the altar.
5.26 כו  וְקָמַץ הַכֹּהֵן מִן-הַמִּנְחָה אֶת-אַזְכָּרָתָהּ, וְהִקְטִיר הַמִּזְבֵּחָה; וְאַחַר יַשְׁקֶה אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה, אֶת-הַמָּיִם.	26 And the priest shall take a handful of the meal-offering, as the memorial-part thereof, and make it smoke upon the altar, and afterward shall make the woman drink the water.
5.27 כז  וְהִשְׁקָהּ אֶת-הַמַּיִם, וְהָיְתָה אִם-נִטְמְאָה וַתִּמְעֹל מַעַל בְּאִישָׁהּ--וּבָאוּ בָהּ הַמַּיִם הַמְאָרְרִים לְמָרִים, וְצָבְתָה בִטְנָהּ וְנָפְלָה יְרֵכָהּ; וְהָיְתָה הָאִשָּׁה לְאָלָה, בְּקֶרֶב עַמָּהּ.	27 And when he hath made her drink the water, then it shall come to pass, if she be defiled, and have acted unfaithfully against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall fall away; and the woman shall be a curse among her people.
5.28 כח  וְאִם-לֹא נִטְמְאָה הָאִשָּׁה, וּטְהֹרָה הִוא--וְנִקְּתָה, וְנִזְרְעָה זָרַע.	28 And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be cleared, and shall conceive seed.
5.29 כט  זֹאת תּוֹרַת, הַקְּנָאֹת, אֲשֶׁר תִּשְׂטֶה אִשָּׁה תַּחַת אִישָׁהּ, וְנִטְמָאָה.	29 This is the law of jealousy, when a wife, being under her husband, goeth aside, and is defiled;
5.30 ל  אוֹ אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲבֹר עָלָיו רוּחַ קִנְאָה--וְקִנֵּא אֶת-אִשְׁתּוֹ; וְהֶעֱמִיד אֶת-הָאִשָּׁה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְעָשָׂה לָהּ הַכֹּהֵן, אֵת כָּל-הַתּוֹרָה הַזֹּאת.	30 or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon a man, and he be jealous over his wife; then shall he set the woman before the LORD, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law.
5.31 לא  וְנִקָּה הָאִישׁ, מֵעָוֺן; וְהָאִשָּׁה הַהִוא, תִּשָּׂא אֶת-עֲוֺנָהּ.  {פ}	31 And the man shall be clear from iniquity, and that woman shall bear her iniquity. {P}
6.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  אִישׁ אוֹ-אִשָּׁה, כִּי יַפְלִא לִנְדֹּר נֶדֶר נָזִיר--לְהַזִּיר, לַיהוָה.	2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When either man or woman shall clearly utter a vow, the vow of a Nazirite, to consecrate himself unto the LORD,
6.3 ג  מִיַּיִן וְשֵׁכָר יַזִּיר, חֹמֶץ יַיִן וְחֹמֶץ שֵׁכָר לֹא יִשְׁתֶּה; וְכָל-מִשְׁרַת עֲנָבִים לֹא יִשְׁתֶּה, וַעֲנָבִים לַחִים וִיבֵשִׁים לֹא יֹאכֵל.	3 he shall abstain from wine and strong drink: he shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat fresh grapes or dried.
6.4 ד  כֹּל, יְמֵי נִזְרוֹ:  מִכֹּל אֲשֶׁר יֵעָשֶׂה מִגֶּפֶן הַיַּיִן, מֵחַרְצַנִּים וְעַד-זָג--לֹא יֹאכֵל.	4 All the days of his Naziriteship shall he eat nothing that is made of the grape-vine, from the pressed grapes even to the grapestone.
6.5 ה  כָּל-יְמֵי נֶדֶר נִזְרוֹ, תַּעַר לֹא-יַעֲבֹר עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ:  עַד-מְלֹאת הַיָּמִם אֲשֶׁר-יַזִּיר לַיהוָה, קָדֹשׁ יִהְיֶה--גַּדֵּל פֶּרַע, שְׂעַר רֹאשׁוֹ.	5 All the days of his vow of Naziriteship there shall no razor come upon his head; until the days be fulfilled, in which he consecrateth himself unto the LORD, he shall be holy, he shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow long.
6.6 ו  כָּל-יְמֵי הַזִּירוֹ, לַיהוָה, עַל-נֶפֶשׁ מֵת, לֹא יָבֹא.	6 All the days that he consecrateth himself unto the LORD he shall not come near to a dead body.
6.7 ז  לְאָבִיו וּלְאִמּוֹ, לְאָחִיו וּלְאַחֹתוֹ--לֹא-יִטַּמָּא לָהֶם, בְּמֹתָם:  כִּי נֵזֶר אֱלֹהָיו, עַל-רֹאשׁוֹ.	7 He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die; because his consecration unto God is upon his head.
6.8 ח  כֹּל, יְמֵי נִזְרוֹ, קָדֹשׁ הוּא, לַיהוָה.	8 All the days of his Naziriteship he is holy unto the LORD.
6.9 ט  וְכִי-יָמוּת מֵת עָלָיו בְּפֶתַע פִּתְאֹם, וְטִמֵּא רֹאשׁ נִזְרוֹ--וְגִלַּח רֹאשׁוֹ בְּיוֹם טָהֳרָתוֹ, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי יְגַלְּחֶנּוּ.	9 And if any man die very suddenly beside him, and he defile his consecrated head, then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.
6.10 י  וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁמִינִי, יָבִא שְׁתֵּי תֹרִים, אוֹ שְׁנֵי, בְּנֵי יוֹנָה:  אֶל-הַכֹּהֵן--אֶל-פֶּתַח, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	10 And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting.
6.11 יא  וְעָשָׂה הַכֹּהֵן, אֶחָד לְחַטָּאת וְאֶחָד לְעֹלָה, וְכִפֶּר עָלָיו, מֵאֲשֶׁר חָטָא עַל-הַנָּפֶשׁ; וְקִדַּשׁ אֶת-רֹאשׁוֹ, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.	11 And the priest shall prepare one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, and make atonement for him, for that he sinned by reason of the dead; and he shall hallow his head that same day.
6.12 יב  וְהִזִּיר לַיהוָה אֶת-יְמֵי נִזְרוֹ, וְהֵבִיא כֶּבֶשׂ בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ לְאָשָׁם; וְהַיָּמִים הָרִאשֹׁנִים יִפְּלוּ, כִּי טָמֵא נִזְרוֹ.	12 And he shall consecrate unto the LORD the days of his Naziriteship, and shall bring a he-lamb of the first year for a guilt-offering; but the former days shall be void, because his consecration was defiled.
6.13 יג  וְזֹאת תּוֹרַת, הַנָּזִיר:  בְּיוֹם, מְלֹאת יְמֵי נִזְרוֹ, יָבִיא אֹתוֹ, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	13 And this is the law of the Nazirite, when the days of his consecration are fulfilled: he shall bring it unto the door of the tent of meeting;
6.14 יד  וְהִקְרִיב אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ לַיהוָה כֶּבֶשׂ בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ תָמִים אֶחָד, לְעֹלָה, וְכַבְשָׂה אַחַת בַּת-שְׁנָתָהּ תְּמִימָה, לְחַטָּאת; וְאַיִל-אֶחָד תָּמִים, לִשְׁלָמִים.	14 and he shall present his offering unto the LORD, one he-lamb of the first year without blemish for a burnt-offering, and one ewe-lamb of the first year without blemish for a sin-offering, and one ram without blemish for peace-offerings,
6.15 טו  וְסַל מַצּוֹת, סֹלֶת חַלֹּת בְּלוּלֹת בַּשֶּׁמֶן, וּרְקִיקֵי מַצּוֹת, מְשֻׁחִים בַּשָּׁמֶן; וּמִנְחָתָם, וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם.	15 and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and their meal-offering, and their drink-offerings.
6.16 טז  וְהִקְרִיב הַכֹּהֵן, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְעָשָׂה אֶת-חַטָּאתוֹ, וְאֶת-עֹלָתוֹ.	16 And the priest shall bring them before the LORD, and shall offer his sin-offering, and his burnt-offering.
6.17 יז  וְאֶת-הָאַיִל יַעֲשֶׂה זֶבַח שְׁלָמִים, לַיהוָה, עַל, סַל הַמַּצּוֹת; וְעָשָׂה, הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-מִנְחָתוֹ, וְאֶת-נִסְכּוֹ.	17 And he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the LORD, with the basket of unleavened bread; the priest shall offer also the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof.
6.18 יח  וְגִלַּח הַנָּזִיר, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--אֶת-רֹאשׁ נִזְרוֹ; וְלָקַח, אֶת-שְׂעַר רֹאשׁ נִזְרוֹ, וְנָתַן עַל-הָאֵשׁ, אֲשֶׁר-תַּחַת זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים.	18 And the Nazirite shall shave his consecrated head at the door of the tent of meeting, and shall take the hair of his consecrated head, and put it on the fire which is under the sacrifice of peace-offerings.
6.19 יט  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן אֶת-הַזְּרֹעַ בְּשֵׁלָה, מִן-הָאַיִל, וְחַלַּת מַצָּה אַחַת מִן-הַסַּל, וּרְקִיק מַצָּה אֶחָד; וְנָתַן עַל-כַּפֵּי הַנָּזִיר, אַחַר הִתְגַּלְּחוֹ אֶת-נִזְרוֹ.	19 And the priest shall take the shoulder of the ram when it is sodden, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazirite, after he hath shaven his consecrated head.
6.20 כ  וְהֵנִיף אוֹתָם הַכֹּהֵן תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--קֹדֶשׁ הוּא לַכֹּהֵן, עַל חֲזֵה הַתְּנוּפָה וְעַל שׁוֹק הַתְּרוּמָה; וְאַחַר יִשְׁתֶּה הַנָּזִיר, יָיִן.	20 And the priest shall wave them for a wave-offering before the LORD; this is holy for the priest, together with the breast of waving and the thigh of heaving; and after that the Nazirite may drink wine.
6.21 כא  זֹאת תּוֹרַת הַנָּזִיר, אֲשֶׁר יִדֹּר, קָרְבָּנוֹ לַיהוָה עַל-נִזְרוֹ, מִלְּבַד אֲשֶׁר-תַּשִּׂיג יָדוֹ; כְּפִי נִדְרוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יִדֹּר--כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה, עַל תּוֹרַת נִזְרוֹ.  {פ}	21 This is the law of the Nazirite who voweth, and of his offering unto the LORD for his Naziriteship, beside that for which his means suffice; according to his vow which he voweth, so he must do after the law of his Naziriteship. {P}
6.22 כב  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	22 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
6.23 כג  דַּבֵּר אֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-בָּנָיו לֵאמֹר, כֹּה תְבָרְכוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אָמוֹר, לָהֶם.  {ס}	23 'Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying: On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel; ye shall say unto them: {S}
6.24 כד  יְבָרֶכְךָ יְהוָה, וְיִשְׁמְרֶךָ.  {ס}	24 The LORD bless thee, and keep thee; {S}
6.25 כה  יָאֵר יְהוָה פָּנָיו אֵלֶיךָ, וִיחֻנֶּךָּ.  {ס}	25 The LORD make His face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; {S}
6.26 כו  יִשָּׂא יְהוָה פָּנָיו אֵלֶיךָ, וְיָשֵׂם לְךָ שָׁלוֹם.  {ס}	26 The LORD lift up His countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. {S}
6.27 כז  וְשָׂמוּ אֶת-שְׁמִי, עַל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַאֲנִי, אֲבָרְכֵם.  {ס}	27 So shall they put My name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them.' {S}
7.1 א  וַיְהִי בְּיוֹם כַּלּוֹת מֹשֶׁה לְהָקִים אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, וַיִּמְשַׁח אֹתוֹ וַיְקַדֵּשׁ אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו, וְאֶת-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְאֶת-כָּל-כֵּלָיו; וַיִּמְשָׁחֵם, וַיְקַדֵּשׁ אֹתָם.	1 And it came to pass on the day that Moses had made an end of setting up the tabernacle, and had anointed it and sanctified it, and all the furniture thereof, and the altar and all the vessels thereof, and had anointed them and sanctified them;
7.2 ב  וַיַּקְרִיבוּ נְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, רָאשֵׁי בֵּית אֲבֹתָם:  הֵם נְשִׂיאֵי הַמַּטֹּת, הֵם הָעֹמְדִים עַל-הַפְּקֻדִים.	2 that the princes of Israel, the heads of their fathers' houses, offered--these were the princes of the tribes, these are they that were over them that were numbered.
7.3 ג  וַיָּבִיאוּ אֶת-קָרְבָּנָם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, שֵׁשׁ-עֶגְלֹת צָב וּשְׁנֵי עָשָׂר בָּקָר--עֲגָלָה עַל-שְׁנֵי הַנְּשִׂאִים, וְשׁוֹר לְאֶחָד; וַיַּקְרִיבוּ אוֹתָם, לִפְנֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	3 And they brought their offering before the LORD, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen: a wagon for every two of the princes, and for each one an ox; and they presented them before the tabernacle.
7.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	4 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
7.5 ה  קַח, מֵאִתָּם, וְהָיוּ, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-עֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְנָתַתָּה אוֹתָם אֶל-הַלְוִיִּם, אִישׁ כְּפִי עֲבֹדָתוֹ.	5 'Take it of them, that they may be to do the service of the tent of meeting; and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according to his service.'
7.6 ו  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-הָעֲגָלֹת וְאֶת-הַבָּקָר; וַיִּתֵּן אוֹתָם, אֶל-הַלְוִיִּם.	6 And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites.
7.7 ז  אֵת שְׁתֵּי הָעֲגָלוֹת, וְאֵת אַרְבַּעַת הַבָּקָר--נָתַן, לִבְנֵי גֵרְשׁוֹן:  כְּפִי, עֲבֹדָתָם.	7 Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service.
7.8 ח  וְאֵת אַרְבַּע הָעֲגָלֹת, וְאֵת שְׁמֹנַת הַבָּקָר--נָתַן, לִבְנֵי מְרָרִי:  כְּפִי, עֲבֹדָתָם, בְּיַד אִיתָמָר, בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן.	8 And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
7.9 ט  וְלִבְנֵי קְהָת, לֹא נָתָן:  כִּי-עֲבֹדַת הַקֹּדֶשׁ עֲלֵהֶם, בַּכָּתֵף יִשָּׂאוּ.	9 But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none, because the service of the holy things belonged unto them: they bore them upon their shoulders.
7.10 י  וַיַּקְרִיבוּ הַנְּשִׂאִים, אֵת חֲנֻכַּת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, בְּיוֹם, הִמָּשַׁח אֹתוֹ; וַיַּקְרִיבוּ הַנְּשִׂיאִם אֶת-קָרְבָּנָם, לִפְנֵי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	10 And the princes brought the dedication-offering of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the princes brought their offering before the altar.
7.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  נָשִׂיא אֶחָד לַיּוֹם, נָשִׂיא אֶחָד לַיּוֹם, יַקְרִיבוּ אֶת-קָרְבָּנָם, לַחֲנֻכַּת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ.  {ס}	11 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'They shall present their offering each prince on his day, for the dedication of the altar.' {S}
7.12 יב  וַיְהִי, הַמַּקְרִיב בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן--אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ:  נַחְשׁוֹן בֶּן-עַמִּינָדָב, לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה.	12 And he that presented his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah;
7.13 יג  וְקָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	13 and his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.14 יד  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	14 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.15 טו  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	15 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.16 טז  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	16 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.17 יז  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתּוּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן נַחְשׁוֹן, בֶּן-עַמִּינָדָב.  {פ}	17 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab. {P}
7.18 יח  בַּיּוֹם, הַשֵּׁנִי, הִקְרִיב, נְתַנְאֵל בֶּן-צוּעָר--נְשִׂיא, יִשָּׂשכָר.	18 On the second day Nethanel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer:
7.19 יט  הִקְרִב אֶת-קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	19 he presented for his offering one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.20 כ  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	20 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.21 כא  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	21 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.22 כב  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	22 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.23 כג  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן נְתַנְאֵל, בֶּן-צוּעָר.  {פ}	23 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Nethanel the son of Zuar. {P}
7.24 כד  בַּיּוֹם, הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי זְבוּלֻן--אֱלִיאָב, בֶּן-חֵלֹן.	24 On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun:
7.25 כה  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	25 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.26 כו  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	26 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.27 כז  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	27 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.28 כח  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	28 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.29 כט  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֱלִיאָב, בֶּן-חֵלֹן.  {פ}	29 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon. {P}
7.30 ל  בַּיּוֹם, הָרְבִיעִי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן--אֱלִיצוּר, בֶּן-שְׁדֵיאוּר.	30 On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben:
7.31 לא  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	31 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.32 לב  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	32 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.33 לג  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	33 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.34 לד  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	34 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.35 לה  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֱלִיצוּר, בֶּן-שְׁדֵיאוּר.  {פ}	35 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur. {P}
7.36 לו  בַּיּוֹם, הַחֲמִישִׁי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן--שְׁלֻמִיאֵל, בֶּן-צוּרִישַׁדָּי.	36 On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon:
7.37 לז  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	37 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.38 לח  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	38 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.39 לט  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	39 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.40 מ  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	40 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.41 מא  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן שְׁלֻמִיאֵל, בֶּן-צוּרִישַׁדָּי.  {פ}	41 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. {P}
7.42 מב  בַּיּוֹם, הַשִּׁשִּׁי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי גָד--אֶלְיָסָף, בֶּן-דְּעוּאֵל.	42 On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad:
7.43 מג  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	43 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.44 מד  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	44 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.45 מה  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	45 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.46 מו  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	46 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.47 מז  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֶלְיָסָף, בֶּן-דְּעוּאֵל.  {פ}	47 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel. {P}
7.48 מח  בַּיּוֹם, הַשְּׁבִיעִי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי אֶפְרָיִם--אֱלִישָׁמָע, בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד.	48 On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim:
7.49 מט  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	49 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.50 נ  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	50 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.51 נא  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	51 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.52 נב  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	52 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.53 נג  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֱלִישָׁמָע, בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד.  {פ}	53 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud. {P}
7.54 נד  בַּיּוֹם, הַשְּׁמִינִי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה--גַּמְלִיאֵל, בֶּן-פְּדָהצוּר.	54 On the eighth day Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manasseh:
7.55 נה  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	55 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.56 נו  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	56 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.57 נז  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	57 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.58 נח  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	58 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.59 נט  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן גַּמְלִיאֵל, בֶּן-פְּדָהצוּר.  {פ}	59 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lamb of the first year. This was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. {P}
7.60 ס  בַּיּוֹם, הַתְּשִׁיעִי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי בִנְיָמִן--אֲבִידָן, בֶּן-גִּדְעֹנִי.	60 On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin:
7.61 סא  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	61 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.62 סב  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	62 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.63 סג  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	63 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.64 סד  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	64 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.65 סה  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֲבִידָן, בֶּן-גִּדְעֹנִי.  {פ}	65 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni. {P}
7.66 סו  בַּיּוֹם, הָעֲשִׂירִי, נָשִׂיא, לִבְנֵי דָן--אֲחִיעֶזֶר, בֶּן-עַמִּישַׁדָּי.	66 On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan:
7.67 סז  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	67 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.68 סח  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	68 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.69 סט  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	69 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.70 ע  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	70 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.71 עא  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֲחִיעֶזֶר, בֶּן-עַמִּישַׁדָּי.  {פ}	71 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. {P}
7.72 עב  בְּיוֹם עַשְׁתֵּי עָשָׂר יוֹם, נָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי אָשֵׁר--פַּגְעִיאֵל, בֶּן-עָכְרָן.	72 On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ochran, prince of the children of Asher:
7.73 עג  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	73 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.74 עד  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	74 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.75 עה  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	75 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.76 עו  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	76 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.77 עז  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן פַּגְעִיאֵל, בֶּן-עָכְרָן.  {פ}	77 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ochran. {P}
7.78 עח  בְּיוֹם שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר יוֹם, נָשִׂיא לִבְנֵי נַפְתָּלִי--אֲחִירַע, בֶּן-עֵינָן.	78 On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali:
7.79 עט  קָרְבָּנוֹ קַעֲרַת-כֶּסֶף אַחַת, שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה מִשְׁקָלָהּ, מִזְרָק אֶחָד כֶּסֶף, שִׁבְעִים שֶׁקֶל בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; שְׁנֵיהֶם מְלֵאִים, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--לְמִנְחָה.	79 his offering was one silver dish, the weight thereof was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering;
7.80 פ  כַּף אַחַת עֲשָׂרָה זָהָב, מְלֵאָה קְטֹרֶת.	80 one golden pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
7.81 פא  פַּר אֶחָד בֶּן-בָּקָר, אַיִל אֶחָד כֶּבֶשׂ-אֶחָד בֶּן-שְׁנָתוֹ--לְעֹלָה.	81 one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burnt-offering;
7.82 פב  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּאת.	82 one male of the goats for a sin-offering;
7.83 פג  וּלְזֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, בָּקָר שְׁנַיִם, אֵילִם חֲמִשָּׁה עַתֻּדִים חֲמִשָּׁה, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה חֲמִשָּׁה:  זֶה קָרְבַּן אֲחִירַע, בֶּן-עֵינָן.  {פ}	83 and for the sacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year. This was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan. {P}
7.84 פד  זֹאת חֲנֻכַּת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, בְּיוֹם הִמָּשַׁח אֹתוֹ, מֵאֵת, נְשִׂיאֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  קַעֲרֹת כֶּסֶף שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה, מִזְרְקֵי-כֶסֶף שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, כַּפּוֹת זָהָב, שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה.	84 This was the dedication-offering of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, at the hands of the princes of Israel: twelve silver dishes, twelve silver basins, twelve golden pans;
7.85 פה  שְׁלֹשִׁים וּמֵאָה, הַקְּעָרָה הָאַחַת כֶּסֶף, וְשִׁבְעִים, הַמִּזְרָק הָאֶחָד; כֹּל כֶּסֶף הַכֵּלִים, אַלְפַּיִם וְאַרְבַּע-מֵאוֹת בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	85 each silver dish weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and each basin seventy; all the silver of the vessels two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
7.86 פו  כַּפּוֹת זָהָב שְׁתֵּים-עֶשְׂרֵה מְלֵאֹת קְטֹרֶת, עֲשָׂרָה עֲשָׂרָה הַכַּף בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ; כָּל-זְהַב הַכַּפּוֹת, עֶשְׂרִים וּמֵאָה.	86 twelve golden pans, full of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary; all the gold of the pans a hundred and twenty shekels;
7.87 פז  כָּל-הַבָּקָר לָעֹלָה שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר פָּרִים, אֵילִם שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר--וּמִנְחָתָם; וּשְׂעִירֵי עִזִּים שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, לְחַטָּאת.	87 all the oxen for the burnt-offering twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the he-lambs of the first year twelve, and their meal-offering; and the males of the goats for a sin-offering twelve;
7.88 פח  וְכֹל בְּקַר זֶבַח הַשְּׁלָמִים, עֶשְׂרִים וְאַרְבָּעָה פָּרִים, אֵילִם שִׁשִּׁים עַתֻּדִים שִׁשִּׁים, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שִׁשִּׁים:  זֹאת חֲנֻכַּת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, אַחֲרֵי הִמָּשַׁח אֹתוֹ.	88 and all the oxen for the sacrifice of peace-offerings twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he-goats sixty, the he-lambs of the first year sixty. This was the dedication-offering of the altar, after that it was anointed.
7.89 פט  וּבְבֹא מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לְדַבֵּר אִתּוֹ, וַיִּשְׁמַע אֶת-הַקּוֹל מִדַּבֵּר אֵלָיו מֵעַל הַכַּפֹּרֶת אֲשֶׁר עַל-אֲרֹן הָעֵדֻת, מִבֵּין שְׁנֵי הַכְּרֻבִים; וַיְדַבֵּר, אֵלָיו.  {פ}	89 And when Moses went into the tent of meeting that He might speak with him, then he heard the Voice speaking unto him from above the ark-cover that was upon the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim; and He spoke unto him. {P}
8.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
8.2 ב  דַּבֵּר, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֵלָיו:  בְּהַעֲלֹתְךָ, אֶת-הַנֵּרֹת, אֶל-מוּל פְּנֵי הַמְּנוֹרָה, יָאִירוּ שִׁבְעַת הַנֵּרוֹת.	2 'Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him: When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front of the candlestick.'
8.3 ג  וַיַּעַשׂ כֵּן, אַהֲרֹן--אֶל-מוּל פְּנֵי הַמְּנוֹרָה, הֶעֱלָה נֵרֹתֶיהָ:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	3 And Aaron did so: he lighted the lamps thereof so as to give light in front of the candlestick, as the LORD commanded Moses.
8.4 ד  וְזֶה מַעֲשֵׂה הַמְּנֹרָה מִקְשָׁה זָהָב, עַד-יְרֵכָהּ עַד-פִּרְחָהּ מִקְשָׁה הִוא:  כַּמַּרְאֶה, אֲשֶׁר הֶרְאָה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה--כֵּן עָשָׂה, אֶת-הַמְּנֹרָה.  {פ}	4 And this was the work of the candlestick, beaten work of gold; unto the base thereof, and unto the flowers thereof, it was beaten work; according unto the pattern which the LORD had shown Moses, so he made the candlestick. {P}
8.5 ה  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	5 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
8.6 ו  קַח, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, מִתּוֹךְ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְטִהַרְתָּ, אֹתָם.	6 'Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.
8.7 ז  וְכֹה-תַעֲשֶׂה לָהֶם לְטַהֲרָם, הַזֵּה עֲלֵיהֶם מֵי חַטָּאת; וְהֶעֱבִירוּ תַעַר עַל-כָּל-בְּשָׂרָם, וְכִבְּסוּ בִגְדֵיהֶם וְהִטֶּהָרוּ.	7 And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: sprinkle the water of purification upon them, and let them cause a razor to pass over all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and cleanse themselves.
8.8 ח  וְלָקְחוּ, פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר, וּמִנְחָתוֹ, סֹלֶת בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן; וּפַר-שֵׁנִי בֶן-בָּקָר, תִּקַּח לְחַטָּאת.	8 Then let them take a young bullock, and its meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin-offering.
8.9 ט  וְהִקְרַבְתָּ, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, לִפְנֵי, אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְהִקְהַלְתָּ--אֶת-כָּל-עֲדַת, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	9 And thou shalt present the Levites before the tent of meeting; and thou shalt assemble the whole congregation of the children of Israel.
8.10 י  וְהִקְרַבְתָּ אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְסָמְכוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל-הַלְוִיִּם.	10 And thou shalt present the Levites before the LORD; and the children of Israel shall lay their hands upon the Levites.
8.11 יא  וְהֵנִיף אַהֲרֹן אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם תְּנוּפָה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהָיוּ, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-עֲבֹדַת יְהוָה.	11 And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the LORD for a wave-offering from the children of Israel, that they may be to do the service of the LORD.
8.12 יב  וְהַלְוִיִּם יִסְמְכוּ אֶת-יְדֵיהֶם, עַל רֹאשׁ הַפָּרִים; וַעֲשֵׂה אֶת-הָאֶחָד חַטָּאת וְאֶת-הָאֶחָד עֹלָה, לַיהוָה, לְכַפֵּר, עַל-הַלְוִיִּם.	12 And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks; and offer thou the one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, unto the LORD, to make atonement for the Levites.
8.13 יג  וְהַעֲמַדְתָּ, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, לִפְנֵי אַהֲרֹן, וְלִפְנֵי בָנָיו; וְהֵנַפְתָּ אֹתָם תְּנוּפָה, לַיהוָה.	13 And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them for a wave-offering unto the LORD.
8.14 יד  וְהִבְדַּלְתָּ, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, מִתּוֹךְ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהָיוּ לִי, הַלְוִיִּם.	14 Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel; and the Levites shall be Mine.
8.15 טו  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן יָבֹאוּ הַלְוִיִּם, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְטִהַרְתָּ אֹתָם, וְהֵנַפְתָּ אֹתָם תְּנוּפָה.	15 And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tent of meeting; and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them for a wave-offering.
8.16 טז  כִּי נְתֻנִים נְתֻנִים הֵמָּה לִי, מִתּוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  תַּחַת פִּטְרַת כָּל-רֶחֶם בְּכוֹר כֹּל, מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לָקַחְתִּי אֹתָם, לִי.	16 For they are wholly given unto Me from among the children of Israel; instead of all that openeth the womb, even the first-born of all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto Me.
8.17 יז  כִּי לִי כָל-בְּכוֹר בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּאָדָם וּבַבְּהֵמָה:  בְּיוֹם, הַכֹּתִי כָל-בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, הִקְדַּשְׁתִּי אֹתָם, לִי.	17 For all the first-born among the children of Israel are Mine, both man and beast; on the day that I smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for Myself.
8.18 יח  וָאֶקַּח, אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם, תַּחַת כָּל-בְּכוֹר, בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	18 And I have taken the Levites instead of all the first-born among the children of Israel.
8.19 יט  וָאֶתְּנָה אֶת-הַלְוִיִּם נְתֻנִים לְאַהֲרֹן וּלְבָנָיו, מִתּוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-עֲבֹדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וּלְכַפֵּר עַל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְלֹא יִהְיֶה בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, נֶגֶף, בְּגֶשֶׁת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	19 And I have given the Levites--they are given to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tent of meeting, and to make atonement for the children of Israel, that there be no plague among the children of Israel, through the children of Israel coming nigh unto the sanctuary.'
8.20 כ  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן וְכָל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַלְוִיִּם:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, לַלְוִיִּם--כֵּן-עָשׂוּ לָהֶם, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	20 Thus did Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the Levites; according unto all that the LORD commanded Moses touching the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them.
8.21 כא  וַיִּתְחַטְּאוּ הַלְוִיִּם, וַיְכַבְּסוּ בִּגְדֵיהֶם, וַיָּנֶף אַהֲרֹן אֹתָם תְּנוּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיהֶם אַהֲרֹן, לְטַהֲרָם.	21 And the Levites purified themselves, and they washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them for a sacred gift before the LORD; and Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them.
8.22 כב  וְאַחֲרֵי-כֵן בָּאוּ הַלְוִיִּם, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-עֲבֹדָתָם בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לִפְנֵי אַהֲרֹן, וְלִפְנֵי בָנָיו:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה עַל-הַלְוִיִּם, כֵּן עָשׂוּ לָהֶם.  {ס}	22 And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the tent of meeting before Aaron, and before his sons; as the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto them. {S}
8.23 כג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	23 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
8.24 כד  זֹאת, אֲשֶׁר לַלְוִיִּם:  מִבֶּן חָמֵשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וָמַעְלָה, יָבוֹא לִצְבֹא צָבָא, בַּעֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	24 'This is that which pertaineth unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in to perform the service in the work of the tent of meeting;
8.25 כה  וּמִבֶּן חֲמִשִּׁים שָׁנָה, יָשׁוּב מִצְּבָא הָעֲבֹדָה; וְלֹא יַעֲבֹד, עוֹד.	25 and from the age of fifty years they shall return from the service of the work, and shall serve no more;
8.26 כו  וְשֵׁרֵת אֶת-אֶחָיו בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לִשְׁמֹר מִשְׁמֶרֶת, וַעֲבֹדָה, לֹא יַעֲבֹד; כָּכָה תַּעֲשֶׂה לַלְוִיִּם, בְּמִשְׁמְרֹתָם.  {פ}	26 but shall minister with their brethren in the tent of meeting, to keep the charge, but they shall do no manner of service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charges.' {P}
9.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה בְמִדְבַּר-סִינַי בַּשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית לְצֵאתָם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן--לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying:
9.2 ב  וְיַעֲשׂוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַפָּסַח, בְּמוֹעֲדוֹ.	2 'Let the children of Israel keep the passover in its appointed season.
9.3 ג  בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר-יוֹם בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם, תַּעֲשׂוּ אֹתוֹ--בְּמֹעֲדוֹ; כְּכָל-חֻקֹּתָיו וּכְכָל-מִשְׁפָּטָיו, תַּעֲשׂוּ אֹתוֹ.	3 In the fourteenth day of this month, at dusk, ye shall keep it in its appointed season; according to all the statutes of it, and according to all the ordinances thereof, shall ye keep it.'
9.4 ד  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לַעֲשֹׂת הַפָּסַח.	4 And Moses spoke unto the children of Israel, that they should keep the passover.
9.5 ה  וַיַּעֲשׂוּ אֶת-הַפֶּסַח בָּרִאשׁוֹן בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ, בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם--בְּמִדְבַּר סִינָי:  כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה--כֵּן עָשׂוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 And they kept the passover in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at dusk, in the wilderness of Sinai; according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.
9.6 ו  וַיְהִי אֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ טְמֵאִים לְנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם, וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ לַעֲשֹׂת-הַפֶּסַח, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיִּקְרְבוּ לִפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה, וְלִפְנֵי אַהֲרֹן--בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא.	6 But there were certain men, who were unclean by the dead body of a man, so that they could not keep the passover on that day; and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day.
9.7 ז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָהֵמָּה, אֵלָיו, אֲנַחְנוּ טְמֵאִים, לְנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם; לָמָּה נִגָּרַע, לְבִלְתִּי הַקְרִיב אֶת-קָרְבַּן יְהוָה בְּמֹעֲדוֹ, בְּתוֹךְ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 And those men said unto him: 'We are unclean by the dead body of a man; wherefore are we to be kept back, so as not to bring the offering of the LORD in its appointed season among the children of Israel?'
9.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, מֹשֶׁה:  עִמְדוּ וְאֶשְׁמְעָה, מַה-יְצַוֶּה יְהוָה לָכֶם.  {פ}	8 And Moses said unto them: 'Stay ye, that I may hear what the LORD will command concerning you.' {P}
9.9 ט  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	9 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
9.10 י  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  אִישׁ אִישׁ כִּי-יִהְיֶה-טָמֵא לָנֶפֶשׁ אוֹ בְדֶרֶךְ רְחֹקָה לָכֶם, אוֹ לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, וְעָשָׂה פֶסַח, לַיהוָה.	10 'Speak unto the children of Israel, saying: If any man of you or of your generations shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the LORD;
9.11 יא  בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם, בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם--יַעֲשׂוּ אֹתוֹ:  עַל-מַצּוֹת וּמְרֹרִים, יֹאכְלֻהוּ.	11 in the second month on the fourteenth day at dusk they shall keep it; they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs;
9.12 יב  לֹא-יַשְׁאִירוּ מִמֶּנּוּ עַד-בֹּקֶר, וְעֶצֶם לֹא יִשְׁבְּרוּ-בוֹ; כְּכָל-חֻקַּת הַפֶּסַח, יַעֲשׂוּ אֹתוֹ.	12 they shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break a bone thereof; according to all the statute of the passover they shall keep it.
9.13 יג  וְהָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-הוּא טָהוֹר וּבְדֶרֶךְ לֹא-הָיָה, וְחָדַל לַעֲשׂוֹת הַפֶּסַח--וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מֵעַמֶּיהָ:  כִּי קָרְבַּן יְהוָה, לֹא הִקְרִיב בְּמֹעֲדוֹ--חֶטְאוֹ יִשָּׂא, הָאִישׁ הַהוּא.	13 But the man that is clean, and is not on a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, that soul shall be cut off from his people; because he brought not the offering of the LORD in its appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.
9.14 יד  וְכִי-יָגוּר אִתְּכֶם גֵּר, וְעָשָׂה פֶסַח לַיהוָה--כְּחֻקַּת הַפֶּסַח וּכְמִשְׁפָּטוֹ, כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה:  חֻקָּה אַחַת יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, וְלַגֵּר וּלְאֶזְרַח הָאָרֶץ.  {ס}	14 And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the passover unto the LORD: according to the statute of the passover, and according to the ordinance thereof, so shall he do; ye shall have one statute, both for the stranger, and for him that is born in the land.' {S}
9.15 טו  וּבְיוֹם, הָקִים אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, כִּסָּה הֶעָנָן אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, לְאֹהֶל הָעֵדֻת; וּבָעֶרֶב יִהְיֶה עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, כְּמַרְאֵה-אֵשׁ--עַד-בֹּקֶר.	15 And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, even the tent of the testimony; and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until morning.
9.16 טז  כֵּן יִהְיֶה תָמִיד, הֶעָנָן יְכַסֶּנּוּ; וּמַרְאֵה-אֵשׁ, לָיְלָה.	16 So it was alway: the cloud covered it, and the appearance of fire by night.
9.17 יז  וּלְפִי הֵעָלוֹת הֶעָנָן, מֵעַל הָאֹהֶל--וְאַחֲרֵי כֵן, יִסְעוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּבִמְקוֹם, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכָּן-שָׁם הֶעָנָן--שָׁם יַחֲנוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	17 And whenever the cloud was taken up from over the Tent, then after that the children of Israel journeyed; and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel encamped.
9.18 יח  עַל-פִּי יְהוָה, יִסְעוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְעַל-פִּי יְהוָה, יַחֲנוּ:  כָּל-יְמֵי, אֲשֶׁר יִשְׁכֹּן הֶעָנָן עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן--יַחֲנוּ.	18 At the commandment of the LORD the children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the LORD they encamped: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they remained encamped.
9.19 יט  וּבְהַאֲרִיךְ הֶעָנָן עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, יָמִים רַבִּים--וְשָׁמְרוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת יְהוָה, וְלֹא יִסָּעוּ.	19 And when the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of the LORD, and journeyed not.
9.20 כ  וְיֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר יִהְיֶה הֶעָנָן, יָמִים מִסְפָּר--עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן; עַל-פִּי יְהוָה יַחֲנוּ, וְעַל-פִּי יְהוָה יִסָּעוּ.	20 And sometimes the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle; according to the commandment of the LORD they remained encamped, and according to the commandment of the LORD they journeyed.
9.21 כא  וְיֵשׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִהְיֶה הֶעָנָן, מֵעֶרֶב עַד-בֹּקֶר, וְנַעֲלָה הֶעָנָן בַּבֹּקֶר, וְנָסָעוּ; אוֹ יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה, וְנַעֲלָה הֶעָנָן וְנָסָעוּ.	21 And sometimes the cloud was from evening until morning; and when the cloud was taken up in the morning, they journeyed; or if it continued by day and by night, when the cloud was taken up, they journeyed.
9.22 כב  אוֹ-יֹמַיִם אוֹ-חֹדֶשׁ אוֹ-יָמִים, בְּהַאֲרִיךְ הֶעָנָן עַל-הַמִּשְׁכָּן לִשְׁכֹּן עָלָיו, יַחֲנוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלֹא יִסָּעוּ; וּבְהֵעָלֹתוֹ, יִסָּעוּ.	22 Whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, abiding thereon, the children of Israel remained encamped, and journeyed not; but when it was taken up, they journeyed.
9.23 כג  עַל-פִּי יְהוָה יַחֲנוּ, וְעַל-פִּי יְהוָה יִסָּעוּ:  אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת יְהוָה שָׁמָרוּ, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	23 At the commandment of the LORD they encamped, and at the commandment of the LORD they journeyed; they kept the charge of the LORD, at the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses. {P}
10.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
10.2 ב  עֲשֵׂה לְךָ, שְׁתֵּי חֲצוֹצְרֹת כֶּסֶף--מִקְשָׁה, תַּעֲשֶׂה אֹתָם; וְהָיוּ לְךָ לְמִקְרָא הָעֵדָה, וּלְמַסַּע אֶת-הַמַּחֲנוֹת.	2 'Make thee two trumpets of silver; of beaten work shalt thou make them; and they shall be unto thee for the calling of the congregation, and for causing the camps to set forward.
10.3 ג  וְתָקְעוּ, בָּהֵן--וְנוֹעֲדוּ אֵלֶיךָ כָּל-הָעֵדָה, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	3 And when they shall blow with them, all the congregation shall gather themselves unto thee at the door of the tent of meeting.
10.4 ד  וְאִם-בְּאַחַת, יִתְקָעוּ--וְנוֹעֲדוּ אֵלֶיךָ הַנְּשִׂיאִים, רָאשֵׁי אַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	4 And if they blow but with one, then the princes, the heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves unto thee.
10.5 ה  וּתְקַעְתֶּם, תְּרוּעָה--וְנָסְעוּ, הַמַּחֲנוֹת, הַחֹנִים, קֵדְמָה.	5 And when ye blow an alarm, the camps that lie on the east side shall take their journey.
10.6 ו  וּתְקַעְתֶּם תְּרוּעָה, שֵׁנִית--וְנָסְעוּ הַמַּחֲנוֹת, הַחֹנִים תֵּימָנָה; תְּרוּעָה יִתְקְעוּ, לְמַסְעֵיהֶם.	6 And when ye blow an alarm the second time, the camps that lie on the south side shall set forward; they shall blow an alarm for their journeys.
10.7 ז  וּבְהַקְהִיל, אֶת-הַקָּהָל--תִּתְקְעוּ, וְלֹא תָרִיעוּ.	7 But when the assembly is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.
10.8 ח  וּבְנֵי אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֲנִים, יִתְקְעוּ בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם לְחֻקַּת עוֹלָם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.	8 And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for a statute for ever throughout your generations.
10.9 ט  וְכִי-תָבֹאוּ מִלְחָמָה בְּאַרְצְכֶם, עַל-הַצַּר הַצֹּרֵר אֶתְכֶם--וַהֲרֵעֹתֶם, בַּחֲצֹצְרֹת; וְנִזְכַּרְתֶּם, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, וְנוֹשַׁעְתֶּם, מֵאֹיְבֵיכֶם.	9 And when ye go to war in your land against the adversary that oppresseth you, then ye shall sound an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the LORD your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.
10.10 י  וּבְיוֹם שִׂמְחַתְכֶם וּבְמוֹעֲדֵיכֶם, וּבְרָאשֵׁי חָדְשֵׁיכֶם--וּתְקַעְתֶּם בַּחֲצֹצְרֹת עַל עֹלֹתֵיכֶם, וְעַל זִבְחֵי שַׁלְמֵיכֶם; וְהָיוּ לָכֶם לְזִכָּרוֹן לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.  {פ}	10 Also in the day of your gladness, and in your appointed seasons, and in your new moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace-offerings; and they shall be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the LORD your God.' {P}
10.11 יא  וַיְהִי בַּשָּׁנָה הַשֵּׁנִית, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַשֵּׁנִי--בְּעֶשְׂרִים בַּחֹדֶשׁ; נַעֲלָה, הֶעָנָן, מֵעַל, מִשְׁכַּן הָעֵדֻת.	11 And it came to pass in the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, that the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle of the testimony.
10.12 יב  וַיִּסְעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְמַסְעֵיהֶם, מִמִּדְבַּר סִינָי; וַיִּשְׁכֹּן הֶעָנָן, בְּמִדְבַּר פָּארָן.	12 And the children of Israel set forward by their stages out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud abode in the wilderness of Paran.--
10.13 יג  וַיִּסְעוּ, בָּרִאשֹׁנָה, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.	13 And they took their first journey, according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
10.14 יד  וַיִּסַּע דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה, בָּרִאשֹׁנָה--לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְעַל-צְבָאוֹ--נַחְשׁוֹן, בֶּן-עַמִּינָדָב.	14 And in the first place the standard of the camp of the children of Judah set forward according to their hosts; and over his host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
10.15 טו  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר:  נְתַנְאֵל, בֶּן-צוּעָר.	15 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar.
10.16 טז  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי זְבוּלֻן:  אֱלִיאָב, בֶּן-חֵלֹן.	16 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.
10.17 יז  וְהוּרַד, הַמִּשְׁכָּן; וְנָסְעוּ בְנֵי-גֵרְשׁוֹן וּבְנֵי מְרָרִי, נֹשְׂאֵי הַמִּשְׁכָּן.	17 And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who bore the tabernacle, set forward.
10.18 יח  וְנָסַע, דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה רְאוּבֵן--לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְעַל-צְבָאוֹ--אֱלִיצוּר, בֶּן-שְׁדֵיאוּר.	18 And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their hosts; and over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur.
10.19 יט  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן:  שְׁלֻמִיאֵל, בֶּן-צוּרִישַׁדָּי.	19 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
10.20 כ  וְעַל-צְבָא, מַטֵּה בְנֵי-גָד:  אֶלְיָסָף, בֶּן-דְּעוּאֵל.	20 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
10.21 כא  וְנָסְעוּ, הַקְּהָתִים, נֹשְׂאֵי, הַמִּקְדָּשׁ; וְהֵקִימוּ אֶת-הַמִּשְׁכָּן, עַד-בֹּאָם.	21 And the Kohathites the bearers of the sanctuary set forward, that the tabernacle might be set up against their coming.
10.22 כב  וְנָסַע, דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה בְנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם--לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְעַל-צְבָאוֹ--אֱלִישָׁמָע, בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד.	22 And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward according to their hosts; and over his host was Elishama the son of Ammihud.
10.23 כג  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה:  גַּמְלִיאֵל, בֶּן-פְּדָהצוּר.	23 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
10.24 כד  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן:  אֲבִידָן, בֶּן-גִּדְעוֹנִי.	24 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.
10.25 כה  וְנָסַע, דֶּגֶל מַחֲנֵה בְנֵי-דָן--מְאַסֵּף לְכָל-הַמַּחֲנֹת, לְצִבְאֹתָם; וְעַל-צְבָאוֹ--אֲחִיעֶזֶר, בֶּן-עַמִּישַׁדָּי.	25 And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan, which was the rearward of all the camps, set forward according to their hosts; and over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
10.26 כו  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי אָשֵׁר:  פַּגְעִיאֵל, בֶּן-עָכְרָן.	26 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ochran.
10.27 כז  וְעַל-צְבָא--מַטֵּה, בְּנֵי נַפְתָּלִי:  אֲחִירַע, בֶּן-עֵינָן.	27 And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.
10.28 כח  אֵלֶּה מַסְעֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְצִבְאֹתָם; וַיִּסָּעוּ.  {ס}	28 Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according to their hosts.--And they set forward. {S}
10.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, לְחֹבָב בֶּן-רְעוּאֵל הַמִּדְיָנִי חֹתֵן מֹשֶׁה, נֹסְעִים אֲנַחְנוּ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה, אֹתוֹ אֶתֵּן לָכֶם; לְכָה אִתָּנוּ וְהֵטַבְנוּ לָךְ, כִּי-יְהוָה דִּבֶּר-טוֹב עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	29 And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law: 'We are journeying unto the place of which the LORD said: I will give it you; come thou with us, and we will do thee good; for the LORD hath spoken good concerning Israel.'
10.30 ל  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, לֹא אֵלֵךְ:  כִּי אִם-אֶל-אַרְצִי וְאֶל-מוֹלַדְתִּי, אֵלֵךְ.	30 And he said unto him: 'I will not go; but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.'
10.31 לא  וַיֹּאמֶר, אַל-נָא תַּעֲזֹב אֹתָנוּ:  כִּי עַל-כֵּן יָדַעְתָּ, חֲנֹתֵנוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְהָיִיתָ לָּנוּ, לְעֵינָיִם.	31 And he said: 'Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou shalt be to us instead of eyes.
10.32 לב  וְהָיָה, כִּי-תֵלֵךְ עִמָּנוּ:  וְהָיָה הַטּוֹב הַהוּא, אֲשֶׁר יֵיטִיב יְהוָה עִמָּנוּ--וְהֵטַבְנוּ לָךְ.	32 And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what good soever the LORD shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.'
10.33 לג  וַיִּסְעוּ מֵהַר יְהוָה, דֶּרֶךְ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים; וַאֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה נֹסֵעַ לִפְנֵיהֶם, דֶּרֶךְ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, לָתוּר לָהֶם, מְנוּחָה.	33 And they set forward from the mount of the LORD three days' journey; and the ark of the covenant of the LORD went before them three days' journey, to seek out a resting-place for them.
10.34 לד  וַעֲנַן יְהוָה עֲלֵיהֶם, יוֹמָם, בְּנָסְעָם, מִן-הַמַּחֲנֶה.  {ס}  ]  {ס}	34 And the cloud of the LORD was over them by day, when they set forward from the camp. {S}
10.35 לה  וַיְהִי בִּנְסֹעַ הָאָרֹן, וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה:  קוּמָה יְהוָה, וְיָפֻצוּ אֹיְבֶיךָ, וְיָנֻסוּ מְשַׂנְאֶיךָ, מִפָּנֶיךָ.	35 And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said: 'Rise up, O LORD, and let Thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate Thee flee before Thee.'
10.36 לו  וּבְנֻחֹה, יֹאמַר:  שׁוּבָה יְהוָה, רִבְבוֹת אַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}  ]  {פ}	36 And when it rested, he said: 'Return, O LORD, unto the ten thousands of the families of Israel.' {P}
11.1 א  וַיְהִי הָעָם כְּמִתְאֹנְנִים, רַע בְּאָזְנֵי יְהוָה; וַיִּשְׁמַע יְהוָה, וַיִּחַר אַפּוֹ, וַתִּבְעַר-בָּם אֵשׁ יְהוָה, וַתֹּאכַל בִּקְצֵה הַמַּחֲנֶה.	1 And the people were as murmurers, speaking evil in the ears of the LORD; and when the LORD heard it, His anger was kindled; and the fire of the LORD burnt among them, and devoured in the uttermost part of the camp.
11.2 ב  וַיִּצְעַק הָעָם, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, וַתִּשְׁקַע הָאֵשׁ.	2 And the people cried unto Moses; and Moses prayed unto the LORD, and the fire abated.
11.3 ג  וַיִּקְרָא שֵׁם-הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, תַּבְעֵרָה:  כִּי-בָעֲרָה בָם, אֵשׁ יְהוָה.	3 And the name of that place was called Taberah, because the fire of the LORD burnt among them.
11.4 ד  וְהָאסַפְסֻף אֲשֶׁר בְּקִרְבּוֹ, הִתְאַוּוּ תַּאֲוָה; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ וַיִּבְכּוּ, גַּם בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מִי יַאֲכִלֵנוּ בָּשָׂר.	4 And the mixed multitude that was among them fell a lusting; and the children of Israel also wept on their part, and said: 'Would that we were given flesh to eat!
11.5 ה  זָכַרְנוּ, אֶת-הַדָּגָה, אֲשֶׁר-נֹאכַל בְּמִצְרַיִם, חִנָּם; אֵת הַקִּשֻּׁאִים, וְאֵת הָאֲבַטִּחִים, וְאֶת-הֶחָצִיר וְאֶת-הַבְּצָלִים, וְאֶת-הַשּׁוּמִים.	5 We remember the fish, which we were wont to eat in Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlic;
11.6 ו  וְעַתָּה נַפְשֵׁנוּ יְבֵשָׁה, אֵין כֹּל--בִּלְתִּי, אֶל-הַמָּן עֵינֵינוּ.	6 but now our soul is dried away; there is nothing at all; we have nought save this manna to look to.'--
11.7 ז  וְהַמָּן, כִּזְרַע-גַּד הוּא; וְעֵינוֹ, כְּעֵין הַבְּדֹלַח.	7 Now the manna was like coriander seed, and the appearance thereof as the appearance of bdellium.
11.8 ח  שָׁטוּ הָעָם וְלָקְטוּ וְטָחֲנוּ בָרֵחַיִם, אוֹ דָכוּ בַּמְּדֹכָה, וּבִשְּׁלוּ בַּפָּרוּר, וְעָשׂוּ אֹתוֹ עֻגוֹת; וְהָיָה טַעְמוֹ, כְּטַעַם לְשַׁד הַשָּׁמֶן.	8 The people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in mortars, and seethed it in pots, and made cakes of it; and the taste of it was as the taste of a cake baked with oil.
11.9 ט  וּבְרֶדֶת הַטַּל עַל-הַמַּחֲנֶה, לָיְלָה, יֵרֵד הַמָּן, עָלָיו.	9 And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.--
11.10 י  וַיִּשְׁמַע מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הָעָם, בֹּכֶה לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָיו--אִישׁ, לְפֶתַח אָהֳלוֹ; וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה מְאֹד, וּבְעֵינֵי מֹשֶׁה רָע.	10 And Moses heard the people weeping, family by family, every man at the door of his tent; and the anger of the LORD was kindled greatly; and Moses was displeased.
11.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-יְהוָה, לָמָה הֲרֵעֹתָ לְעַבְדֶּךָ, וְלָמָּה לֹא-מָצָתִי חֵן, בְּעֵינֶיךָ:  לָשׂוּם, אֶת-מַשָּׂא כָּל-הָעָם הַזֶּה--עָלָי.	11 And Moses said unto the LORD: 'Wherefore hast Thou dealt ill with Thy servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in Thy sight, that Thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
11.12 יב  הֶאָנֹכִי הָרִיתִי, אֵת כָּל-הָעָם הַזֶּה--אִם-אָנֹכִי, יְלִדְתִּיהוּ:  כִּי-תֹאמַר אֵלַי שָׂאֵהוּ בְחֵיקֶךָ, כַּאֲשֶׁר יִשָּׂא הָאֹמֵן אֶת-הַיֹּנֵק, עַל הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתָּ לַאֲבֹתָיו.	12 Have I conceived all this people? have I brought them forth, that Thou shouldest say unto me: Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing-father carrieth the sucking child, unto the land which Thou didst swear unto their fathers?
11.13 יג  מֵאַיִן לִי בָּשָׂר, לָתֵת לְכָל-הָעָם הַזֶּה:  כִּי-יִבְכּוּ עָלַי לֵאמֹר, תְּנָה-לָּנוּ בָשָׂר וְנֹאכֵלָה.	13 Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they trouble me with their weeping, saying: Give us flesh, that we may eat.
11.14 יד  לֹא-אוּכַל אָנֹכִי לְבַדִּי, לָשֵׂאת אֶת-כָּל-הָעָם הַזֶּה:  כִּי כָבֵד, מִמֶּנִּי.	14 I am not able to bear all this people myself alone, because it is too heavy for me.
11.15 טו  וְאִם-כָּכָה אַתְּ-עֹשֶׂה לִּי, הָרְגֵנִי נָא הָרֹג--אִם-מָצָאתִי חֵן, בְּעֵינֶיךָ; וְאַל-אֶרְאֶה, בְּרָעָתִי.  {פ}	15 And if Thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray Thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in Thy sight; and let me not look upon my wretchedness.' {P}
11.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֶסְפָה-לִּי שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ מִזִּקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יָדַעְתָּ, כִּי-הֵם זִקְנֵי הָעָם וְשֹׁטְרָיו; וְלָקַחְתָּ אֹתָם אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְהִתְיַצְּבוּ שָׁם עִמָּךְ.	16 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Gather unto Me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tent of meeting, that they may stand there with thee.
11.17 יז  וְיָרַדְתִּי, וְדִבַּרְתִּי עִמְּךָ שָׁם, וְאָצַלְתִּי מִן-הָרוּחַ אֲשֶׁר עָלֶיךָ, וְשַׂמְתִּי עֲלֵיהֶם; וְנָשְׂאוּ אִתְּךָ בְּמַשָּׂא הָעָם, וְלֹא-תִשָּׂא אַתָּה לְבַדֶּךָ.	17 And I will come down and speak with thee there; and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone.
11.18 יח  וְאֶל-הָעָם תֹּאמַר הִתְקַדְּשׁוּ לְמָחָר, וַאֲכַלְתֶּם בָּשָׂר--כִּי בְּכִיתֶם בְּאָזְנֵי יְהוָה לֵאמֹר מִי יַאֲכִלֵנוּ בָּשָׂר, כִּי-טוֹב לָנוּ בְּמִצְרָיִם; וְנָתַן יְהוָה לָכֶם בָּשָׂר, וַאֲכַלְתֶּם.	18 And say thou unto the people: Sanctify yourselves against to-morrow, and ye shall eat flesh; for ye have wept in the ears of the LORD, saying: Would that we were given flesh to eat! for it was well with us in Egypt; therefore the LORD will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.
11.19 יט  לֹא יוֹם אֶחָד תֹּאכְלוּן, וְלֹא יוֹמָיִם; וְלֹא חֲמִשָּׁה יָמִים, וְלֹא עֲשָׂרָה יָמִים, וְלֹא, עֶשְׂרִים יוֹם.	19 Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days;
11.20 כ  עַד חֹדֶשׁ יָמִים, עַד אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא מֵאַפְּכֶם, וְהָיָה לָכֶם, לְזָרָא:  יַעַן, כִּי-מְאַסְתֶּם אֶת-יְהוָה אֲשֶׁר בְּקִרְבְּכֶם, וַתִּבְכּוּ לְפָנָיו לֵאמֹר, לָמָּה זֶּה יָצָאנוּ מִמִּצְרָיִם.	20 but a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you; because that ye have rejected the LORD who is among you, and have troubled Him with weeping, saying: Why, now, came we forth out of Egypt?'
11.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר, מֹשֶׁה, שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף רַגְלִי, הָעָם אֲשֶׁר אָנֹכִי בְּקִרְבּוֹ; וְאַתָּה אָמַרְתָּ, בָּשָׂר אֶתֵּן לָהֶם, וְאָכְלוּ, חֹדֶשׁ יָמִים.	21 And Moses said: 'The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand men on foot; and yet Thou hast said: I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month!
11.22 כב  הֲצֹאן וּבָקָר יִשָּׁחֵט לָהֶם, וּמָצָא לָהֶם; אִם אֶת-כָּל-דְּגֵי הַיָּם יֵאָסֵף לָהֶם, וּמָצָא לָהֶם.  {פ}	22 If flocks and herds be slain for them, will they suffice them? or if all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, will they suffice them?' {P}
11.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הֲיַד יְהוָה תִּקְצָר; עַתָּה תִרְאֶה הֲיִקְרְךָ דְבָרִי, אִם-לֹא.	23 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Is the LORD'S hand waxed short? now shalt thou see whether My word shall come to pass unto thee or not.'
11.24 כד  וַיֵּצֵא מֹשֶׁה--וַיְדַבֵּר אֶל-הָעָם, אֵת דִּבְרֵי יְהוָה; וַיֶּאֱסֹף שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ, מִזִּקְנֵי הָעָם, וַיַּעֲמֵד אֹתָם, סְבִיבֹת הָאֹהֶל.	24 And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the LORD; and he gathered seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the Tent.
11.25 כה  וַיֵּרֶד יְהוָה בֶּעָנָן, וַיְדַבֵּר אֵלָיו, וַיָּאצֶל מִן-הָרוּחַ אֲשֶׁר עָלָיו, וַיִּתֵּן עַל-שִׁבְעִים אִישׁ הַזְּקֵנִים; וַיְהִי, כְּנוֹחַ עֲלֵיהֶם הָרוּחַ, וַיִּתְנַבְּאוּ, וְלֹא יָסָפוּ.	25 And the LORD came down in the cloud, and spoke unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the seventy elders; and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, but they did so no more.
11.26 כו  וַיִּשָּׁאֲרוּ שְׁנֵי-אֲנָשִׁים בַּמַּחֲנֶה שֵׁם הָאֶחָד אֶלְדָּד וְשֵׁם הַשֵּׁנִי מֵידָד וַתָּנַח עֲלֵהֶם הָרוּחַ, וְהֵמָּה בַּכְּתֻבִים, וְלֹא יָצְאוּ, הָאֹהֱלָה; וַיִּתְנַבְּאוּ, בַּמַּחֲנֶה.	26 But there remained two men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad; and the spirit rested upon them; and they were of them that were recorded, but had not gone out unto the Tent; and they prophesied in the camp.
11.27 כז  וַיָּרָץ הַנַּעַר, וַיַּגֵּד לְמֹשֶׁה וַיֹּאמַר:  אֶלְדָּד וּמֵידָד, מִתְנַבְּאִים בַּמַּחֲנֶה.	27 And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said: 'Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp.'
11.28 כח  וַיַּעַן יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, מְשָׁרֵת מֹשֶׁה מִבְּחֻרָיו--וַיֹּאמַר:  אֲדֹנִי מֹשֶׁה, כְּלָאֵם.	28 And Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses from his youth up, answered and said: 'My lord Moses, shut them in.'
11.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ מֹשֶׁה, הַמְקַנֵּא אַתָּה לִי; וּמִי יִתֵּן כָּל-עַם יְהוָה, נְבִיאִים--כִּי-יִתֵּן יְהוָה אֶת-רוּחוֹ, עֲלֵיהֶם.	29 And Moses said unto him: 'Art thou jealous for my sake? would that all the LORD'S people were prophets, that the LORD would put His spirit upon them!'
11.30 ל  וַיֵּאָסֵף מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה--הוּא, וְזִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	30 And Moses withdrew into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
11.31 לא  וְרוּחַ נָסַע מֵאֵת יְהוָה, וַיָּגָז שַׂלְוִים מִן-הַיָּם, וַיִּטֹּשׁ עַל-הַמַּחֲנֶה כְּדֶרֶךְ יוֹם כֹּה וּכְדֶרֶךְ יוֹם כֹּה, סְבִיבוֹת הַמַּחֲנֶה--וּכְאַמָּתַיִם, עַל-פְּנֵי הָאָרֶץ.	31 And there went forth a wind from the LORD, and brought across quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, about a day's journey on this side, and a day's journey on the other side, round about the camp, and about two cubits above the face of the earth.
11.32 לב  וַיָּקָם הָעָם כָּל-הַיּוֹם הַהוּא וְכָל-הַלַּיְלָה וְכֹל יוֹם הַמָּחֳרָת, וַיַּאַסְפוּ אֶת-הַשְּׂלָו--הַמַּמְעִיט, אָסַף עֲשָׂרָה חֳמָרִים; וַיִּשְׁטְחוּ לָהֶם שָׁטוֹחַ, סְבִיבוֹת הַמַּחֲנֶה.	32 And the people rose up all that day, and all the night, and all the next day, and gathered the quails; he that gathered least gathered ten heaps; and they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.
11.33 לג  הַבָּשָׂר, עוֹדֶנּוּ בֵּין שִׁנֵּיהֶם--טֶרֶם, יִכָּרֵת; וְאַף יְהוָה, חָרָה בָעָם, וַיַּךְ יְהוָה בָּעָם, מַכָּה רַבָּה מְאֹד.	33 While the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the anger of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD smote the people with a very great plague.
11.34 לד  וַיִּקְרָא אֶת-שֵׁם-הַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, קִבְרוֹת הַתַּאֲוָה:  כִּי-שָׁם, קָבְרוּ, אֶת-הָעָם, הַמִּתְאַוִּים.	34 And the name of that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the people that lusted.
11.35 לה  מִקִּבְרוֹת הַתַּאֲוָה נָסְעוּ הָעָם, חֲצֵרוֹת; וַיִּהְיוּ, בַּחֲצֵרוֹת.  {פ}	35 From Kibroth-hattaavah the people journeyed unto Hazeroth; and they abode at Hazeroth. {P}
12.1 א  וַתְּדַבֵּר מִרְיָם וְאַהֲרֹן בְּמֹשֶׁה, עַל-אֹדוֹת הָאִשָּׁה הַכֻּשִׁית אֲשֶׁר לָקָח:  כִּי-אִשָּׁה כֻשִׁית, לָקָח.	1 And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman whom he had married; for he had married a Cushite woman.
12.2 ב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, הֲרַק אַךְ-בְּמֹשֶׁה דִּבֶּר יְהוָה--הֲלֹא, גַּם-בָּנוּ דִבֵּר; וַיִּשְׁמַע, יְהוָה.	2 And they said: 'Hath the LORD indeed spoken only with Moses? hath He not spoken also with us?' And the LORD heard it.--
12.3 ג  וְהָאִישׁ מֹשֶׁה, עָנָו מְאֹד--מִכֹּל, הָאָדָם, אֲשֶׁר, עַל-פְּנֵי הָאֲדָמָה.  {ס}	3 Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men that were upon the face of the earth.-- {S}
12.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה פִּתְאֹם, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-מִרְיָם, צְאוּ שְׁלָשְׁתְּכֶם, אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיֵּצְאוּ, שְׁלָשְׁתָּם.	4 And the LORD spoke suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam: 'Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting.' And they three came out.
12.5 ה  וַיֵּרֶד יְהוָה בְּעַמּוּד עָנָן, וַיַּעֲמֹד פֶּתַח הָאֹהֶל; וַיִּקְרָא אַהֲרֹן וּמִרְיָם, וַיֵּצְאוּ שְׁנֵיהֶם.	5 And the LORD came down in a pillar of cloud, and stood at the door of the Tent, and called Aaron and Miriam; and they both came forth.
12.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר, שִׁמְעוּ-נָא דְבָרָי; אִם-יִהְיֶה, נְבִיאֲכֶם--יְהוָה בַּמַּרְאָה אֵלָיו אֶתְוַדָּע, בַּחֲלוֹם אֲדַבֶּר-בּוֹ.	6 And He said: 'Hear now My words: if there be a prophet among you, I the LORD do make Myself known unto him in a vision, I do speak with him in a dream.
12.7 ז  לֹא-כֵן, עַבְדִּי מֹשֶׁה:  בְּכָל-בֵּיתִי, נֶאֱמָן הוּא.	7 My servant Moses is not so; he is trusted in all My house;
12.8 ח  פֶּה אֶל-פֶּה אֲדַבֶּר-בּוֹ, וּמַרְאֶה וְלֹא בְחִידֹת, וּתְמֻנַת יְהוָה, יַבִּיט; וּמַדּוּעַ לֹא יְרֵאתֶם, לְדַבֵּר בְּעַבְדִּי בְמֹשֶׁה.	8 with him do I speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the LORD doth he behold; wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against My servant, against Moses?'
12.9 ט  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה בָּם, וַיֵּלַךְ.	9 And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them; and He departed.
12.10 י  וְהֶעָנָן, סָר מֵעַל הָאֹהֶל, וְהִנֵּה מִרְיָם, מְצֹרַעַת כַּשָּׁלֶג; וַיִּפֶן אַהֲרֹן אֶל-מִרְיָם, וְהִנֵּה מְצֹרָעַת.	10 And when the cloud was removed from over the Tent, behold, Miriam was leprous, as white as snow; and Aaron looked upon Miriam; and, behold, she was leprous.
12.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר אַהֲרֹן, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה:  בִּי אֲדֹנִי--אַל-נָא תָשֵׁת עָלֵינוּ חַטָּאת, אֲשֶׁר נוֹאַלְנוּ וַאֲשֶׁר חָטָאנוּ.	11 And Aaron said unto Moses: 'Oh my lord, lay not, I pray thee, sin upon us, for that we have done foolishly, and for that we have sinned.
12.12 יב  אַל-נָא תְהִי, כַּמֵּת, אֲשֶׁר בְּצֵאתוֹ מֵרֶחֶם אִמּוֹ, וַיֵּאָכֵל חֲצִי בְשָׂרוֹ.	12 Let her not, I pray, be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of his mother's womb.'
12.13 יג  וַיִּצְעַק מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר:  אֵל, נָא רְפָא נָא לָהּ.  {פ}	13 And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying: 'Heal her now, O God, I beseech Thee.' {P}
12.14 יד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וְאָבִיהָ יָרֹק יָרַק בְּפָנֶיהָ--הֲלֹא תִכָּלֵם, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; תִּסָּגֵר שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, וְאַחַר, תֵּאָסֵף.	14 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'If her father had but spit in her face, should she not hide in shame seven days? let her be shut up without the camp seven days, and after that she shall be brought in again.'
12.15 טו  וַתִּסָּגֵר מִרְיָם מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים; וְהָעָם לֹא נָסַע, עַד-הֵאָסֵף מִרְיָם.	15 And Miriam was shut up without the camp seven days; and the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.
12.16 טז  וְאַחַר נָסְעוּ הָעָם, מֵחֲצֵרוֹת; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמִדְבַּר פָּארָן.  {פ}	16 And afterward the people journeyed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran. {P}
13.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
13.2 ב  שְׁלַח-לְךָ אֲנָשִׁים, וְיָתֻרוּ אֶת-אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, אֲשֶׁר-אֲנִי נֹתֵן, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  אִישׁ אֶחָד אִישׁ אֶחָד לְמַטֵּה אֲבֹתָיו, תִּשְׁלָחוּ--כֹּל, נָשִׂיא בָהֶם.	2 'Send thou men, that they may spy out the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel; of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a prince among them.'
13.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֹתָם מֹשֶׁה מִמִּדְבַּר פָּארָן, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה:  כֻּלָּם אֲנָשִׁים, רָאשֵׁי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל הֵמָּה.	3 And Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran according to the commandment of the LORD; all of them men who were heads of the children of Israel.
13.4 ד  וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹתָם:  לְמַטֵּה רְאוּבֵן, שַׁמּוּעַ בֶּן-זַכּוּר.	4 And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur.
13.5 ה  לְמַטֵּה שִׁמְעוֹן, שָׁפָט בֶּן-חוֹרִי.	5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.
13.6 ו  לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה, כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה.	6 Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
13.7 ז  לְמַטֵּה יִשָּׂשכָר, יִגְאָל בֶּן-יוֹסֵף.	7 Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.
13.8 ח  לְמַטֵּה אֶפְרָיִם, הוֹשֵׁעַ בִּן-נוּן.	8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Nun.
13.9 ט  לְמַטֵּה בִנְיָמִן, פַּלְטִי בֶּן-רָפוּא.	9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.
13.10 י  לְמַטֵּה זְבוּלֻן, גַּדִּיאֵל בֶּן-סוֹדִי.	10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.
13.11 יא  לְמַטֵּה יוֹסֵף, לְמַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה--גַּדִּי, בֶּן-סוּסִי.	11 Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.
13.12 יב  לְמַטֵּה דָן, עַמִּיאֵל בֶּן-גְּמַלִּי.	12 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.
13.13 יג  לְמַטֵּה אָשֵׁר, סְתוּר בֶּן-מִיכָאֵל.	13 Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.
13.14 יד  לְמַטֵּה נַפְתָּלִי, נַחְבִּי בֶּן-וָפְסִי.	14 Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
13.15 טו  לְמַטֵּה גָד, גְּאוּאֵל בֶּן-מָכִי.	15 Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
13.16 טז  אֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח מֹשֶׁה לָתוּר אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וַיִּקְרָא מֹשֶׁה לְהוֹשֵׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, יְהוֹשֻׁעַ.	16 These are the names of the men that Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun Joshua.
13.17 יז  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֹתָם מֹשֶׁה, לָתוּר אֶת-אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן; וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵהֶם, עֲלוּ זֶה בַּנֶּגֶב, וַעֲלִיתֶם, אֶת-הָהָר.	17 And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto them: 'Get you up here into the South, and go up into the mountains;
13.18 יח  וּרְאִיתֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, מַה-הִוא; וְאֶת-הָעָם, הַיֹּשֵׁב עָלֶיהָ--הֶחָזָק הוּא הֲרָפֶה, הַמְעַט הוּא אִם-רָב.	18 and see the land, what it is; and the people that dwelleth therein, whether they are strong or weak, whether they are few or many;
13.19 יט  וּמָה הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא יֹשֵׁב בָּהּ--הֲטוֹבָה הִוא, אִם-רָעָה; וּמָה הֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא יוֹשֵׁב בָּהֵנָּה--הַבְּמַחֲנִים, אִם בְּמִבְצָרִים.	19 and what the land is that they dwell in, whether it is good or bad; and what cities they are that they dwell in, whether in camps, or in strongholds;
13.20 כ  וּמָה הָאָרֶץ הַשְּׁמֵנָה הִוא אִם-רָזָה, הֲיֵשׁ-בָּהּ עֵץ אִם-אַיִן, וְהִתְחַזַּקְתֶּם, וּלְקַחְתֶּם מִפְּרִי הָאָרֶץ; וְהַיָּמִים--יְמֵי, בִּכּוּרֵי עֲנָבִים.	20 and what the land is, whether it is fat or lean, whether there is wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land.'--Now the time was the time of the first-ripe grapes.--
13.21 כא  וַיַּעֲלוּ, וַיָּתֻרוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, מִמִּדְבַּר-צִן עַד-רְחֹב, לְבֹא חֲמָת.	21 So they went up, and spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob, at the entrance to Hamath.
13.22 כב  וַיַּעֲלוּ בַנֶּגֶב, וַיָּבֹא עַד-חֶבְרוֹן, וְשָׁם אֲחִימַן שֵׁשַׁי וְתַלְמַי, יְלִידֵי הָעֲנָק; וְחֶבְרוֹן, שֶׁבַע שָׁנִים נִבְנְתָה, לִפְנֵי, צֹעַן מִצְרָיִם.	22 And they went up into the South, and came unto Hebron; and Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were there.--Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.--
13.23 כג  וַיָּבֹאוּ עַד-נַחַל אֶשְׁכֹּל, וַיִּכְרְתוּ מִשָּׁם זְמוֹרָה וְאֶשְׁכּוֹל עֲנָבִים אֶחָד, וַיִּשָּׂאֻהוּ בַמּוֹט, בִּשְׁנָיִם; וּמִן-הָרִמֹּנִים, וּמִן-הַתְּאֵנִים.	23 And they came unto the valley of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bore it upon a pole between two; they took also of the pomegranates, and of the figs.--
13.24 כד  לַמָּקוֹם הַהוּא, קָרָא נַחַל אֶשְׁכּוֹל, עַל אֹדוֹת הָאֶשְׁכּוֹל, אֲשֶׁר-כָּרְתוּ מִשָּׁם בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	24 That place was called the valley of Eshcol, because of the cluster which the children of Israel cut down from thence.--
13.25 כה  וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, מִתּוּר הָאָרֶץ, מִקֵּץ, אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם.	25 And they returned from spying out the land at the end of forty days.
13.26 כו  וַיֵּלְכוּ וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-מִדְבַּר פָּארָן--קָדֵשָׁה; וַיָּשִׁיבוּ אֹתָם דָּבָר וְאֶת-כָּל-הָעֵדָה, וַיַּרְאוּם אֶת-פְּרִי הָאָרֶץ.	26 And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.
13.27 כז  וַיְסַפְּרוּ-לוֹ, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, בָּאנוּ, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר שְׁלַחְתָּנוּ; וְגַם זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבַשׁ, הִוא--וְזֶה-פִּרְיָהּ.	27 And they told him, and said: 'We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it.
13.28 כח  אֶפֶס כִּי-עַז הָעָם, הַיֹּשֵׁב בָּאָרֶץ; וְהֶעָרִים, בְּצֻרוֹת גְּדֹלֹת מְאֹד, וְגַם-יְלִדֵי הָעֲנָק, רָאִינוּ שָׁם.	28 Howbeit the people that dwell in the land are fierce, and the cities are fortified, and very great; and moreover we saw the children of Anak there.
13.29 כט  עֲמָלֵק יוֹשֵׁב, בְּאֶרֶץ הַנֶּגֶב; וְהַחִתִּי וְהַיְבוּסִי וְהָאֱמֹרִי, יוֹשֵׁב בָּהָר, וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי יוֹשֵׁב עַל-הַיָּם, וְעַל יַד הַיַּרְדֵּן.	29 Amalek dwelleth in the land of the South; and the Hittite, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, dwell in the mountains; and the Canaanite dwelleth by the sea, and along by the side of the Jordan.'
13.30 ל  וַיַּהַס כָּלֵב אֶת-הָעָם, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה; וַיֹּאמֶר, עָלֹה נַעֲלֶה וְיָרַשְׁנוּ אֹתָהּ--כִּי-יָכוֹל נוּכַל, לָהּ.	30 And Caleb stilled the people toward Moses, and said: 'We should go up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.'
13.31 לא  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים אֲשֶׁר-עָלוּ עִמּוֹ, אָמְרוּ, לֹא נוּכַל, לַעֲלוֹת אֶל-הָעָם:  כִּי-חָזָק הוּא, מִמֶּנּוּ.	31 But the men that went up with him said: 'We are not able to go up against the people; for they are stronger than we.'
13.32 לב  וַיֹּצִיאוּ דִּבַּת הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר תָּרוּ אֹתָהּ, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֵאמֹר:  הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר עָבַרְנוּ בָהּ לָתוּר אֹתָהּ, אֶרֶץ אֹכֶלֶת יוֹשְׁבֶיהָ הִוא, וְכָל-הָעָם אֲשֶׁר-רָאִינוּ בְתוֹכָהּ, אַנְשֵׁי מִדּוֹת.	32 And they spread an evil report of the land which they had spied out unto the children of Israel, saying: 'The land, through which we have passed to spy it out, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of great stature.
13.33 לג  וְשָׁם רָאִינוּ, אֶת-הַנְּפִילִים בְּנֵי עֲנָק--מִן-הַנְּפִלִים; וַנְּהִי בְעֵינֵינוּ כַּחֲגָבִים, וְכֵן הָיִינוּ בְּעֵינֵיהֶם.	33 And there we saw the Nephilim, the sons of Anak, who come of the Nephilim; and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.'
14.1 א  וַתִּשָּׂא, כָּל-הָעֵדָה, וַיִּתְּנוּ, אֶת-קוֹלָם; וַיִּבְכּוּ הָעָם, בַּלַּיְלָה הַהוּא.	1 And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.
14.2 ב  וַיִּלֹּנוּ עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן, כֹּל בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֲלֵהֶם כָּל-הָעֵדָה, לוּ-מַתְנוּ בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, אוֹ בַּמִּדְבָּר הַזֶּה, לוּ-מָתְנוּ.	2 And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron; and the whole congregation said unto them: 'Would that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would we had died in this wilderness!
14.3 ג  וְלָמָה יְהוָה מֵבִיא אֹתָנוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, לִנְפֹּל בַּחֶרֶב--נָשֵׁינוּ וְטַפֵּנוּ, יִהְיוּ לָבַז; הֲלוֹא טוֹב לָנוּ, שׁוּב מִצְרָיְמָה.	3 And wherefore doth the LORD bring us unto this land, to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will be a prey; were it not better for us to return into Egypt?'
14.4 ד  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אִישׁ אֶל-אָחִיו:  נִתְּנָה רֹאשׁ, וְנָשׁוּבָה מִצְרָיְמָה.	4 And they said one to another: 'Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.'
14.5 ה  וַיִּפֹּל מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם, לִפְנֵי, כָּל-קְהַל עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel.
14.6 ו  וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, וְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, מִן-הַתָּרִים, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ--קָרְעוּ, בִּגְדֵיהֶם.	6 And Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who were of them that spied out the land, rent their clothes.
14.7 ז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר עָבַרְנוּ בָהּ לָתוּר אֹתָהּ--טוֹבָה הָאָרֶץ, מְאֹד מְאֹד.	7 And they spoke unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying: 'The land, which we passed through to spy it out, is an exceeding good land.
14.8 ח  אִם-חָפֵץ בָּנוּ, יְהוָה--וְהֵבִיא אֹתָנוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, וּנְתָנָהּ לָנוּ:  אֶרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-הִוא זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבָשׁ.	8 If the LORD delight in us, then He will bring us into this land, and give it unto us--a land which floweth with milk and honey.
14.9 ט  אַךְ בַּיהוָה, אַל-תִּמְרֹדוּ, וְאַתֶּם אַל-תִּירְאוּ אֶת-עַם הָאָרֶץ, כִּי לַחְמֵנוּ הֵם; סָר צִלָּם מֵעֲלֵיהֶם וַיהוָה אִתָּנוּ, אַל-תִּירָאֻם.	9 Only rebel not against the LORD, neither fear ye the people of the land; for they are bread for us; their defence is removed from over them, and the LORD is with us; fear them not.'
14.10 י  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, כָּל-הָעֵדָה, לִרְגּוֹם אֹתָם, בָּאֲבָנִים; וּכְבוֹד יְהוָה, נִרְאָה בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, אֶל-כָּל-בְּנֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	10 But all the congregation bade stone them with stones, when the glory of the LORD appeared in the tent of meeting unto all the children of Israel. {P}
14.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עַד-אָנָה יְנַאֲצֻנִי הָעָם הַזֶּה; וְעַד-אָנָה, לֹא-יַאֲמִינוּ בִי, בְּכֹל הָאֹתוֹת, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתִי בְּקִרְבּוֹ.	11 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'How long will this people despise Me? and how long will they not believe in Me, for all the signs which I have wrought among them?
14.12 יב  אַכֶּנּוּ בַדֶּבֶר, וְאוֹרִשֶׁנּוּ; וְאֶעֱשֶׂה, אֹתְךָ, לְגוֹי-גָּדוֹל וְעָצוּם, מִמֶּנּוּ.	12 I will smite them with the pestilence, and destroy them, and will make of thee a nation greater and mightier than they.'
14.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-יְהוָה:  וְשָׁמְעוּ מִצְרַיִם, כִּי-הֶעֱלִיתָ בְכֹחֲךָ אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה מִקִּרְבּוֹ.	13 And Moses said unto the LORD: 'When the Egyptians shall hear--for Thou broughtest up this people in Thy might from among them--
14.14 יד  וְאָמְרוּ, אֶל-יוֹשֵׁב הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת, שָׁמְעוּ כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה, בְּקֶרֶב הָעָם הַזֶּה:  אֲשֶׁר-עַיִן בְּעַיִן נִרְאָה אַתָּה יְהוָה, וַעֲנָנְךָ עֹמֵד עֲלֵהֶם, וּבְעַמֻּד עָנָן אַתָּה הֹלֵךְ לִפְנֵיהֶם יוֹמָם, וּבְעַמּוּד אֵשׁ לָיְלָה.	14 they will say to the inhabitants of this land, who have heard that Thou LORD art in the midst of this people; inasmuch as Thou LORD art seen face to face, and Thy cloud standeth over them, and Thou goest before them, in a pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night;
14.15 טו  וְהֵמַתָּה אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, כְּאִישׁ אֶחָד; וְאָמְרוּ, הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁמְעוּ אֶת-שִׁמְעֲךָ, לֵאמֹר.	15 now if Thou shalt kill this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of Thee will speak, saying:
14.16 טז  מִבִּלְתִּי יְכֹלֶת יְהוָה, לְהָבִיא אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּע לָהֶם; וַיִּשְׁחָטֵם, בַּמִּדְבָּר.	16 Because the LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which He swore unto them, therefore He hath slain them in the wilderness.
14.17 יז  וְעַתָּה, יִגְדַּל-נָא כֹּחַ אֲדֹנָי, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתָּ, לֵאמֹר.	17 And now, I pray Thee, let the power of the LORD be great, according as Thou hast spoken, saying:
14.18 יח  יְהוָה, אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם וְרַב-חֶסֶד, נֹשֵׂא עָוֺן, וָפָשַׁע; וְנַקֵּה, לֹא יְנַקֶּה--פֹּקֵד עֲוֺן אָבוֹת עַל-בָּנִים, עַל-שִׁלֵּשִׁים וְעַל-רִבֵּעִים.	18 The LORD is slow to anger, and plenteous in lovingkindness, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, upon the third and upon the fourth generation.
14.19 יט  סְלַח-נָא, לַעֲוֺן הָעָם הַזֶּה--כְּגֹדֶל חַסְדֶּךָ; וְכַאֲשֶׁר נָשָׂאתָה לָעָם הַזֶּה, מִמִּצְרַיִם וְעַד-הֵנָּה.	19 Pardon, I pray Thee, the iniquity of this people according unto the greatness of Thy lovingkindness, and according as Thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.'
14.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, סָלַחְתִּי כִּדְבָרֶךָ.	20 And the LORD said: 'I have pardoned according to thy word.
14.21 כא  וְאוּלָם, חַי-אָנִי:  וְיִמָּלֵא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֶת-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.	21 But in very deed, as I live--and all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the LORD--
14.22 כב  כִּי כָל-הָאֲנָשִׁים, הָרֹאִים אֶת-כְּבֹדִי וְאֶת-אֹתֹתַי, אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתִי בְמִצְרַיִם, וּבַמִּדְבָּר; וַיְנַסּוּ אֹתִי, זֶה עֶשֶׂר פְּעָמִים, וְלֹא שָׁמְעוּ, בְּקוֹלִי.	22 surely all those men that have seen My glory, and My signs, which I wrought in Egypt and in the wilderness, yet have put Me to proof these ten times, and have not hearkened to My voice;
14.23 כג  אִם-יִרְאוּ, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי, לַאֲבֹתָם; וְכָל-מְנַאֲצַי, לֹא יִרְאוּהָ.	23 surely they shall not see the land which I swore unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that despised Me see it.
14.24 כד  וְעַבְדִּי כָלֵב, עֵקֶב הָיְתָה רוּחַ אַחֶרֶת עִמּוֹ, וַיְמַלֵּא, אַחֲרָי--וַהֲבִיאֹתִיו, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר-בָּא שָׁמָּה, וְזַרְעוֹ, יוֹרִשֶׁנָּה.	24 But My servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed Me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall possess it.
14.25 כה  וְהָעֲמָלֵקִי וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי, יוֹשֵׁב בָּעֵמֶק; מָחָר, פְּנוּ וּסְעוּ לָכֶם הַמִּדְבָּר--דֶּרֶךְ יַם-סוּף.  {פ}	25 Now the Amalekite and the Canaanite dwell in the Vale; tomorrow turn ye, and get you into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.' {P}
14.26 כו  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	26 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
14.27 כז  עַד-מָתַי, לָעֵדָה הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת, אֲשֶׁר הֵמָּה מַלִּינִים, עָלָי; אֶת-תְּלֻנּוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הֵמָּה מַלִּינִים עָלַי--שָׁמָעְתִּי.	27 'How long shall I bear with this evil congregation, that keep murmuring against Me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they keep murmuring against Me.
14.28 כח  אֱמֹר אֲלֵהֶם, חַי-אָנִי נְאֻם-יְהוָה, אִם-לֹא, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבַּרְתֶּם בְּאָזְנָי:  כֵּן, אֶעֱשֶׂה לָכֶם.	28 Say unto them: As I live, saith the LORD, surely as ye have spoken in Mine ears, so will I do to you:
14.29 כט  בַּמִּדְבָּר הַזֶּה יִפְּלוּ פִגְרֵיכֶם וְכָל-פְּקֻדֵיכֶם, לְכָל-מִסְפַּרְכֶם, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וָמָעְלָה:  אֲשֶׁר הֲלִינֹתֶם, עָלָי.	29 your carcasses shall fall in this wilderness, and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, ye that have murmured against Me;
14.30 ל  אִם-אַתֶּם, תָּבֹאוּ אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-יָדִי, לְשַׁכֵּן אֶתְכֶם בָּהּ--כִּי אִם-כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן.	30 surely ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I lifted up My hand that I would make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
14.31 לא  וְטַפְּכֶם--אֲשֶׁר אֲמַרְתֶּם, לָבַז יִהְיֶה:  וְהֵבֵיאתִי אֹתָם--וְיָדְעוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר מְאַסְתֶּם בָּהּ.	31 But your little ones, that ye said would be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have rejected.
14.32 לב  וּפִגְרֵיכֶם, אַתֶּם--יִפְּלוּ, בַּמִּדְבָּר הַזֶּה.	32 But as for you, your carcasses shall fall in this wilderness.
14.33 לג  וּבְנֵיכֶם יִהְיוּ רֹעִים בַּמִּדְבָּר, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, וְנָשְׂאוּ, אֶת-זְנוּתֵיכֶם--עַד-תֹּם פִּגְרֵיכֶם, בַּמִּדְבָּר.	33 And your children shall be wanderers in the wilderness forty years, and shall bear your strayings, until your carcasses be consumed in the wilderness.
14.34 לד  בְּמִסְפַּר הַיָּמִים אֲשֶׁר-תַּרְתֶּם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אַרְבָּעִים יוֹם--יוֹם לַשָּׁנָה יוֹם לַשָּׁנָה תִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-עֲוֺנֹתֵיכֶם, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה; וִידַעְתֶּם, אֶת-תְּנוּאָתִי.	34 After the number of the days in which ye spied out the land, even forty days, for every day a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know My displeasure.
14.35 לה  אֲנִי יְהוָה, דִּבַּרְתִּי, אִם-לֹא זֹאת אֶעֱשֶׂה לְכָל-הָעֵדָה הָרָעָה הַזֹּאת, הַנּוֹעָדִים עָלָי; בַּמִּדְבָּר הַזֶּה יִתַּמּוּ, וְשָׁם יָמֻתוּ.	35 I the LORD have spoken, surely this will I do unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered together against Me; in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.'
14.36 לו  וְהָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַח מֹשֶׁה לָתוּר אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וַיָּשֻׁבוּ, וילונו (וַיַּלִּינוּ) עָלָיו אֶת-כָּל-הָעֵדָה, לְהוֹצִיא דִבָּה, עַל-הָאָרֶץ.	36 And the men, whom Moses sent to spy out the land, and who, when they returned, made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up an evil report against the land,
14.37 לז  וַיָּמֻתוּ, הָאֲנָשִׁים, מוֹצִאֵי דִבַּת-הָאָרֶץ, רָעָה--בַּמַּגֵּפָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	37 even those men that did bring up an evil report of the land, died by the plague before the LORD.
14.38 לח  וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן, וְכָלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, חָיוּ מִן-הָאֲנָשִׁים הָהֵם, הַהֹלְכִים לָתוּר אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	38 But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, remained alive of those men that went to spy out the land.
14.39 לט  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, אֶל-כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּתְאַבְּלוּ הָעָם, מְאֹד.	39 And Moses told these words unto all the children of Israel; and the people mourned greatly.
14.40 מ  וַיַּשְׁכִּמוּ בַבֹּקֶר, וַיַּעֲלוּ אֶל-רֹאשׁ-הָהָר לֵאמֹר:  הִנֶּנּוּ, וְעָלִינוּ אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם אֲשֶׁר-אָמַר יְהוָה--כִּי חָטָאנוּ.	40 And they rose up early in the morning, and got them up to the top of the mountain, saying: 'Lo, we are here, and will go up unto the place which the LORD hath promised; for we have sinned.'
14.41 מא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, לָמָּה זֶּה אַתֶּם עֹבְרִים אֶת-פִּי יְהוָה; וְהִוא, לֹא תִצְלָח.	41 And Moses said: 'Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the LORD, seeing it shall not prosper?
14.42 מב  אַל-תַּעֲלוּ, כִּי אֵין יְהוָה בְּקִרְבְּכֶם; וְלֹא, תִּנָּגְפוּ, לִפְנֵי, אֹיְבֵיכֶם.	42 Go not up, for the LORD is not among you; that ye be not smitten down before your enemies.
14.43 מג  כִּי הָעֲמָלֵקִי וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי שָׁם לִפְנֵיכֶם, וּנְפַלְתֶּם בֶּחָרֶב:  כִּי-עַל-כֵּן שַׁבְתֶּם מֵאַחֲרֵי יְהוָה, וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה יְהוָה עִמָּכֶם.	43 For there the Amalekite and the Canaanite are before you, and ye shall fall by the sword; forasmuch as ye are turned back from following the LORD, and the LORD will not be with you.'
14.44 מד  וַיַּעְפִּלוּ, לַעֲלוֹת אֶל-רֹאשׁ הָהָר; וַאֲרוֹן בְּרִית-יְהוָה וּמֹשֶׁה, לֹא-מָשׁוּ מִקֶּרֶב הַמַּחֲנֶה.	44 But they presumed to go up to the top of the mountain; nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.
14.45 מה  וַיֵּרֶד הָעֲמָלֵקִי וְהַכְּנַעֲנִי, הַיֹּשֵׁב בָּהָר הַהוּא; וַיַּכּוּם וַיַּכְּתוּם, עַד-הַחָרְמָה.  {פ}	45 Then the Amalekite and the Canaanite, who dwelt in that hill-country, came down, and smote them and beat them down, even unto Hormah. {P}
15.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
15.2 ב  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  כִּי תָבֹאוּ, אֶל-אֶרֶץ מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי, נֹתֵן לָכֶם.	2 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye are come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you,
15.3 ג  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה, עֹלָה אוֹ-זֶבַח, לְפַלֵּא-נֶדֶר אוֹ בִנְדָבָה, אוֹ בְּמֹעֲדֵיכֶם--לַעֲשׂוֹת רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה, מִן-הַבָּקָר, אוֹ מִן-הַצֹּאן.	3 and will make an offering by fire unto the LORD, a burnt-offering, or a sacrifice, in fulfilment of a vow clearly uttered, or as a freewill-offering, or in your appointed seasons, to make a sweet savour unto the LORD, of the herd, or of the flock;
15.4 ד  וְהִקְרִיב הַמַּקְרִיב קָרְבָּנוֹ, לַיהוָה--מִנְחָה, סֹלֶת עִשָּׂרוֹן, בָּלוּל, בִּרְבִעִית הַהִין שָׁמֶן.	4 then shall he that bringeth his offering present unto the LORD a meal-offering of a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of oil;
15.5 ה  וְיַיִן לַנֶּסֶךְ רְבִיעִית הַהִין, תַּעֲשֶׂה עַל-הָעֹלָה אוֹ לַזָּבַח--לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד.	5 and wine for the drink-offering, the fourth part of a hin, shalt thou prepare with the burnt-offering or for the sacrifice, for each lamb.
15.6 ו  אוֹ לָאַיִל תַּעֲשֶׂה מִנְחָה, סֹלֶת שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים, בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, שְׁלִשִׁית הַהִין.	6 Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meal-offering two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the third part of a hin of oil;
15.7 ז  וְיַיִן לַנֶּסֶךְ, שְׁלִשִׁית הַהִין--תַּקְרִיב רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.	7 and for the drink-offering thou shalt present the third part of a hin of wine, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
15.8 ח  וְכִי-תַעֲשֶׂה בֶן-בָּקָר, עֹלָה אוֹ-זָבַח, לְפַלֵּא-נֶדֶר אוֹ-שְׁלָמִים, לַיהוָה.	8 And when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt-offering, or for a sacrifice, in fulfilment of a vow clearly uttered, or for peace-offerings unto the LORD;
15.9 ט  וְהִקְרִיב עַל-בֶּן-הַבָּקָר מִנְחָה, סֹלֶת שְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים, בָּלוּל בַּשֶּׁמֶן, חֲצִי הַהִין.	9 then shall there be presented with the bullock a meal-offering of three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with half a hin of oil.
15.10 י  וְיַיִן תַּקְרִיב לַנֶּסֶךְ, חֲצִי הַהִין--אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.	10 And thou shalt present for the drink-offering half a hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
15.11 יא  כָּכָה יֵעָשֶׂה, לַשּׁוֹר הָאֶחָד, אוֹ, לָאַיִל הָאֶחָד; אוֹ-לַשֶּׂה בַכְּבָשִׂים, אוֹ בָעִזִּים.	11 Thus shall it be done for each bullock, or for each ram, or for each of the he-lambs, or of the kids.
15.12 יב  כַּמִּסְפָּר, אֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשׂוּ--כָּכָה תַּעֲשׂוּ לָאֶחָד, כְּמִסְפָּרָם.	12 According to the number that ye may prepare, so shall ye do for every one according to their number.
15.13 יג  כָּל-הָאֶזְרָח יַעֲשֶׂה-כָּכָה, אֶת-אֵלֶּה, לְהַקְרִיב אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.	13 All that are home-born shall do these things after this manner, in presenting an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
15.14 יד  וְכִי-יָגוּר אִתְּכֶם גֵּר אוֹ אֲשֶׁר-בְּתוֹכְכֶם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, וְעָשָׂה אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה--כַּאֲשֶׁר תַּעֲשׂוּ, כֵּן יַעֲשֶׂה.	14 And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever may be among you, throughout your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shall do.
15.15 טו  הַקָּהָל, חֻקָּה אַחַת לָכֶם וְלַגֵּר הַגָּר:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, כָּכֶם כַּגֵּר יִהְיֶה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	15 As for the congregation, there shall be one statute both for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you, a statute for ever throughout your generations; as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the LORD.
15.16 טז  תּוֹרָה אַחַת וּמִשְׁפָּט אֶחָד, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, וְלַגֵּר, הַגָּר אִתְּכֶם.  {פ}	16 One law and one ordinance shall be both for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you. {P}
15.17 יז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	17 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
15.18 יח  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  בְּבֹאֲכֶם, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי מֵבִיא אֶתְכֶם, שָׁמָּה.	18 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye come into the land whither I bring you,
15.19 יט  וְהָיָה, בַּאֲכָלְכֶם מִלֶּחֶם הָאָרֶץ--תָּרִימוּ תְרוּמָה, לַיהוָה.	19 then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall set apart a portion for a gift unto the LORD.
15.20 כ  רֵאשִׁית, עֲרִסֹתֵכֶם--חַלָּה, תָּרִימוּ תְרוּמָה:  כִּתְרוּמַת גֹּרֶן, כֵּן תָּרִימוּ אֹתָהּ.	20 Of the first of your dough ye shall set apart a cake for a gift; as that which is set apart of the threshing-floor, so shall ye set it apart.
15.21 כא  מֵרֵאשִׁית, עֲרִסֹתֵיכֶם, תִּתְּנוּ לַיהוָה, תְּרוּמָה--לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.  {ס}	21 Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the LORD a portion for a gift throughout your generations. {S}
15.22 כב  וְכִי תִשְׁגּוּ--וְלֹא תַעֲשׂוּ, אֵת כָּל-הַמִּצְוֺת הָאֵלֶּה:  אֲשֶׁר-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה.	22 And when ye shall err, and not observe all these commandments, which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses,
15.23 כג  אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֲלֵיכֶם, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה:  מִן-הַיּוֹם אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, וָהָלְאָה--לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם.	23 even all that the LORD hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD gave commandment, and onward throughout your generations;
15.24 כד  וְהָיָה, אִם מֵעֵינֵי הָעֵדָה נֶעֶשְׂתָה לִשְׁגָגָה, וְעָשׂוּ כָל-הָעֵדָה פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר אֶחָד לְעֹלָה לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ לַיהוָה, וּמִנְחָתוֹ וְנִסְכּוֹ כַּמִּשְׁפָּט; וּשְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, לְחַטָּת.	24 then it shall be, if it be done in error by the congregation, it being hid from their eyes, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt-offering, for a sweet savour unto the LORD--with the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof, according to the ordinance--and one he-goat for a sin-offering.
15.25 כה  וְכִפֶּר הַכֹּהֵן, עַל-כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--וְנִסְלַח לָהֶם:  כִּי-שְׁגָגָה הִוא--וְהֵם הֵבִיאוּ אֶת-קָרְבָּנָם אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה וְחַטָּאתָם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, עַל-שִׁגְגָתָם.	25 And the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and they shall be forgiven; for it was an error, and they have brought their offering, an offering made by fire unto the LORD, and their sin-offering before the LORD, for their error.
15.26 כו  וְנִסְלַח, לְכָל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלַגֵּר, הַגָּר בְּתוֹכָם:  כִּי לְכָל-הָעָם, בִּשְׁגָגָה.  {ס}	26 And all the congregation of the children of Israel shall be forgiven, and the stranger that sojourneth among them; for in respect of all the people it was done in error. {S}
15.27 כז  וְאִם-נֶפֶשׁ אַחַת, תֶּחֱטָא בִשְׁגָגָה--וְהִקְרִיבָה עֵז בַּת-שְׁנָתָהּ, לְחַטָּאת.	27 And if one person sin through error, then he shall offer a she-goat of the first year for a sin-offering.
15.28 כח  וְכִפֶּר הַכֹּהֵן, עַל-הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַשֹּׁגֶגֶת בְּחֶטְאָה בִשְׁגָגָה--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  לְכַפֵּר עָלָיו, וְנִסְלַח לוֹ.	28 And the priest shall make atonement for the soul that erreth, when he sinneth through error, before the LORD, to make atonement for him; and he shall be forgiven,
15.29 כט  הָאֶזְרָח בִּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכָם--תּוֹרָה אַחַת יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, לָעֹשֶׂה בִּשְׁגָגָה.	29 both he that is home-born among the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them: ye shall have one law for him that doeth aught in error.
15.30 ל  וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר-תַּעֲשֶׂה בְּיָד רָמָה, מִן-הָאֶזְרָח וּמִן-הַגֵּר--אֶת-יְהוָה, הוּא מְגַדֵּף; וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מִקֶּרֶב עַמָּהּ.	30 But the soul that doeth aught with a high hand, whether he be home-born or a stranger, the same blasphemeth the LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
15.31 לא  כִּי דְבַר-יְהוָה בָּזָה, וְאֶת-מִצְוָתוֹ הֵפַר; הִכָּרֵת תִּכָּרֵת הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, עֲוֺנָה בָהּ.  {פ}	31 Because he hath despised the word of the LORD, and hath broken His commandment; that soul shall utterly be cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him. {P}
15.32 לב  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּמִּדְבָּר; וַיִּמְצְאוּ, אִישׁ מְקֹשֵׁשׁ עֵצִים--בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת.	32 And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks upon the sabbath day.
15.33 לג  וַיַּקְרִיבוּ אֹתוֹ, הַמֹּצְאִים אֹתוֹ מְקֹשֵׁשׁ עֵצִים--אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, וְאֶל, כָּל-הָעֵדָה.	33 And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.
15.34 לד  וַיַּנִּיחוּ אֹתוֹ, בַּמִּשְׁמָר:  כִּי לֹא פֹרַשׁ, מַה-יֵּעָשֶׂה לוֹ.  {ס}	34 And they put him in ward, because it had not been declared what should be done to him. {S}
15.35 לה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, מוֹת יוּמַת הָאִישׁ; רָגוֹם אֹתוֹ בָאֲבָנִים כָּל-הָעֵדָה, מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה.	35 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'The man shall surely be put to death; all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.'
15.36 לו  וַיֹּצִיאוּ אֹתוֹ כָּל-הָעֵדָה, אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, וַיִּרְגְּמוּ אֹתוֹ בָּאֲבָנִים, וַיָּמֹת:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	36 And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died, as the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
15.37 לז  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	37 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
15.38 לח  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, וְעָשׂוּ לָהֶם צִיצִת עַל-כַּנְפֵי בִגְדֵיהֶם, לְדֹרֹתָם; וְנָתְנוּ עַל-צִיצִת הַכָּנָף, פְּתִיל תְּכֵלֶת.	38 'Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them throughout their generations fringes in the corners of their garments, and that they put with the fringe of each corner a thread of blue.
15.39 לט  וְהָיָה לָכֶם, לְצִיצִת, וּרְאִיתֶם אֹתוֹ וּזְכַרְתֶּם אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺת יְהוָה, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֹתָם; וְלֹא-תָתוּרוּ אַחֲרֵי לְבַבְכֶם, וְאַחֲרֵי עֵינֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר-אַתֶּם זֹנִים, אַחֲרֵיהֶם.	39 And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the LORD, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray;
15.40 מ  לְמַעַן תִּזְכְּרוּ, וַעֲשִׂיתֶם אֶת-כָּל-מִצְוֺתָי; וִהְיִיתֶם קְדֹשִׁים, לֵאלֹהֵיכֶם.	40 that ye may remember and do all My commandments, and be holy unto your God.
15.41 מא  אֲנִי יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר הוֹצֵאתִי אֶתְכֶם מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, לִהְיוֹת לָכֶם, לֵאלֹהִים:  אֲנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם.  {פ}	41 I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD your God.' {P}
16.1 א  וַיִּקַּח קֹרַח, בֶּן-יִצְהָר בֶּן-קְהָת בֶּן-לֵוִי; וְדָתָן וַאֲבִירָם בְּנֵי אֱלִיאָב, וְאוֹן בֶּן-פֶּלֶת--בְּנֵי רְאוּבֵן.	1 Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men;
16.2 ב  וַיָּקֻמוּ לִפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה, וַאֲנָשִׁים מִבְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתָיִם, נְשִׂיאֵי עֵדָה קְרִאֵי מוֹעֵד, אַנְשֵׁי-שֵׁם.	2 and they rose up in face of Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty men; they were princes of the congregation, the elect men of the assembly, men of renown;
16.3 ג  וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן, וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֲלֵהֶם רַב-לָכֶם--כִּי כָל-הָעֵדָה כֻּלָּם קְדֹשִׁים, וּבְתוֹכָם יְהוָה; וּמַדּוּעַ תִּתְנַשְּׂאוּ, עַל-קְהַל יְהוָה.	3 and they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them: 'Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them; wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?'
16.4 ד  וַיִּשְׁמַע מֹשֶׁה, וַיִּפֹּל עַל-פָּנָיו.	4 And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face.
16.5 ה  וַיְדַבֵּר אֶל-קֹרַח וְאֶל-כָּל-עֲדָתוֹ, לֵאמֹר, בֹּקֶר וְיֹדַע יְהוָה אֶת-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ וְאֶת-הַקָּדוֹשׁ, וְהִקְרִיב אֵלָיו; וְאֵת אֲשֶׁר יִבְחַר-בּוֹ, יַקְרִיב אֵלָיו.	5 And he spoke unto Korah and unto all his company, saying: 'In the morning the LORD will show who are His, and who is holy, and will cause him to come near unto Him; even him whom He may choose will He cause to come near unto Him.
16.6 ו  זֹאת, עֲשׂוּ:  קְחוּ-לָכֶם מַחְתּוֹת, קֹרַח וְכָל-עֲדָתוֹ.	6 This do: take you censors, Korah, and all his company;
16.7 ז  וּתְנוּ בָהֵן אֵשׁ וְשִׂימוּ עֲלֵיהֶן קְטֹרֶת לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, מָחָר, וְהָיָה הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִבְחַר יְהוָה, הוּא הַקָּדוֹשׁ; רַב-לָכֶם, בְּנֵי לֵוִי.	7 and put fire therein, and put incense upon them before the LORD to-morrow; and it shall be that the man whom the LORD doth choose, he shall be holy; ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.'
16.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-קֹרַח:  שִׁמְעוּ-נָא, בְּנֵי לֵוִי.	8 And Moses said unto Korah: 'Hear now, ye sons of Levi:
16.9 ט  הַמְעַט מִכֶּם, כִּי-הִבְדִּיל אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶתְכֶם מֵעֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְהַקְרִיב אֶתְכֶם, אֵלָיו--לַעֲבֹד, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה, וְלַעֲמֹד לִפְנֵי הָעֵדָה, לְשָׁרְתָם.	9 is it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to Himself, to do the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them;
16.10 י  וַיַּקְרֵב, אֹתְךָ, וְאֶת-כָּל-אַחֶיךָ בְנֵי-לֵוִי, אִתָּךְ; וּבִקַּשְׁתֶּם, גַּם-כְּהֻנָּה.	10 and that He hath brought thee near, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee? and will ye seek the priesthood also?
16.11 יא  לָכֵן, אַתָּה וְכָל-עֲדָתְךָ--הַנֹּעָדִים, עַל-יְהוָה; וְאַהֲרֹן מַה-הוּא, כִּי תלונו (תַלִּינוּ) עָלָיו.	11 Therefore thou and all thy company that are gathered together against the LORD--; and as to Aaron, what is he that ye murmur against him?'
16.12 יב  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֹשֶׁה, לִקְרֹא לְדָתָן וְלַאֲבִירָם בְּנֵי אֱלִיאָב; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֹא נַעֲלֶה.	12 And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab; and they said: 'We will not come up;
16.13 יג  הַמְעַט, כִּי הֶעֱלִיתָנוּ מֵאֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבַשׁ, לַהֲמִיתֵנוּ, בַּמִּדְבָּר:  כִּי-תִשְׂתָּרֵר עָלֵינוּ, גַּם-הִשְׂתָּרֵר.	13 is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, but thou must needs make thyself also a prince over us?
16.14 יד  אַף לֹא אֶל-אֶרֶץ זָבַת חָלָב וּדְבַשׁ, הֲבִיאֹתָנוּ, וַתִּתֶּן-לָנוּ, נַחֲלַת שָׂדֶה וָכָרֶם; הַעֵינֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים הָהֵם, תְּנַקֵּר--לֹא נַעֲלֶה.	14 Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields and vineyards; wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not come up.'
16.15 טו  וַיִּחַר לְמֹשֶׁה, מְאֹד, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-יְהוָה, אַל-תֵּפֶן אֶל-מִנְחָתָם; לֹא חֲמוֹר אֶחָד מֵהֶם, נָשָׂאתִי, וְלֹא הֲרֵעֹתִי, אֶת-אַחַד מֵהֶם.	15 And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the LORD: 'Respect not Thou their offering; I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them.'
16.16 טז  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-קֹרַח, אַתָּה וְכָל-עֲדָתְךָ, הֱיוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  אַתָּה וָהֵם וְאַהֲרֹן, מָחָר.	16 And Moses said unto Korah: 'Be thou and all thy congregation before the LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron, to-morrow;
16.17 יז  וּקְחוּ אִישׁ מַחְתָּתוֹ, וּנְתַתֶּם עֲלֵיהֶם קְטֹרֶת, וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם לִפְנֵי יְהוָה אִישׁ מַחְתָּתוֹ, חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתַיִם מַחְתֹּת; וְאַתָּה וְאַהֲרֹן, אִישׁ מַחְתָּתוֹ.	17 and take ye every man his fire-pan, and put incense upon them, and bring ye before the LORD every man his fire-pan, two hundred and fifty fire-pans; thou also, and Aaron, each his fire-pan.'
16.18 יח  וַיִּקְחוּ אִישׁ מַחְתָּתוֹ, וַיִּתְּנוּ עֲלֵיהֶם אֵשׁ, וַיָּשִׂימוּ עֲלֵיהֶם, קְטֹרֶת; וַיַּעַמְדוּ, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--וּמֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן.	18 And they took every man his fire-pan, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood at the door of the tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron.
16.19 יט  וַיַּקְהֵל עֲלֵיהֶם קֹרַח אֶת-כָּל-הָעֵדָה, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וַיֵּרָא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֶל-כָּל-הָעֵדָה.  {ס}	19 And Korah assembled all the congregation against them unto the door of the tent of meeting; and the glory of the LORD appeared unto all the congregation. {S}
16.20 כ  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	20 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
16.21 כא  הִבָּדְלוּ, מִתּוֹךְ הָעֵדָה הַזֹּאת; וַאֲכַלֶּה אֹתָם, כְּרָגַע.	21 'Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.'
16.22 כב  וַיִּפְּלוּ עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם, וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֵל, אֱלֹהֵי הָרוּחֹת לְכָל-בָּשָׂר:  הָאִישׁ אֶחָד יֶחֱטָא, וְעַל כָּל-הָעֵדָה תִּקְצֹף.  {ס}	22 And they fell upon their faces, and said: 'O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt Thou be wroth with all the congregation?' {S}
16.23 כג  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	23 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
16.24 כד  דַּבֵּר אֶל-הָעֵדָה, לֵאמֹר:  הֵעָלוּ, מִסָּבִיב, לְמִשְׁכַּן-קֹרַח, דָּתָן וַאֲבִירָם.	24 'Speak unto the congregation, saying: Get you up from about the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.'
16.25 כה  וַיָּקָם מֹשֶׁה, וַיֵּלֶךְ אֶל-דָּתָן וַאֲבִירָם; וַיֵּלְכוּ אַחֲרָיו, זִקְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	25 And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him.
16.26 כו  וַיְדַבֵּר אֶל-הָעֵדָה לֵאמֹר, סוּרוּ נָא מֵעַל אָהֳלֵי הָאֲנָשִׁים הָרְשָׁעִים הָאֵלֶּה, וְאַל-תִּגְּעוּ, בְּכָל-אֲשֶׁר לָהֶם:  פֶּן-תִּסָּפוּ, בְּכָל-חַטֹּאתָם.	26 And he spoke unto the congregation, saying: 'Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be swept away in all their sins.'
16.27 כז  וַיֵּעָלוּ, מֵעַל מִשְׁכַּן-קֹרַח דָּתָן וַאֲבִירָם--מִסָּבִיב; וְדָתָן וַאֲבִירָם יָצְאוּ נִצָּבִים, פֶּתַח אָהֳלֵיהֶם, וּנְשֵׁיהֶם וּבְנֵיהֶם, וְטַפָּם.	27 So they got them up from the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side; and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood at the door of their tents, with their wives, and their sons, and their little ones.
16.28 כח  וַיֹּאמֶר, מֹשֶׁה, בְּזֹאת תֵּדְעוּן, כִּי-יְהוָה שְׁלָחַנִי לַעֲשׂוֹת אֵת כָּל-הַמַּעֲשִׂים הָאֵלֶּה:  כִּי-לֹא, מִלִּבִּי.	28 And Moses said: 'Hereby ye shall know that the LORD hath sent me to do all these works, and that I have not done them of mine own mind.
16.29 כט  אִם-כְּמוֹת כָּל-הָאָדָם, יְמֻתוּן אֵלֶּה, וּפְקֻדַּת כָּל-הָאָדָם, יִפָּקֵד עֲלֵיהֶם--לֹא יְהוָה, שְׁלָחָנִי.	29 If these men die the common death of all men, and be visited after the visitation of all men, then the LORD hath not sent Me.
16.30 ל  וְאִם-בְּרִיאָה יִבְרָא יְהוָה, וּפָצְתָה הָאֲדָמָה אֶת-פִּיהָ וּבָלְעָה אֹתָם וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר לָהֶם, וְיָרְדוּ חַיִּים, שְׁאֹלָה--וִידַעְתֶּם, כִּי נִאֲצוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה אֶת-יְהוָה.	30 But if the LORD make a new thing, and the ground open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down alive into the pit, then ye shall understand that these men have despised the LORD.'
16.31 לא  וַיְהִי, כְּכַלֹּתוֹ, לְדַבֵּר, אֵת כָּל-הַדְּבָרִים הָאֵלֶּה; וַתִּבָּקַע הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר תַּחְתֵּיהֶם.	31 And it came to pass, as he made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground did cleave asunder that was under them.
16.32 לב  וַתִּפְתַּח הָאָרֶץ אֶת-פִּיהָ, וַתִּבְלַע אֹתָם וְאֶת-בָּתֵּיהֶם, וְאֵת כָּל-הָאָדָם אֲשֶׁר לְקֹרַח, וְאֵת כָּל-הָרְכוּשׁ.	32 And the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their households, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.
16.33 לג  וַיֵּרְדוּ הֵם וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר לָהֶם, חַיִּים--שְׁאֹלָה; וַתְּכַס עֲלֵיהֶם הָאָרֶץ, וַיֹּאבְדוּ מִתּוֹךְ הַקָּהָל.	33 So they, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit; and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the assembly.
16.34 לד  וְכָל-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר סְבִיבֹתֵיהֶם--נָסוּ לְקֹלָם:  כִּי אָמְרוּ, פֶּן-תִּבְלָעֵנוּ הָאָרֶץ.	34 And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them; for they said: 'Lest the earth swallow us up.'
16.35 לה  וְאֵשׁ יָצְאָה, מֵאֵת יְהוָה; וַתֹּאכַל, אֵת הַחֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתַיִם אִישׁ, מַקְרִיבֵי, הַקְּטֹרֶת.  {ס}	35 And fire came forth from the LORD, and devoured the two hundred and fifty men that offered the incense. {S}
16.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
16.2 ב  אֱמֹר אֶל-אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, וְיָרֵם אֶת-הַמַּחְתֹּת מִבֵּין הַשְּׂרֵפָה, וְאֶת-הָאֵשׁ, זְרֵה-הָלְאָה:  כִּי, קָדֵשׁוּ.	2 'Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the fire-pans out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are become holy;
16.3 ג  אֵת מַחְתּוֹת הַחַטָּאִים הָאֵלֶּה בְּנַפְשֹׁתָם, וְעָשׂוּ אֹתָם רִקֻּעֵי פַחִים צִפּוּי לַמִּזְבֵּחַ--כִּי-הִקְרִיבֻם לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה, וַיִּקְדָּשׁוּ; וְיִהְיוּ לְאוֹת, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 even the fire-pans of these men who have sinned at the cost of their lives, and let them be made beaten plates for a covering of the altar--for they are become holy, because they were offered before the LORD--that they may be a sign unto the children of Israel.'
16.4 ד  וַיִּקַּח אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, אֵת מַחְתּוֹת הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, אֲשֶׁר הִקְרִיבוּ, הַשְּׂרֻפִים; וַיְרַקְּעוּם, צִפּוּי לַמִּזְבֵּחַ.	4 And Eleazar the priest took the brazen fire-pans, which they that were burnt had offered; and they beat them out for a covering of the altar,
16.5 ה  זִכָּרוֹן לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְמַעַן אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִקְרַב אִישׁ זָר אֲשֶׁר לֹא מִזֶּרַע אַהֲרֹן הוּא, לְהַקְטִיר קְטֹרֶת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה כְקֹרַח וְכַעֲדָתוֹ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה לוֹ.  {פ}	5 to be a memorial unto the children of Israel, to the end that no common man, that is not of the seed of Aaron, draw near to burn incense before the LORD; that he fare not as Korah, and as his company; as the LORD spoke unto him by the hand of Moses. {P}
16.6 ו  וַיִּלֹּנוּ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמָּחֳרָת, עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן, לֵאמֹר:  אַתֶּם הֲמִתֶּם, אֶת-עַם יְהוָה.	6 But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying: 'Ye have killed the people of the LORD.'
16.7 ז  וַיְהִי, בְּהִקָּהֵל הָעֵדָה עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן, וַיִּפְנוּ אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְהִנֵּה כִסָּהוּ הֶעָנָן; וַיֵּרָא, כְּבוֹד יְהוָה.	7 And it came to pass, when the congregation was assembled against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tent of meeting; and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the LORD appeared.
16.8 ח  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, אֶל-פְּנֵי אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.  {ס}	8 And Moses and Aaron came to the front of the tent of meeting. {S}
16.9 ט  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	9 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
16.10 י  הֵרֹמּוּ, מִתּוֹךְ הָעֵדָה הַזֹּאת, וַאֲכַלֶּה אֹתָם, כְּרָגַע; וַיִּפְּלוּ, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם.	10 'Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.' And they fell upon their faces.
16.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, קַח אֶת-הַמַּחְתָּה וְתֶן-עָלֶיהָ אֵשׁ מֵעַל הַמִּזְבֵּחַ וְשִׂים קְטֹרֶת, וְהוֹלֵךְ מְהֵרָה אֶל-הָעֵדָה, וְכַפֵּר עֲלֵיהֶם:  כִּי-יָצָא הַקֶּצֶף מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, הֵחֵל הַנָּגֶף.	11 And Moses said unto Aaron: 'Take thy fire-pan, and put fire therein from off the altar, and lay incense thereon, and carry it quickly unto the congregation, and make atonement for them; for there is wrath gone out from the LORD: the plague is begun.'
16.12 יב  וַיִּקַּח אַהֲרֹן כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר מֹשֶׁה, וַיָּרָץ אֶל-תּוֹךְ הַקָּהָל, וְהִנֵּה הֵחֵל הַנֶּגֶף, בָּעָם; וַיִּתֵּן, אֶת-הַקְּטֹרֶת, וַיְכַפֵּר, עַל-הָעָם.	12 And Aaron took as Moses spoke, and ran into the midst of the assembly; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people; and he put on the incense, and made atonement for the people.
16.13 יג  וַיַּעֲמֹד בֵּין-הַמֵּתִים, וּבֵין הַחַיִּים; וַתֵּעָצַר, הַמַּגֵּפָה.	13 And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed.
16.14 יד  וַיִּהְיוּ, הַמֵּתִים בַּמַּגֵּפָה, אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר אֶלֶף, וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת--מִלְּבַד הַמֵּתִים, עַל-דְּבַר-קֹרַח.	14 Now they that died by the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides them that died about the matter of Korah.
16.15 טו  וַיָּשָׁב אַהֲרֹן אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד; וְהַמַּגֵּפָה, נֶעֱצָרָה.  {פ}	15 And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tent of meeting, and the plague was stayed. {P}
17.16 טז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	16 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
17.17 יז  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְקַח מֵאִתָּם מַטֶּה מַטֶּה לְבֵית אָב מֵאֵת כָּל-נְשִׂיאֵהֶם לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם--שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, מַטּוֹת:  אִישׁ אֶת-שְׁמוֹ, תִּכְתֹּב עַל-מַטֵּהוּ.	17 'Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of them rods, one for each fathers' house, of all their princes according to their fathers' houses, twelve rods; thou shalt write every man's name upon his rod.
17.18 יח  וְאֵת שֵׁם אַהֲרֹן, תִּכְתֹּב עַל-מַטֵּה לֵוִי:  כִּי מַטֶּה אֶחָד, לְרֹאשׁ בֵּית אֲבוֹתָם.	18 And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi, for there shall be one rod for the head of their fathers' houses.
17.19 יט  וְהִנַּחְתָּם, בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד--לִפְנֵי, הָעֵדוּת, אֲשֶׁר אִוָּעֵד לָכֶם, שָׁמָּה.	19 And thou shalt lay them up in the tent of meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you.
17.20 כ  וְהָיָה, הָאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר אֶבְחַר-בּוֹ--מַטֵּהוּ יִפְרָח; וַהֲשִׁכֹּתִי מֵעָלַי, אֶת-תְּלֻנּוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר הֵם מַלִּינִם, עֲלֵיכֶם.	20 And it shall come to pass, that the man whom I shall choose, his rod shall bud; and I will make to cease from Me the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against you.'
17.21 כא  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּתְּנוּ אֵלָיו כָּל-נְשִׂיאֵיהֶם מַטֶּה לְנָשִׂיא אֶחָד מַטֶּה לְנָשִׂיא אֶחָד לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם--שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר, מַטּוֹת; וּמַטֵּה אַהֲרֹן, בְּתוֹךְ מַטּוֹתָם.	21 And Moses spoke unto the children of Israel; and all their princes gave him rods, for each prince one, according to their fathers' houses, even twelve rods; and the rod of Aaron was among their rods.
17.22 כב  וַיַּנַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַמַּטֹּת, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, בְּאֹהֶל, הָעֵדֻת.	22 And Moses laid up the rods before the LORD in the tent of the testimony.
17.23 כג  וַיְהִי מִמָּחֳרָת, וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה אֶל-אֹהֶל הָעֵדוּת, וְהִנֵּה פָּרַח מַטֵּה-אַהֲרֹן, לְבֵית לֵוִי; וַיֹּצֵא פֶרַח וַיָּצֵץ צִיץ, וַיִּגְמֹל שְׁקֵדִים.	23 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses went into the tent of the testimony; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and put forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and bore ripe almonds.
17.24 כד  וַיֹּצֵא מֹשֶׁה אֶת-כָּל-הַמַּטֹּת מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֶל-כָּל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיִּרְאוּ וַיִּקְחוּ, אִישׁ מַטֵּהוּ.  {פ}	24 And Moses brought out all the rods from before the LORD unto all the children of Israel; and they looked, and took every man his rod. {P}
17.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הָשֵׁב אֶת-מַטֵּה אַהֲרֹן לִפְנֵי הָעֵדוּת, לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת לְאוֹת, לִבְנֵי-מֶרִי; וּתְכַל תְּלוּנֹּתָם מֵעָלַי, וְלֹא יָמֻתוּ.	25 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Put back the rod of Aaron before the testimony, to be kept there, for a token against the rebellious children; that there may be made an end of their murmurings against Me, that they die not.'
17.26 כו  וַיַּעַשׂ, מֹשֶׁה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֹתוֹ, כֵּן עָשָׂה.  {פ}	26 Thus did Moses; as the LORD commanded him, so did he. {P}
17.27 כז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵאמֹר:  הֵן גָּוַעְנוּ אָבַדְנוּ, כֻּלָּנוּ אָבָדְנוּ.	27 And the children of Israel spoke unto Moses, saying: 'Behold, we perish, we are undone, we are all undone.
17.28 כח  כֹּל הַקָּרֵב הַקָּרֵב אֶל-מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה, יָמוּת; הַאִם תַּמְנוּ, לִגְוֺעַ.  {ס}	28 Every one that cometh near, that cometh near unto the tabernacle of the LORD, is to die; shall we wholly perish?' {S}
18.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, אַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ וּבֵית-אָבִיךָ אִתָּךְ, תִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-עֲוֺן הַמִּקְדָּשׁ; וְאַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ אִתָּךְ, תִּשְׂאוּ אֶת-עֲוֺן כְּהֻנַּתְכֶם.	1 And the LORD said unto Aaron: 'Thou and thy sons and thy fathers' house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary; and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
18.2 ב  וְגַם אֶת-אַחֶיךָ מַטֵּה לֵוִי שֵׁבֶט אָבִיךָ, הַקְרֵב אִתָּךְ, וְיִלָּווּ עָלֶיךָ, וִישָׁרְתוּךָ; וְאַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ אִתָּךְ, לִפְנֵי אֹהֶל הָעֵדֻת.	2 And thy brethren also, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou near with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and minister unto thee, thou and thy sons with thee being before the tent of the testimony.
18.3 ג  וְשָׁמְרוּ, מִשְׁמַרְתְּךָ, וּמִשְׁמֶרֶת, כָּל-הָאֹהֶל:  אַךְ אֶל-כְּלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ וְאֶל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ לֹא יִקְרָבוּ, וְלֹא-יָמֻתוּ גַם-הֵם גַּם-אַתֶּם.	3 And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the Tent; only they shall not come nigh unto the holy furniture and unto the altar, that they die not, neither they, nor ye.
18.4 ד  וְנִלְווּ עָלֶיךָ--וְשָׁמְרוּ אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לְכֹל עֲבֹדַת הָאֹהֶל; וְזָר, לֹא-יִקְרַב אֲלֵיכֶם.	4 And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the tent of meeting, whatsoever the service of the Tent may be; but a common man shall not draw nigh unto you.
18.5 ה  וּשְׁמַרְתֶּם, אֵת מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַקֹּדֶשׁ, וְאֵת, מִשְׁמֶרֶת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ; וְלֹא-יִהְיֶה עוֹד קֶצֶף, עַל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 And ye shall keep the charge of the holy things, and the charge of the altar, that there be wrath no more upon the children of Israel.
18.6 ו  וַאֲנִי, הִנֵּה לָקַחְתִּי אֶת-אֲחֵיכֶם הַלְוִיִּם, מִתּוֹךְ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לָכֶם מַתָּנָה נְתֻנִים, לַיהוָה, לַעֲבֹד, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	6 And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel; for you they are given as a gift unto the LORD, to do the service of the tent of meeting.
18.7 ז  וְאַתָּה וּבָנֶיךָ אִתְּךָ תִּשְׁמְרוּ אֶת-כְּהֻנַּתְכֶם לְכָל-דְּבַר הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וּלְמִבֵּית לַפָּרֹכֶת--וַעֲבַדְתֶּם; עֲבֹדַת מַתָּנָה, אֶתֵּן אֶת-כְּהֻנַּתְכֶם, וְהַזָּר הַקָּרֵב, יוּמָת.  {פ}	7 And thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priesthood in everything that pertaineth to the altar, and to that within the veil; and ye shall serve; I give you the priesthood as a service of gift; and the common man that draweth nigh shall be put to death.' {P}
18.8 ח  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, וַאֲנִי הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי לְךָ, אֶת-מִשְׁמֶרֶת תְּרוּמֹתָי:  לְכָל-קָדְשֵׁי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְךָ נְתַתִּים לְמָשְׁחָה, וּלְבָנֶיךָ--לְחָק-עוֹלָם.	8 And the LORD spoke unto Aaron: 'And I, behold, I have given thee the charge of My heave-offerings; even of all the hallowed things of the children of Israel unto thee have I given them for a consecrated portion, and to thy sons, as a due for ever.
18.9 ט  זֶה-יִהְיֶה לְךָ מִקֹּדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים, מִן-הָאֵשׁ:  כָּל-קָרְבָּנָם לְכָל-מִנְחָתָם וּלְכָל-חַטָּאתָם, וּלְכָל-אֲשָׁמָם אֲשֶׁר יָשִׁיבוּ לִי--קֹדֶשׁ קָדָשִׁים לְךָ הוּא, וּלְבָנֶיךָ.	9 This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every offering of theirs, even every meal-offering of theirs, and every sin-offering of theirs, and every guilt-offering of theirs, which they may render unto Me, shall be most holy for thee and for thy sons.
18.10 י  בְּקֹדֶשׁ הַקֳּדָשִׁים, תֹּאכְלֶנּוּ; כָּל-זָכָר יֹאכַל אֹתוֹ, קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ.	10 In a most holy place shalt thou eat thereof; every male may eat thereof; it shall be holy unto thee.
18.11 יא  וְזֶה-לְּךָ תְּרוּמַת מַתָּנָם, לְכָל-תְּנוּפֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְךָ נְתַתִּים וּלְבָנֶיךָ וְלִבְנֹתֶיךָ אִתְּךָ, לְחָק-עוֹלָם:  כָּל-טָהוֹר בְּבֵיתְךָ, יֹאכַל אֹתוֹ.	11 And this is thine: the heave-offering of their gift, even all the wave-offerings of the children of Israel; I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, as a due for ever; every one that is clean in thy house may eat thereof.
18.12 יב  כֹּל חֵלֶב יִצְהָר, וְכָל-חֵלֶב תִּירוֹשׁ וְדָגָן--רֵאשִׁיתָם אֲשֶׁר-יִתְּנוּ לַיהוָה, לְךָ נְתַתִּים.	12 All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the corn, the first part of them which they give unto the LORD, to thee have I given them.
18.13 יג  בִּכּוּרֵי כָּל-אֲשֶׁר בְּאַרְצָם, אֲשֶׁר-יָבִיאוּ לַיהוָה--לְךָ יִהְיֶה:  כָּל-טָהוֹר בְּבֵיתְךָ, יֹאכְלֶנּוּ.	13 The first-ripe fruits of all that is in their land, which they bring unto the LORD, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thy house may eat thereof.
18.14 יד  כָּל-חֵרֶם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, לְךָ יִהְיֶה.	14 Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.
18.15 טו  כָּל-פֶּטֶר רֶחֶם לְכָל-בָּשָׂר אֲשֶׁר-יַקְרִיבוּ לַיהוָה, בָּאָדָם וּבַבְּהֵמָה--יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ:  אַךְ פָּדֹה תִפְדֶּה, אֵת בְּכוֹר הָאָדָם, וְאֵת בְּכוֹר-הַבְּהֵמָה הַטְּמֵאָה, תִּפְדֶּה.	15 Every thing that openeth the womb, of all flesh which they offer unto the LORD, both of man and beast, shall be thine; howbeit the first-born of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.
18.16 טז  וּפְדוּיָו, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ תִּפְדֶּה, בְּעֶרְכְּךָ, כֶּסֶף חֲמֵשֶׁת שְׁקָלִים בְּשֶׁקֶל הַקֹּדֶשׁ:  עֶשְׂרִים גֵּרָה, הוּא.	16 And their redemption-money--from a month old shalt thou redeem them--shall be, according to thy valuation, five shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary--the same is twenty gerahs.
18.17 יז  אַךְ בְּכוֹר-שׁוֹר אוֹ-בְכוֹר כֶּשֶׂב אוֹ-בְכוֹר עֵז, לֹא תִפְדֶּה--קֹדֶשׁ הֵם:  אֶת-דָּמָם תִּזְרֹק עַל-הַמִּזְבֵּחַ, וְאֶת-חֶלְבָּם תַּקְטִיר--אִשֶּׁה לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה.	17 But the firstling of an ox, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt dash their blood against the altar, and shalt make their fat smoke for an offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
18.18 יח  וּבְשָׂרָם, יִהְיֶה-לָּךְ:  כַּחֲזֵה הַתְּנוּפָה וּכְשׁוֹק הַיָּמִין, לְךָ יִהְיֶה.	18 And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave-breast and as the right thigh, it shall be thine.
18.19 יט  כֹּל תְּרוּמֹת הַקֳּדָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר יָרִימוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לַיהוָה--נָתַתִּי לְךָ וּלְבָנֶיךָ וְלִבְנֹתֶיךָ אִתְּךָ, לְחָק-עוֹלָם:  בְּרִית מֶלַח עוֹלָם הִוא לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לְךָ וּלְזַרְעֲךָ אִתָּךְ.	19 All the heave-offerings of the holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the LORD, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, as a due for ever; it is an everlasting covenant of salt before the LORD unto thee and to thy seed with thee.'
18.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-אַהֲרֹן, בְּאַרְצָם לֹא תִנְחָל, וְחֵלֶק, לֹא-יִהְיֶה לְךָ בְּתוֹכָם:  אֲנִי חֶלְקְךָ וְנַחֲלָתְךָ, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	20 And the LORD said unto Aaron: 'Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any portion among them; I am thy portion and thine inheritance among the children of Israel. {S}
18.21 כא  וְלִבְנֵי לֵוִי, הִנֵּה נָתַתִּי כָּל-מַעֲשֵׂר בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל לְנַחֲלָה, חֵלֶף עֲבֹדָתָם אֲשֶׁר-הֵם עֹבְדִים, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	21 And unto the children of Levi, behold, I have given all the tithe in Israel for an inheritance, in return for their service which they serve, even the service of the tent of meeting.
18.22 כב  וְלֹא-יִקְרְבוּ עוֹד בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, לָשֵׂאת חֵטְא, לָמוּת.	22 And henceforth the children of Israel shall not come nigh the tent of meeting, lest they bear sin, and die.
18.23 כג  וְעָבַד הַלֵּוִי הוּא, אֶת-עֲבֹדַת אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וְהֵם, יִשְׂאוּ עֲוֺנָם:  חֻקַּת עוֹלָם, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, וּבְתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא יִנְחֲלוּ נַחֲלָה.	23 But the Levites alone shall do the service of the tent of meeting, and they shall bear their iniquity; it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations, and among the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
18.24 כד  כִּי אֶת-מַעְשַׂר בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יָרִימוּ לַיהוָה תְּרוּמָה, נָתַתִּי לַלְוִיִּם, לְנַחֲלָה; עַל-כֵּן, אָמַרְתִּי לָהֶם, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא יִנְחֲלוּ נַחֲלָה.  {פ}	24 For the tithe of the children of Israel, which they set apart as a gift unto the LORD, I have given to the Levites for an inheritance; therefore I have said unto them: Among the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.' {P}
18.25 כה  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	25 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
18.26 כו  וְאֶל-הַלְוִיִּם תְּדַבֵּר, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, כִּי-תִקְחוּ מֵאֵת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-הַמַּעֲשֵׂר אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לָכֶם מֵאִתָּם, בְּנַחֲלַתְכֶם--וַהֲרֵמֹתֶם מִמֶּנּוּ תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה, מַעֲשֵׂר מִן-הַמַּעֲשֵׂר.	26 'Moreover thou shalt speak unto the Levites, and say unto them: When ye take of the children of Israel the tithe which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall set apart of it a gift for the LORD, even a tithe of the tithe.
18.27 כז  וְנֶחְשַׁב לָכֶם, תְּרוּמַתְכֶם--כַּדָּגָן, מִן-הַגֹּרֶן, וְכַמְלֵאָה, מִן-הַיָּקֶב.	27 And the gift which ye set apart shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the corn of the threshing-floor, and as the fulness of the wine-press.
18.28 כח  כֵּן תָּרִימוּ גַם-אַתֶּם, תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה, מִכֹּל מַעְשְׂרֹתֵיכֶם, אֲשֶׁר תִּקְחוּ מֵאֵת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וּנְתַתֶּם מִמֶּנּוּ אֶת-תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה, לְאַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן.	28 Thus ye also shall set apart a gift unto the LORD of all your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and thereof ye shall give the gift which is set apart unto the LORD to Aaron the priest.
18.29 כט  מִכֹּל, מַתְּנֹתֵיכֶם, תָּרִימוּ, אֵת כָּל-תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה:  מִכָּל-חֶלְבּוֹ--אֶת-מִקְדְּשׁוֹ, מִמֶּנּוּ.	29 Out of all that is given you ye shall set apart all of that which is due unto the LORD, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of it.
18.30 ל  וְאָמַרְתָּ, אֲלֵהֶם:  בַּהֲרִימְכֶם אֶת-חֶלְבּוֹ, מִמֶּנּוּ, וְנֶחְשַׁב לַלְוִיִּם, כִּתְבוּאַת גֹּרֶן וְכִתְבוּאַת יָקֶב.	30 Therefore thou shalt say unto them: When ye set apart the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshing-floor, and as the increase of the wine-press.
18.31 לא  וַאֲכַלְתֶּם אֹתוֹ בְּכָל-מָקוֹם, אַתֶּם וּבֵיתְכֶם:  כִּי-שָׂכָר הוּא לָכֶם, חֵלֶף עֲבֹדַתְכֶם בְּאֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	31 And ye may eat it in every place, ye and your households; for it is your reward in return for your service in the tent of meeting.
18.32 לב  וְלֹא-תִשְׂאוּ עָלָיו חֵטְא, בַּהֲרִימְכֶם אֶת-חֶלְבּוֹ מִמֶּנּוּ; וְאֶת-קָדְשֵׁי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לֹא תְחַלְּלוּ, וְלֹא תָמוּתוּ.  {פ}	32 And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, seeing that ye have set apart from it the best thereof; and ye shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, that ye die not.' {P}
19.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying:
19.2 ב  זֹאת חֻקַּת הַתּוֹרָה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה לֵאמֹר:  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְיִקְחוּ אֵלֶיךָ פָרָה אֲדֻמָּה תְּמִימָה אֲשֶׁר אֵין-בָּהּ מוּם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-עָלָה עָלֶיהָ, עֹל.	2 This is the statute of the law which the LORD hath commanded, saying: Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer, faultless, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke.
19.3 ג  וּנְתַתֶּם אֹתָהּ, אֶל-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן; וְהוֹצִיא אֹתָהּ אֶל-מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, וְשָׁחַט אֹתָהּ לְפָנָיו.	3 And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, and she shall be brought forth without the camp, and she shall be slain before his face.
19.4 ד  וְלָקַח אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, מִדָּמָהּ--בְּאֶצְבָּעוֹ; וְהִזָּה אֶל-נֹכַח פְּנֵי אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד, מִדָּמָהּ--שֶׁבַע פְּעָמִים.	4 And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood toward the front of the tent of meeting seven times.
19.5 ה  וְשָׂרַף אֶת-הַפָּרָה, לְעֵינָיו:  אֶת-עֹרָהּ וְאֶת-בְּשָׂרָהּ וְאֶת-דָּמָהּ, עַל-פִּרְשָׁהּ יִשְׂרֹף.	5 And the heifer shall be burnt in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall be burnt.
19.6 ו  וְלָקַח הַכֹּהֵן, עֵץ אֶרֶז וְאֵזוֹב--וּשְׁנִי תוֹלָעַת; וְהִשְׁלִיךְ, אֶל-תּוֹךְ שְׂרֵפַת הַפָּרָה.	6 And the priest shall take cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
19.7 ז  וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו הַכֹּהֵן, וְרָחַץ בְּשָׂרוֹ בַּמַּיִם, וְאַחַר, יָבֹא אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה; וְטָמֵא הַכֹּהֵן, עַד-הָעָרֶב.	7 Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he may come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.
19.8 ח  וְהַשֹּׂרֵף אֹתָהּ--יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו בַּמַּיִם, וְרָחַץ בְּשָׂרוֹ בַּמָּיִם; וְטָמֵא, עַד-הָעָרֶב.	8 And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.
19.9 ט  וְאָסַף אִישׁ טָהוֹר, אֵת אֵפֶר הַפָּרָה, וְהִנִּיחַ מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה, בְּמָקוֹם טָהוֹר; וְהָיְתָה לַעֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת, לְמֵי נִדָּה--חַטָּאת הִוא.	9 And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of sprinkling; it is a purification from sin.
19.10 י  וְכִבֶּס הָאֹסֵף אֶת-אֵפֶר הַפָּרָה, אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וְטָמֵא, עַד-הָעָרֶב; וְהָיְתָה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלַגֵּר הַגָּר בְּתוֹכָם--לְחֻקַּת עוֹלָם.	10 And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; and it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever.
19.11 יא  הַנֹּגֵעַ בְּמֵת, לְכָל-נֶפֶשׁ אָדָם--וְטָמֵא, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.	11 He that toucheth the dead, even any man's dead body, shall be unclean seven days;
19.12 יב  הוּא יִתְחַטָּא-בוֹ בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי--יִטְהָר; וְאִם-לֹא יִתְחַטָּא בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי, וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי--לֹא יִטְהָר.	12 the same shall purify himself therewith on the third day and on the seventh day, and he shall be clean; but if he purify not himself the third day and the seventh day, he shall not be clean.
19.13 יג  כָּל-הַנֹּגֵעַ בְּמֵת בְּנֶפֶשׁ הָאָדָם אֲשֶׁר-יָמוּת וְלֹא יִתְחַטָּא, אֶת-מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה טִמֵּא--וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל:  כִּי מֵי נִדָּה לֹא-זֹרַק עָלָיו, טָמֵא יִהְיֶה--עוֹד, טֻמְאָתוֹ בוֹ.	13 Whosoever toucheth the dead, even the body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself--he hath defiled the tabernacle of the LORD--that soul shall be cut off from Israel; because the water of sprinkling was not dashed against him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon him.
19.14 יד  זֹאת, הַתּוֹרָה, אָדָם, כִּי-יָמוּת בְּאֹהֶל:  כָּל-הַבָּא אֶל-הָאֹהֶל וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר בָּאֹהֶל, יִטְמָא שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.	14 This is the law: when a man dieth in a tent, every one that cometh into the tent, and every thing that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
19.15 טו  וְכֹל כְּלִי פָתוּחַ, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-צָמִיד פָּתִיל עָלָיו--טָמֵא, הוּא.	15 And every open vessel, which hath no covering close-bound upon it, is unclean.
19.16 טז  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִגַּע עַל-פְּנֵי הַשָּׂדֶה, בַּחֲלַל-חֶרֶב אוֹ בְמֵת, אוֹ-בְעֶצֶם אָדָם, אוֹ בְקָבֶר--יִטְמָא, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.	16 And whosoever in the open field toucheth one that is slain with a sword, or one that dieth of himself, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
19.17 יז  וְלָקְחוּ, לַטָּמֵא, מֵעֲפַר, שְׂרֵפַת הַחַטָּאת; וְנָתַן עָלָיו מַיִם חַיִּים, אֶל-כֶּלִי.	17 And for the unclean they shall take of the ashes of the burning of the purification from sin, and running water shall be put thereto in a vessel.
19.18 יח  וְלָקַח אֵזוֹב וְטָבַל בַּמַּיִם, אִישׁ טָהוֹר, וְהִזָּה עַל-הָאֹהֶל וְעַל-כָּל-הַכֵּלִים, וְעַל-הַנְּפָשׁוֹת אֲשֶׁר הָיוּ-שָׁם; וְעַל-הַנֹּגֵעַ, בַּעֶצֶם אוֹ בֶחָלָל, אוֹ בַמֵּת, אוֹ בַקָּבֶר.	18 And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that touched the bone, or the slain, or the dead, or the grave.
19.19 יט  וְהִזָּה הַטָּהֹר עַל-הַטָּמֵא, בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי; וְחִטְּאוֹ בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וְכִבֶּס בְּגָדָיו וְרָחַץ בַּמַּיִם וְטָהֵר בָּעָרֶב.	19 And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day; and on the seventh day he shall purify him; and he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at even.
19.20 כ  וְאִישׁ אֲשֶׁר-יִטְמָא וְלֹא יִתְחַטָּא, וְנִכְרְתָה הַנֶּפֶשׁ הַהִוא מִתּוֹךְ הַקָּהָל:  כִּי אֶת-מִקְדַּשׁ יְהוָה טִמֵּא, מֵי נִדָּה לֹא-זֹרַק עָלָיו--טָמֵא הוּא.	20 But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of the assembly, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the LORD; the water of sprinkling hath not been dashed against him: he is unclean.
19.21 כא  וְהָיְתָה לָהֶם, לְחֻקַּת עוֹלָם; וּמַזֵּה מֵי-הַנִּדָּה, יְכַבֵּס בְּגָדָיו, וְהַנֹּגֵעַ בְּמֵי הַנִּדָּה, יִטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.	21 And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them; and he that sprinkleth the water of sprinkling shall wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of sprinkling shall be unclean until even.
19.22 כב  וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יִגַּע-בּוֹ הַטָּמֵא, יִטְמָא; וְהַנֶּפֶשׁ הַנֹּגַעַת, תִּטְמָא עַד-הָעָרֶב.  {פ}	22 And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth him shall be unclean until even. {P}
20.1 א  וַיָּבֹאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל כָּל-הָעֵדָה מִדְבַּר-צִן, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, וַיֵּשֶׁב הָעָם, בְּקָדֵשׁ; וַתָּמָת שָׁם מִרְיָם, וַתִּקָּבֵר שָׁם.	1 And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month; and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.
20.2 ב  וְלֹא-הָיָה מַיִם, לָעֵדָה; וַיִּקָּהֲלוּ, עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן.	2 And there was no water for the congregation; and they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.
20.3 ג  וַיָּרֶב הָעָם, עִם-מֹשֶׁה; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לֵאמֹר, וְלוּ גָוַעְנוּ בִּגְוַע אַחֵינוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	3 And the people strove with Moses, and spoke, saying: 'Would that we had perished when our brethren perished before the LORD!
20.4 ד  וְלָמָה הֲבֵאתֶם אֶת-קְהַל יְהוָה, אֶל-הַמִּדְבָּר הַזֶּה, לָמוּת שָׁם, אֲנַחְנוּ וּבְעִירֵנוּ.	4 And why have ye brought the assembly of the LORD into this wilderness, to die there, we and our cattle?
20.5 ה  וְלָמָה הֶעֱלִיתֻנוּ, מִמִּצְרַיִם, לְהָבִיא אֹתָנוּ, אֶל-הַמָּקוֹם הָרָע הַזֶּה:  לֹא מְקוֹם זֶרַע, וּתְאֵנָה וְגֶפֶן וְרִמּוֹן, וּמַיִם אַיִן, לִשְׁתּוֹת.	5 And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither is there any water to drink.'
20.6 ו  וַיָּבֹא מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן מִפְּנֵי הַקָּהָל, אֶל-פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, וַיִּפְּלוּ, עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם; וַיֵּרָא כְבוֹד-יְהוָה, אֲלֵיהֶם.  {פ}	6 And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto the door of the tent of meeting, and fell upon their faces; and the glory of the LORD appeared unto them. {P}
20.7 ז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	7 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
20.8 ח  קַח אֶת-הַמַּטֶּה, וְהַקְהֵל אֶת-הָעֵדָה אַתָּה וְאַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ, וְדִבַּרְתֶּם אֶל-הַסֶּלַע לְעֵינֵיהֶם, וְנָתַן מֵימָיו; וְהוֹצֵאתָ לָהֶם מַיִם מִן-הַסֶּלַע, וְהִשְׁקִיתָ אֶת-הָעֵדָה וְאֶת-בְּעִירָם.	8 'Take the rod, and assemble the congregation, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes, that it give forth its water; and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock; so thou shalt give the congregation and their cattle drink.'
20.9 ט  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַמַּטֶּה, מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר, צִוָּהוּ.	9 And Moses took the rod from before the LORD, as He commanded him.
20.10 י  וַיַּקְהִלוּ מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, אֶת-הַקָּהָל--אֶל-פְּנֵי הַסָּלַע; וַיֹּאמֶר לָהֶם, שִׁמְעוּ-נָא הַמֹּרִים--הֲמִן-הַסֶּלַע הַזֶּה, נוֹצִיא לָכֶם מָיִם.	10 And Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the rock, and he said unto them: 'Hear now, ye rebels; are we to bring you forth water out of this rock?'
20.11 יא  וַיָּרֶם מֹשֶׁה אֶת-יָדוֹ, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הַסֶּלַע בְּמַטֵּהוּ--פַּעֲמָיִם; וַיֵּצְאוּ מַיִם רַבִּים, וַתֵּשְׁתְּ הָעֵדָה וּבְעִירָם.  {ס}	11 And Moses lifted up his hand, and smote the rock with his rod twice; and water came forth abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their cattle. {S}
20.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, יַעַן לֹא-הֶאֱמַנְתֶּם בִּי, לְהַקְדִּישֵׁנִי לְעֵינֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לָכֵן, לֹא תָבִיאוּ אֶת-הַקָּהָל הַזֶּה, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַתִּי לָהֶם.	12 And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron: 'Because ye believed not in Me, to sanctify Me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.'
20.13 יג  הֵמָּה מֵי מְרִיבָה, אֲשֶׁר-רָבוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-יְהוָה; וַיִּקָּדֵשׁ, בָּם.  {ס}	13 These are the waters of Meribah, where the children of Israel strove with the LORD, and He was sanctified in them. {S}
20.14 יד  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֹשֶׁה מַלְאָכִים מִקָּדֵשׁ, אֶל-מֶלֶךְ אֱדוֹם:  כֹּה אָמַר, אָחִיךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל, אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ, אֵת כָּל-הַתְּלָאָה אֲשֶׁר מְצָאָתְנוּ.	14 And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom: 'Thus saith thy brother Israel: Thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us;
20.15 טו  וַיֵּרְדוּ אֲבֹתֵינוּ מִצְרַיְמָה, וַנֵּשֶׁב בְּמִצְרַיִם יָמִים רַבִּים; וַיָּרֵעוּ לָנוּ מִצְרַיִם, וְלַאֲבֹתֵינוּ.	15 how our fathers went down into Egypt, and we dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians dealt ill with us, and our fathers;
20.16 טז  וַנִּצְעַק אֶל-יְהוָה, וַיִּשְׁמַע קֹלֵנוּ, וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָךְ, וַיֹּצִאֵנוּ מִמִּצְרָיִם; וְהִנֵּה אֲנַחְנוּ בְקָדֵשׁ, עִיר קְצֵה גְבוּלֶךָ.	16 and when we cried unto the LORD, He heard our voice, and sent an angel, and brought us forth out of Egypt; and, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border.
20.17 יז  נַעְבְּרָה-נָּא בְאַרְצֶךָ, לֹא נַעֲבֹר בְּשָׂדֶה וּבְכֶרֶם, וְלֹא נִשְׁתֶּה, מֵי בְאֵר:  דֶּרֶךְ הַמֶּלֶךְ נֵלֵךְ, לֹא נִטֶּה יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול, עַד אֲשֶׁר-נַעֲבֹר, גְּבֻלֶךָ.	17 Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy land; we will not pass through field or through vineyard, neither will we drink of the water of the wells; we will go along the king's highway, we will not turn aside to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy border.'
20.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו אֱדוֹם, לֹא תַעֲבֹר בִּי--פֶּן-בַּחֶרֶב, אֵצֵא לִקְרָאתֶךָ.	18 And Edom said unto him: 'Thou shalt not pass through me, lest I come out with the sword against thee.'
20.19 יט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֵלָיו בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּמְסִלָּה נַעֲלֶה, וְאִם-מֵימֶיךָ נִשְׁתֶּה אֲנִי וּמִקְנַי, וְנָתַתִּי מִכְרָם; רַק אֵין-דָּבָר, בְּרַגְלַי אֶעֱבֹרָה.	19 And the children of Israel said unto him: 'We will go up by the highway; and if we drink of thy water, I and my cattle, then will I give the price thereof; let me only pass through on my feet; there is no hurt.'
20.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא תַעֲבֹר; וַיֵּצֵא אֱדוֹם לִקְרָאתוֹ, בְּעַם כָּבֵד וּבְיָד חֲזָקָה.	20 And he said: 'Thou shalt not pass through.' And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.
20.21 כא  וַיְמָאֵן אֱדוֹם, נְתֹן אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲבֹר, בִּגְבֻלוֹ; וַיֵּט יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵעָלָיו.  {פ}	21 Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border; wherefore Israel turned away from him. {P}
20.22 כב  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִקָּדֵשׁ; וַיָּבֹאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל כָּל-הָעֵדָה, הֹר הָהָר.	22 And they journeyed from Kadesh; and the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, came unto mount Hor.
20.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אַהֲרֹן, בְּהֹר הָהָר, עַל-גְּבוּל אֶרֶץ-אֱדוֹם, לֵאמֹר.	23 And the LORD spoke unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom, saying:
20.24 כד  יֵאָסֵף אַהֲרֹן, אֶל-עַמָּיו, כִּי לֹא יָבֹא אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--עַל אֲשֶׁר-מְרִיתֶם אֶת-פִּי, לְמֵי מְרִיבָה.	24 'Aaron shall be gathered unto his people; for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against My word at the waters of Meribah.
20.25 כה  קַח, אֶת-אַהֲרֹן, וְאֶת-אֶלְעָזָר, בְּנוֹ; וְהַעַל אֹתָם, הֹר הָהָר.	25 Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor.
20.26 כו  וְהַפְשֵׁט אֶת-אַהֲרֹן אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וְהִלְבַּשְׁתָּם אֶת-אֶלְעָזָר בְּנוֹ; וְאַהֲרֹן יֵאָסֵף, וּמֵת שָׁם.	26 And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die there.'
20.27 כז  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה; וַיַּעֲלוּ אֶל-הֹר הָהָר, לְעֵינֵי כָּל-הָעֵדָה.	27 And Moses did as the LORD commanded; and they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.
20.28 כח  וַיַּפְשֵׁט מֹשֶׁה אֶת-אַהֲרֹן אֶת-בְּגָדָיו, וַיַּלְבֵּשׁ אֹתָם אֶת-אֶלְעָזָר בְּנוֹ, וַיָּמָת אַהֲרֹן שָׁם, בְּרֹאשׁ הָהָר; וַיֵּרֶד מֹשֶׁה וְאֶלְעָזָר, מִן-הָהָר.	28 And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount; and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
20.29 כט  וַיִּרְאוּ, כָּל-הָעֵדָה, כִּי גָוַע, אַהֲרֹן; וַיִּבְכּוּ אֶת-אַהֲרֹן שְׁלֹשִׁים יוֹם, כֹּל בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {ס}	29 And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they wept for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel. {S}
21.1 א  וַיִּשְׁמַע הַכְּנַעֲנִי מֶלֶךְ-עֲרָד, יֹשֵׁב הַנֶּגֶב, כִּי בָּא יִשְׂרָאֵל, דֶּרֶךְ הָאֲתָרִים; וַיִּלָּחֶם, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּשְׁבְּ מִמֶּנּוּ, שֶׁבִי.	1 And the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the South, heard tell that Israel came by the way of Atharim; and he fought against Israel, and took some of them captive.
21.2 ב  וַיִּדַּר יִשְׂרָאֵל נֶדֶר לַיהוָה, וַיֹּאמַר:  אִם-נָתֹן תִּתֵּן אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, בְּיָדִי--וְהַחֲרַמְתִּי, אֶת-עָרֵיהֶם.	2 And Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said: 'If Thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.'
21.3 ג  וַיִּשְׁמַע יְהוָה בְּקוֹל יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיִּתֵּן אֶת-הַכְּנַעֲנִי, וַיַּחֲרֵם אֶתְהֶם, וְאֶת-עָרֵיהֶם; וַיִּקְרָא שֵׁם-הַמָּקוֹם, חָרְמָה.  {פ}	3 And the LORD hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities; and the name of the place was called Hormah. {P}
21.4 ד  וַיִּסְעוּ מֵהֹר הָהָר, דֶּרֶךְ יַם-סוּף, לִסְבֹב, אֶת-אֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם; וַתִּקְצַר נֶפֶשׁ-הָעָם, בַּדָּרֶךְ.	4 And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way to the Red Sea, to compass the land of Edom; and the soul of the people became impatient because of the way.
21.5 ה  וַיְדַבֵּר הָעָם, בֵּאלֹהִים וּבְמֹשֶׁה, לָמָה הֶעֱלִיתֻנוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, לָמוּת בַּמִּדְבָּר:  כִּי אֵין לֶחֶם, וְאֵין מַיִם, וְנַפְשֵׁנוּ קָצָה, בַּלֶּחֶם הַקְּלֹקֵל.	5 And the people spoke against God, and against Moses: 'Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no bread, and there is no water; and our soul loatheth this light bread.'
21.6 ו  וַיְשַׁלַּח יְהוָה בָּעָם, אֵת הַנְּחָשִׁים הַשְּׂרָפִים, וַיְנַשְּׁכוּ, אֶת-הָעָם; וַיָּמָת עַם-רָב, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל.	6 And the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel died.
21.7 ז  וַיָּבֹא הָעָם אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וַיֹּאמְרוּ חָטָאנוּ, כִּי-דִבַּרְנוּ בַיהוָה וָבָךְ--הִתְפַּלֵּל אֶל-יְהוָה, וְיָסֵר מֵעָלֵינוּ אֶת-הַנָּחָשׁ; וַיִּתְפַּלֵּל מֹשֶׁה, בְּעַד הָעָם.	7 And the people came to Moses, and said: 'We have sinned, because we have spoken against the LORD, and against thee; pray unto the LORD, that He take away the serpents from us.' And Moses prayed for the people.
21.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עֲשֵׂה לְךָ שָׂרָף, וְשִׂים אֹתוֹ, עַל-נֵס; וְהָיָה, כָּל-הַנָּשׁוּךְ, וְרָאָה אֹתוֹ, וָחָי.	8 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole; and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he seeth it, shall live.'
21.9 ט  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה נְחַשׁ נְחֹשֶׁת, וַיְשִׂמֵהוּ עַל-הַנֵּס; וְהָיָה, אִם-נָשַׁךְ הַנָּחָשׁ אֶת-אִישׁ--וְהִבִּיט אֶל-נְחַשׁ הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, וָחָי.	9 And Moses made a serpent of brass, and set it upon the pole; and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he looked unto the serpent of brass, he lived.
21.10 י  וַיִּסְעוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּאֹבֹת.	10 And the children of Israel journeyed, and pitched in Oboth.
21.11 יא  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵאֹבֹת; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּעִיֵּי הָעֲבָרִים, בַּמִּדְבָּר אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי מוֹאָב, מִמִּזְרַח, הַשָּׁמֶשׁ.	11 And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ije-abarim, in the wilderness which is in front of Moab, toward the sun-rising.
21.12 יב  מִשָּׁם, נָסָעוּ; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּנַחַל זָרֶד.	12 From thence they journeyed, and pitched in the valley of Zered.
21.13 יג  מִשָּׁם, נָסָעוּ, וַיַּחֲנוּ מֵעֵבֶר אַרְנוֹן אֲשֶׁר בַּמִּדְבָּר, הַיֹּצֵא מִגְּבֻל הָאֱמֹרִי:  כִּי אַרְנוֹן גְּבוּל מוֹאָב, בֵּין מוֹאָב וּבֵין הָאֱמֹרִי.	13 From thence they journeyed, and pitched on the other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness, that cometh out of the border of the Amorites.--For Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites;
21.14 יד  עַל-כֵּן, יֵאָמַר, בְּסֵפֶר, מִלְחֲמֹת יְהוָה:  אֶת-וָהֵב בְּסוּפָה, וְאֶת-הַנְּחָלִים אַרְנוֹן.	14 wherefore it is said in the book of the Wars of the LORD: Vaheb in Suphah, and the valleys of Arnon,
21.15 טו  וְאֶשֶׁד, הַנְּחָלִים, אֲשֶׁר נָטָה, לְשֶׁבֶת עָר; וְנִשְׁעַן, לִגְבוּל מוֹאָב.	15 And the slope of the valleys that inclineth toward the seat of Ar, and leaneth upon the border of Moab.--
21.16 טז  וּמִשָּׁם, בְּאֵרָה:  הִוא הַבְּאֵר, אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה לְמֹשֶׁה, אֱסֹף אֶת-הָעָם, וְאֶתְּנָה לָהֶם מָיִם.  {ס}	16 And from thence to Beer; that is the well whereof the LORD said unto Moses: 'Gather the people together, and I will give them water.' {S}
21.17 יז  אָז יָשִׁיר יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַשִּׁירָה הַזֹּאת:  עֲלִי בְאֵר, עֱנוּ-לָהּ.	17 Then sang Israel this song: Spring up, O well--sing ye unto it--
21.18 יח  בְּאֵר חֲפָרוּהָ שָׂרִים, כָּרוּהָ נְדִיבֵי הָעָם, בִּמְחֹקֵק, בְּמִשְׁעֲנֹתָם; וּמִמִּדְבָּר, מַתָּנָה.	18 The well, which the princes digged, which the nobles of the people delved, with the sceptre, and with their staves. And from the wilderness to Mattanah;
21.19 יט  וּמִמַּתָּנָה, נַחֲלִיאֵל; וּמִנַּחֲלִיאֵל, בָּמוֹת.	19 and from Mattanah to Nahaliel; and from Nahaliel to Bamoth;
21.20 כ  וּמִבָּמוֹת, הַגַּיְא אֲשֶׁר בִּשְׂדֵה מוֹאָב--רֹאשׁ, הַפִּסְגָּה; וְנִשְׁקָפָה, עַל-פְּנֵי הַיְשִׁימֹן.  {פ}	20 and from Bamoth to the valley that is in the field of Moab, by the top of Pisgah, which looketh down upon the desert. {P}
21.21 כא  וַיִּשְׁלַח יִשְׂרָאֵל מַלְאָכִים, אֶל-סִיחֹן מֶלֶךְ-הָאֱמֹרִי לֵאמֹר.	21 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, saying:
21.22 כב  אֶעְבְּרָה בְאַרְצֶךָ, לֹא נִטֶּה בְּשָׂדֶה וּבְכֶרֶם--לֹא נִשְׁתֶּה, מֵי בְאֵר:  בְּדֶרֶךְ הַמֶּלֶךְ נֵלֵךְ, עַד אֲשֶׁר-נַעֲבֹר גְּבֻלֶךָ.	22 'Let me pass through thy land; we will not turn aside into field, or into vineyard; we will not drink of the water of the wells; we will go by the king's highway, until we have passed thy border.'
21.23 כג  וְלֹא-נָתַן סִיחֹן אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲבֹר בִּגְבֻלוֹ, וַיֶּאֱסֹף סִיחֹן אֶת-כָּל-עַמּוֹ וַיֵּצֵא לִקְרַאת יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמִּדְבָּרָה, וַיָּבֹא יָהְצָה; וַיִּלָּחֶם, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	23 And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border; but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderness, and came to Jahaz; and he fought against Israel.
21.24 כד  וַיַּכֵּהוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְפִי-חָרֶב; וַיִּירַשׁ אֶת-אַרְצוֹ מֵאַרְנֹן, עַד-יַבֹּק עַד-בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן--כִּי עַז, גְּבוּל בְּנֵי עַמּוֹן.	24 And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from the Arnon unto the Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon; for the border of the children of Ammon was strong.
21.25 כה  וַיִּקַּח, יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֵת כָּל-הֶעָרִים, הָאֵלֶּה; וַיֵּשֶׁב יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּכָל-עָרֵי הָאֱמֹרִי, בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן וּבְכָל-בְּנֹתֶיהָ.	25 And Israel took all these cities; and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the towns thereof.
21.26 כו  כִּי חֶשְׁבּוֹן--עִיר סִיחֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, הִוא; וְהוּא נִלְחַם, בְּמֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב הָרִאשׁוֹן, וַיִּקַּח אֶת-כָּל-אַרְצוֹ מִיָּדוֹ, עַד-אַרְנֹן.	26 For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto the Arnon.
21.27 כז  עַל-כֵּן יֹאמְרוּ הַמֹּשְׁלִים, בֹּאוּ חֶשְׁבּוֹן; תִּבָּנֶה וְתִכּוֹנֵן, עִיר סִיחוֹן.	27 Wherefore they that speak in parables say: Come ye to Heshbon! let the city of Sihon be built and established!
21.28 כח  כִּי-אֵשׁ יָצְאָה מֵחֶשְׁבּוֹן, לֶהָבָה מִקִּרְיַת סִיחֹן:  אָכְלָה עָר מוֹאָב, בַּעֲלֵי בָּמוֹת אַרְנֹן.	28 For a fire is gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon; it hath devoured Ar of Moab, the lords of the high places of Arnon.
21.29 כט  אוֹי-לְךָ מוֹאָב, אָבַדְתָּ עַם-כְּמוֹשׁ; נָתַן בָּנָיו פְּלֵיטִם וּבְנֹתָיו בַּשְּׁבִית, לְמֶלֶךְ אֱמֹרִי סִיחוֹן.	29 Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh; he hath given his sons as fugitives, and his daughters into captivity, unto Sihon king of the Amorites.
21.30 ל  וַנִּירָם אָבַד חֶשְׁבּוֹן, עַד-דִּיבֹן; וַנַּשִּׁים עַד-נֹפַח, אֲשֶׁר עַד-מֵידְבָא.	30 We have shot at them--Heshbon is perished--even unto Dibon, and we have laid waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.
21.31 לא  וַיֵּשֶׁב, יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּאֶרֶץ, הָאֱמֹרִי.	31 Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
21.32 לב  וַיִּשְׁלַח מֹשֶׁה לְרַגֵּל אֶת-יַעְזֵר, וַיִּלְכְּדוּ בְּנֹתֶיהָ; ויירש (וַיּוֹרֶשׁ), אֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם.	32 And Moses sent to spy out Jazer, and they took the towns thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there.
21.33 לג  וַיִּפְנוּ, וַיַּעֲלוּ, דֶּרֶךְ, הַבָּשָׁן; וַיֵּצֵא עוֹג מֶלֶךְ-הַבָּשָׁן לִקְרָאתָם הוּא וְכָל-עַמּוֹ, לַמִּלְחָמָה--אֶדְרֶעִי.	33 And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan; and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
21.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, אַל-תִּירָא אֹתוֹ--כִּי בְיָדְךָ נָתַתִּי אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-כָּל-עַמּוֹ, וְאֶת-אַרְצוֹ; וְעָשִׂיתָ לּוֹ--כַּאֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ לְסִיחֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, אֲשֶׁר יוֹשֵׁב בְּחֶשְׁבּוֹן.	34 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Fear him not; for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.'
21.35 לה  וַיַּכּוּ אֹתוֹ וְאֶת-בָּנָיו וְאֶת-כָּל-עַמּוֹ, עַד-בִּלְתִּי הִשְׁאִיר-לוֹ שָׂרִיד; וַיִּירְשׁוּ, אֶת-אַרְצוֹ.	35 So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there was none left him remaining; and they possessed his land.
22.1 א  וַיִּסְעוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּעַרְבוֹת מוֹאָב, מֵעֵבֶר לְיַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ.  {ס}	1 And the children of Israel journeyed, and pitched in the plains of Moab beyond the Jordan at Jericho. {S}
22.2 ב  וַיַּרְא בָּלָק, בֶּן-צִפּוֹר, אֵת כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה יִשְׂרָאֵל, לָאֱמֹרִי.	2 And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
22.3 ג  וַיָּגָר מוֹאָב מִפְּנֵי הָעָם, מְאֹד--כִּי רַב-הוּא; וַיָּקָץ מוֹאָב, מִפְּנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many; and Moab was overcome with dread because of the children of Israel.
22.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר מוֹאָב אֶל-זִקְנֵי מִדְיָן, עַתָּה יְלַחֲכוּ הַקָּהָל אֶת-כָּל-סְבִיבֹתֵינוּ, כִּלְחֹךְ הַשּׁוֹר, אֵת יֶרֶק הַשָּׂדֶה; וּבָלָק בֶּן-צִפּוֹר מֶלֶךְ לְמוֹאָב, בָּעֵת הַהִוא.	4 And Moab said unto the elders of Midian: 'Now will this multitude lick up all that is round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field.'--And Balak the son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time.--
22.5 ה  וַיִּשְׁלַח מַלְאָכִים אֶל-בִּלְעָם בֶּן-בְּעֹר, פְּתוֹרָה אֲשֶׁר עַל-הַנָּהָר אֶרֶץ בְּנֵי-עַמּוֹ--לִקְרֹא-לוֹ:  לֵאמֹר, הִנֵּה עַם יָצָא מִמִּצְרַיִם הִנֵּה כִסָּה אֶת-עֵין הָאָרֶץ, וְהוּא יֹשֵׁב, מִמֻּלִי.	5 And he sent messengers unto Balaam the son of Beor, to Pethor, which is by the River, to the land of the children of his people, to call him, saying: 'Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt; behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me.
22.6 ו  וְעַתָּה לְכָה-נָּא אָרָה-לִּי אֶת-הָעָם הַזֶּה, כִּי-עָצוּם הוּא מִמֶּנִּי--אוּלַי אוּכַל נַכֶּה-בּוֹ, וַאֲגָרְשֶׁנּוּ מִן-הָאָרֶץ:  כִּי יָדַעְתִּי, אֵת אֲשֶׁר-תְּבָרֵךְ מְבֹרָךְ, וַאֲשֶׁר תָּאֹר, יוּאָר.	6 Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me; peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land; for I know that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.'
22.7 ז  וַיֵּלְכוּ זִקְנֵי מוֹאָב, וְזִקְנֵי מִדְיָן, וּקְסָמִים, בְּיָדָם; וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-בִּלְעָם, וַיְדַבְּרוּ אֵלָיו, דִּבְרֵי בָלָק.	7 And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and spoke unto him the words of Balak.
22.8 ח  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, לִינוּ פֹה הַלַּיְלָה, וַהֲשִׁבֹתִי אֶתְכֶם דָּבָר, כַּאֲשֶׁר יְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֵלָי; וַיֵּשְׁבוּ שָׂרֵי-מוֹאָב, עִם-בִּלְעָם.	8 And he said unto them: 'Lodge here this night, and I will bring you back word, as the LORD may speak unto me'; and the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.
22.9 ט  וַיָּבֹא אֱלֹהִים, אֶל-בִּלְעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר, מִי הָאֲנָשִׁים הָאֵלֶּה עִמָּךְ.	9 And God came unto Balaam, and said: 'What men are these with thee?'
22.10 י  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם, אֶל-הָאֱלֹהִים:  בָּלָק בֶּן-צִפֹּר מֶלֶךְ מוֹאָב, שָׁלַח אֵלָי.	10 And Balaam said unto God: 'Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me [saying]:
22.11 יא  הִנֵּה הָעָם הַיֹּצֵא מִמִּצְרַיִם, וַיְכַס אֶת-עֵין הָאָרֶץ; עַתָּה, לְכָה קָבָה-לִּי אֹתוֹ--אוּלַי אוּכַל לְהִלָּחֶם בּוֹ, וְגֵרַשְׁתִּיו.	11 Behold the people that is come out of Egypt, it covereth the face of the earth; now, come curse me them; peradventure I shall be able to fight against them, and shall drive them out.'
22.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים אֶל-בִּלְעָם, לֹא תֵלֵךְ עִמָּהֶם; לֹא תָאֹר אֶת-הָעָם, כִּי בָרוּךְ הוּא.	12 And God said unto Balaam: 'Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people; for they are blessed.'
22.13 יג  וַיָּקָם בִּלְעָם, בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-שָׂרֵי בָלָק, לְכוּ אֶל-אַרְצְכֶם:  כִּי מֵאֵן יְהוָה, לְתִתִּי לַהֲלֹךְ עִמָּכֶם.	13 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of Balak: 'Get you into your land; for the LORD refuseth to give me leave to go with you.'
22.14 יד  וַיָּקוּמוּ שָׂרֵי מוֹאָב, וַיָּבֹאוּ אֶל-בָּלָק; וַיֹּאמְרוּ, מֵאֵן בִּלְעָם הֲלֹךְ עִמָּנוּ.	14 And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said: 'Balaam refuseth to come with us.'
22.15 טו  וַיֹּסֶף עוֹד, בָּלָק, שְׁלֹחַ שָׂרִים, רַבִּים וְנִכְבָּדִים מֵאֵלֶּה.	15 And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than they.
22.16 טז  וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֶל-בִּלְעָם; וַיֹּאמְרוּ לוֹ, כֹּה אָמַר בָּלָק בֶּן-צִפּוֹר, אַל-נָא תִמָּנַע, מֵהֲלֹךְ אֵלָי.	16 And they came to Balaam, and said to him: 'Thus saith Balak the son of Zippor: Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto me;
22.17 יז  כִּי-כַבֵּד אֲכַבֶּדְךָ מְאֹד, וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-תֹּאמַר אֵלַי אֶעֱשֶׂה; וּלְכָה-נָּא, קָבָה-לִּי, אֵת, הָעָם הַזֶּה.	17 for I will promote thee unto very great honour, and whatsoever thou sayest unto me I will do; come therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people.'
22.18 יח  וַיַּעַן בִּלְעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-עַבְדֵי בָלָק, אִם-יִתֶּן-לִי בָלָק מְלֹא בֵיתוֹ, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב--לֹא אוּכַל, לַעֲבֹר אֶת-פִּי יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי, לַעֲשׂוֹת קְטַנָּה, אוֹ גְדוֹלָה.	18 And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak: 'If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the LORD my God, to do any thing, small or great.
22.19 יט  וְעַתָּה, שְׁבוּ נָא בָזֶה גַּם-אַתֶּם--הַלָּיְלָה; וְאֵדְעָה, מַה-יֹּסֵף יְהוָה דַּבֵּר עִמִּי.	19 Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what the LORD will speak unto me more.'
22.20 כ  וַיָּבֹא אֱלֹהִים אֶל-בִּלְעָם, לַיְלָה, וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ אִם-לִקְרֹא לְךָ בָּאוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים, קוּם לֵךְ אִתָּם; וְאַךְ, אֶת-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-אֲדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ--אֹתוֹ תַעֲשֶׂה.	20 And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him: 'If the men are come to call thee, rise up, go with them; but only the word which I speak unto thee, that shalt thou do.'
22.21 כא  וַיָּקָם בִּלְעָם בַּבֹּקֶר, וַיַּחֲבֹשׁ אֶת-אֲתֹנוֹ; וַיֵּלֶךְ, עִם-שָׂרֵי מוֹאָב.	21 And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.
22.22 כב  וַיִּחַר-אַף אֱלֹהִים, כִּי-הוֹלֵךְ הוּא, וַיִּתְיַצֵּב מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה בַּדֶּרֶךְ, לְשָׂטָן לוֹ; וְהוּא רֹכֵב עַל-אֲתֹנוֹ, וּשְׁנֵי נְעָרָיו עִמּוֹ.	22 And God's anger was kindled because he went; and the angel of the LORD placed himself in the way for an adversary against him.--Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.--
22.23 כג  וַתֵּרֶא הָאָתוֹן אֶת-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה נִצָּב בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וְחַרְבּוֹ שְׁלוּפָה בְּיָדוֹ, וַתֵּט הָאָתוֹן מִן-הַדֶּרֶךְ, וַתֵּלֶךְ בַּשָּׂדֶה; וַיַּךְ בִּלְעָם אֶת-הָאָתוֹן, לְהַטֹּתָהּ הַדָּרֶךְ.	23 And the ass saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand; and the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field; and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into the way.
22.24 כד  וַיַּעֲמֹד מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, בְּמִשְׁעוֹל הַכְּרָמִים--גָּדֵר מִזֶּה, וְגָדֵר מִזֶּה.	24 Then the angel of the LORD stood in a hollow way between the vineyards, a fence being on this side, and a fence on that side.
22.25 כה  וַתֵּרֶא הָאָתוֹן אֶת-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, וַתִּלָּחֵץ אֶל-הַקִּיר, וַתִּלְחַץ אֶת-רֶגֶל בִּלְעָם, אֶל-הַקִּיר; וַיֹּסֶף, לְהַכֹּתָהּ.	25 And the ass saw the angel of the LORD, and she thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the wall; and he smote her again.
22.26 כו  וַיּוֹסֶף מַלְאַךְ-יְהוָה, עֲבוֹר; וַיַּעֲמֹד בְּמָקוֹם צָר, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-דֶּרֶךְ לִנְטוֹת יָמִין וּשְׂמֹאול.	26 And the angel of the LORD went further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.
22.27 כז  וַתֵּרֶא הָאָתוֹן אֶת-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, וַתִּרְבַּץ תַּחַת בִּלְעָם; וַיִּחַר-אַף בִּלְעָם, וַיַּךְ אֶת-הָאָתוֹן בַּמַּקֵּל.	27 And the ass saw the angel of the LORD, and she lay down under Balaam; and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with his staff.
22.28 כח  וַיִּפְתַּח יְהוָה, אֶת-פִּי הָאָתוֹן; וַתֹּאמֶר לְבִלְעָם, מֶה-עָשִׂיתִי לְךָ, כִּי הִכִּיתַנִי, זֶה שָׁלֹשׁ רְגָלִים.	28 And the LORD opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balaam: 'What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?'
22.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם לָאָתוֹן, כִּי הִתְעַלַּלְתְּ בִּי; לוּ יֶשׁ-חֶרֶב בְּיָדִי, כִּי עַתָּה הֲרַגְתִּיךְ.	29 And Balaam said unto the ass: 'Because thou hast mocked me; I would there were a sword in my hand, for now I had killed thee.'
22.30 ל  וַתֹּאמֶר הָאָתוֹן אֶל-בִּלְעָם, הֲלוֹא אָנֹכִי אֲתֹנְךָ אֲשֶׁר-רָכַבְתָּ עָלַי מֵעוֹדְךָ עַד-הַיּוֹם הַזֶּה--הַהַסְכֵּן הִסְכַּנְתִּי, לַעֲשׂוֹת לְךָ כֹּה; וַיֹּאמֶר, לֹא.	30 And the ass said unto Balaam: 'Am not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden all thy life long unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee?' And he said: 'Nay.'
22.31 לא  וַיְגַל יְהוָה, אֶת-עֵינֵי בִלְעָם, וַיַּרְא אֶת-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה נִצָּב בַּדֶּרֶךְ, וְחַרְבּוֹ שְׁלֻפָה בְּיָדוֹ; וַיִּקֹּד וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ, לְאַפָּיו.	31 Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand; and he bowed his head, and fell on his face.
22.32 לב  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, עַל-מָה הִכִּיתָ אֶת-אֲתֹנְךָ, זֶה שָׁלוֹשׁ רְגָלִים; הִנֵּה אָנֹכִי יָצָאתִי לְשָׂטָן, כִּי-יָרַט הַדֶּרֶךְ לְנֶגְדִּי.	32 And the angel of the LORD said unto him: 'Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I am come forth for an adversary, because thy way is contrary unto me;
22.33 לג  וַתִּרְאַנִי, הָאָתוֹן, וַתֵּט לְפָנַי, זֶה שָׁלֹשׁ רְגָלִים; אוּלַי נָטְתָה מִפָּנַי, כִּי עַתָּה גַּם-אֹתְכָה הָרַגְתִּי וְאוֹתָהּ הֶחֱיֵיתִי.	33 and the ass saw me, and turned aside before me these three times; unless she had turned aside from me, surely now I had even slain thee, and saved her alive.'
22.34 לד  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם אֶל-מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, חָטָאתִי--כִּי לֹא יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי אַתָּה נִצָּב לִקְרָאתִי בַּדָּרֶךְ; וְעַתָּה אִם-רַע בְּעֵינֶיךָ, אָשׁוּבָה לִּי.	34 And Balaam said unto the angel of the LORD: 'I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me; now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get me back.'
22.35 לה  וַיֹּאמֶר מַלְאַךְ יְהוָה אֶל-בִּלְעָם, לֵךְ עִם-הָאֲנָשִׁים, וְאֶפֶס אֶת-הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-אֲדַבֵּר אֵלֶיךָ, אֹתוֹ תְדַבֵּר; וַיֵּלֶךְ בִּלְעָם, עִם-שָׂרֵי בָלָק.	35 And the angel of the LORD said unto Balaam: 'Go with the men; but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak.' So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.
22.36 לו  וַיִּשְׁמַע בָּלָק, כִּי בָא בִלְעָם; וַיֵּצֵא לִקְרָאתוֹ אֶל-עִיר מוֹאָב, אֲשֶׁר עַל-גְּבוּל אַרְנֹן, אֲשֶׁר, בִּקְצֵה הַגְּבוּל.	36 And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him unto Ir-moab, which is on the border of Arnon, which is in the utmost part of the border.
22.37 לז  וַיֹּאמֶר בָּלָק אֶל-בִּלְעָם, הֲלֹא שָׁלֹחַ שָׁלַחְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ לִקְרֹא-לָךְ--לָמָּה לֹא-הָלַכְתָּ, אֵלָי; הַאֻמְנָם, לֹא אוּכַל כַּבְּדֶךָ.	37 And Balak said unto Balaam: 'Did I not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed to promote thee to honour?'
22.38 לח  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם אֶל-בָּלָק, הִנֵּה-בָאתִי אֵלֶיךָ--עַתָּה, הֲיָכֹל אוּכַל דַּבֵּר מְאוּמָה:  הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר יָשִׂים אֱלֹהִים בְּפִי--אֹתוֹ אֲדַבֵּר.	38 And Balaam said unto Balak: 'Lo, I am come unto thee; have I now any power at all to speak any thing? the word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.'
22.39 לט  וַיֵּלֶךְ בִּלְעָם, עִם-בָּלָק; וַיָּבֹאוּ, קִרְיַת חֻצוֹת.	39 And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kiriath-huzoth.
22.40 מ  וַיִּזְבַּח בָּלָק, בָּקָר וָצֹאן; וַיְשַׁלַּח לְבִלְעָם, וְלַשָּׂרִים אֲשֶׁר אִתּוֹ.	40 And Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the princes that were with him.
22.41 מא  וַיְהִי בַבֹּקֶר--וַיִּקַּח בָּלָק אֶת-בִּלְעָם, וַיַּעֲלֵהוּ בָּמוֹת בָּעַל; וַיַּרְא מִשָּׁם, קְצֵה הָעָם.	41 And it came to pass in the morning that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into Bamoth-baal, and he saw from thence the utmost part of the people.
23.1 א  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם אֶל-בָּלָק, בְּנֵה-לִי בָזֶה שִׁבְעָה מִזְבְּחֹת; וְהָכֵן לִי בָּזֶה, שִׁבְעָה פָרִים וְשִׁבְעָה אֵילִים.	1 And Balaam said unto Balak: 'Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.'
23.2 ב  וַיַּעַשׂ בָּלָק, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר בִּלְעָם; וַיַּעַל בָּלָק וּבִלְעָם פָּר וָאַיִל, בַּמִּזְבֵּחַ.	2 And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered on every altar a bullock and a ram.
23.3 ג  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם לְבָלָק, הִתְיַצֵּב עַל-עֹלָתֶךָ, וְאֵלְכָה אוּלַי יִקָּרֵה יְהוָה לִקְרָאתִי, וּדְבַר מַה-יַּרְאֵנִי וְהִגַּדְתִּי לָךְ; וַיֵּלֶךְ, שֶׁפִי.	3 And Balaam said unto Balak: 'Stand by thy burnt-offering, and I will go; peradventure the LORD will come to meet me; and whatsoever He showeth me I will tell thee.' And he went to a bare height.
23.4 ד  וַיִּקָּר אֱלֹהִים, אֶל-בִּלְעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו, אֶת-שִׁבְעַת הַמִּזְבְּחֹת עָרַכְתִּי, וָאַעַל פָּר וָאַיִל, בַּמִּזְבֵּחַ.	4 And God met Balaam; and he said unto Him: 'I have prepared the seven altars, and I have offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.'
23.5 ה  וַיָּשֶׂם יְהוָה דָּבָר, בְּפִי בִלְעָם; וַיֹּאמֶר שׁוּב אֶל-בָּלָק, וְכֹה תְדַבֵּר.	5 And the LORD put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said: 'Return unto Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.'
23.6 ו  וַיָּשָׁב אֵלָיו, וְהִנֵּה נִצָּב עַל-עֹלָתוֹ--הוּא, וְכָל-שָׂרֵי מוֹאָב.	6 And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt-offering, he, and all the princes of Moab.
23.7 ז  וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  מִן-אֲרָם יַנְחֵנִי בָלָק מֶלֶךְ-מוֹאָב, מֵהַרְרֵי-קֶדֶם--לְכָה אָרָה-לִּי יַעֲקֹב, וּלְכָה זֹעֲמָה יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 And he took up his parable, and said: From Aram Balak bringeth me, the king of Moab from the mountains of the East: 'Come, curse me Jacob, and come, execrate Israel.'
23.8 ח  מָה אֶקֹּב, לֹא קַבֹּה אֵל; וּמָה אֶזְעֹם, לֹא זָעַם יְהוָה.	8 How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? And how shall I execrate, whom the LORD hath not execrated?
23.9 ט  כִּי-מֵרֹאשׁ צֻרִים אֶרְאֶנּוּ, וּמִגְּבָעוֹת אֲשׁוּרֶנּוּ:  הֶן-עָם לְבָדָד יִשְׁכֹּן, וּבַגּוֹיִם לֹא יִתְחַשָּׁב.	9 For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, it is a people that shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.
23.10 י  מִי מָנָה עֲפַר יַעֲקֹב, וּמִסְפָּר אֶת-רֹבַע יִשְׂרָאֵל; תָּמֹת נַפְשִׁי מוֹת יְשָׁרִים, וּתְהִי אַחֲרִיתִי כָּמֹהוּ.	10 Who hath counted the dust of Jacob, or numbered the stock of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let mine end be like his!
23.11 יא  וַיֹּאמֶר בָּלָק אֶל-בִּלְעָם, מֶה עָשִׂיתָ לִי:  לָקֹב אֹיְבַי לְקַחְתִּיךָ, וְהִנֵּה בֵּרַכְתָּ בָרֵךְ.	11 And Balak said unto Balaam: 'What hast thou done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast blessed them altogether.'
23.12 יב  וַיַּעַן, וַיֹּאמַר:  הֲלֹא, אֵת אֲשֶׁר יָשִׂים יְהוָה בְּפִי--אֹתוֹ אֶשְׁמֹר, לְדַבֵּר.	12 And he answered and said: 'Must I not take heed to speak that which the LORD putteth in my mouth?'
23.13 יג  וַיֹּאמֶר אֵלָיו בָּלָק, לְךָ-נָּא אִתִּי אֶל-מָקוֹם אַחֵר אֲשֶׁר תִּרְאֶנּוּ מִשָּׁם--אֶפֶס קָצֵהוּ תִרְאֶה, וְכֻלּוֹ לֹא תִרְאֶה; וְקָבְנוֹ-לִי, מִשָּׁם.	13 And Balak said unto him: 'Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest see them; thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not see them all; and curse me them from thence.'
23.14 יד  וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ שְׂדֵה צֹפִים, אֶל-רֹאשׁ הַפִּסְגָּה; וַיִּבֶן שִׁבְעָה מִזְבְּחֹת, וַיַּעַל פָּר וָאַיִל בַּמִּזְבֵּחַ.	14 And he took him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
23.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר, אֶל-בָּלָק, הִתְיַצֵּב כֹּה, עַל-עֹלָתֶךָ; וְאָנֹכִי, אִקָּרֶה כֹּה.	15 And he said unto Balak: 'Stand here by thy burnt-offering, while I go toward a meeting yonder.'
23.16 טז  וַיִּקָּר יְהוָה אֶל-בִּלְעָם, וַיָּשֶׂם דָּבָר בְּפִיו; וַיֹּאמֶר שׁוּב אֶל-בָּלָק, וְכֹה תְדַבֵּר.	16 And the LORD met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said: 'Return unto Balak, and thus shalt thou speak.'
23.17 יז  וַיָּבֹא אֵלָיו, וְהִנּוֹ נִצָּב עַל-עֹלָתוֹ, וְשָׂרֵי מוֹאָב, אִתּוֹ; וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ בָּלָק, מַה-דִּבֶּר יְהוָה.	17 And he came to him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt-offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him: 'What hath the LORD spoken?'
23.18 יח  וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  קוּם בָּלָק וּשְׁמָע, הַאֲזִינָה עָדַי בְּנוֹ צִפֹּר.	18 And he took up his parable, and said: Arise, Balak, and hear; give ear unto me, thou son of Zippor:
23.19 יט  לֹא אִישׁ אֵל וִיכַזֵּב, וּבֶן-אָדָם וְיִתְנֶחָם; הַהוּא אָמַר וְלֹא יַעֲשֶׂה, וְדִבֶּר וְלֹא יְקִימֶנָּה.	19 God is not a man, that He should lie; neither the son of man, that He should repent: when He hath said, will He not do it? or when He hath spoken, will He not make it good?
23.20 כ  הִנֵּה בָרֵךְ, לָקָחְתִּי; וּבֵרֵךְ, וְלֹא אֲשִׁיבֶנָּה.	20 Behold, I am bidden to bless; and when He hath blessed, I cannot call it back.
23.21 כא  לֹא-הִבִּיט אָוֶן בְּיַעֲקֹב, וְלֹא-רָאָה עָמָל בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו עִמּוֹ, וּתְרוּעַת מֶלֶךְ בּוֹ.	21 None hath beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath one seen perverseness in Israel; the LORD his God is with him, and the shouting for the King is among them.
23.22 כב  אֵל, מוֹצִיאָם מִמִּצְרָיִם--כְּתוֹעֲפֹת רְאֵם, לוֹ.	22 God who brought them forth out of Egypt is for them like the lofty horns of the wild-ox.
23.23 כג  כִּי לֹא-נַחַשׁ בְּיַעֲקֹב, וְלֹא-קֶסֶם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל; כָּעֵת, יֵאָמֵר לְיַעֲקֹב וּלְיִשְׂרָאֵל, מַה-פָּעַל, אֵל.	23 For there is no enchantment with Jacob, neither is there any divination with Israel; now is it said of Jacob and of Israel: 'What hath God wrought!'
23.24 כד  הֶן-עָם כְּלָבִיא יָקוּם, וְכַאֲרִי יִתְנַשָּׂא; לֹא יִשְׁכַּב עַד-יֹאכַל טֶרֶף, וְדַם-חֲלָלִים יִשְׁתֶּה.	24 Behold a people that riseth up as a lioness, and as a lion doth he lift himself up; he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the blood of the slain.
23.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר בָּלָק אֶל-בִּלְעָם, גַּם-קֹב לֹא תִקֳּבֶנּוּ; גַּם-בָּרֵךְ, לֹא תְבָרְכֶנּוּ.	25 And Balak said unto Balaam: 'Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.'
23.26 כו  וַיַּעַן בִּלְעָם, וַיֹּאמֶר אֶל-בָּלָק:  הֲלֹא, דִּבַּרְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ לֵאמֹר, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-יְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֹתוֹ אֶעֱשֶׂה.	26 But Balaam answered and said unto Balak: 'Told not I thee, saying: All that the LORD speaketh, that I must do?'
23.27 כז  וַיֹּאמֶר בָּלָק, אֶל-בִּלְעָם, לְכָה-נָּא אֶקָּחֲךָ, אֶל-מָקוֹם אַחֵר; אוּלַי יִישַׁר בְּעֵינֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, וְקַבֹּתוֹ לִי מִשָּׁם.	27 And Balak said unto Balaam: 'Come now, I will take thee unto another place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them from thence.'
23.28 כח  וַיִּקַּח בָּלָק, אֶת-בִּלְעָם, רֹאשׁ הַפְּעוֹר, הַנִּשְׁקָף עַל-פְּנֵי הַיְשִׁימֹן.	28 And Balak took Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh down upon the desert.
23.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם אֶל-בָּלָק, בְּנֵה-לִי בָזֶה שִׁבְעָה מִזְבְּחֹת; וְהָכֵן לִי בָּזֶה, שִׁבְעָה פָרִים וְשִׁבְעָה אֵילִם.	29 And Balaam said unto Balak: 'Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.'
23.30 ל  וַיַּעַשׂ בָּלָק, כַּאֲשֶׁר אָמַר בִּלְעָם; וַיַּעַל פָּר וָאַיִל, בַּמִּזְבֵּחַ.	30 And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
24.1 א  וַיַּרְא בִּלְעָם, כִּי טוֹב בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה לְבָרֵךְ אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלֹא-הָלַךְ כְּפַעַם-בְּפַעַם, לִקְרַאת נְחָשִׁים; וַיָּשֶׁת אֶל-הַמִּדְבָּר, פָּנָיו.	1 And when Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, he went not, as at the other times, to meet with enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.
24.2 ב  וַיִּשָּׂא בִלְעָם אֶת-עֵינָיו, וַיַּרְא אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל, שֹׁכֵן, לִשְׁבָטָיו; וַתְּהִי עָלָיו, רוּחַ אֱלֹהִים.	2 And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel dwelling tribe by tribe; and the spirit of God came upon him.
24.3 ג  וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  נְאֻם בִּלְעָם בְּנוֹ בְעֹר, וּנְאֻם הַגֶּבֶר שְׁתֻם הָעָיִן.	3 And he took up his parable, and said: The saying of Balaam the son of Beor, and the saying of the man whose eye is opened;
24.4 ד  נְאֻם--שֹׁמֵעַ, אִמְרֵי-אֵל:  אֲשֶׁר מַחֲזֵה שַׁדַּי יֶחֱזֶה, נֹפֵל וּגְלוּי עֵינָיִם.	4 The saying of him who heareth the words of God, who seeth the vision of the Almighty, fallen down, yet with opened eyes:
24.5 ה  מַה-טֹּבוּ אֹהָלֶיךָ, יַעֲקֹב; מִשְׁכְּנֹתֶיךָ, יִשְׂרָאֵל.	5 How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, thy dwellings, O Israel!
24.6 ו  כִּנְחָלִים נִטָּיוּ, כְּגַנֹּת עֲלֵי נָהָר; כַּאֲהָלִים נָטַע יְהוָה, כַּאֲרָזִים עֲלֵי-מָיִם.	6 As valleys stretched out, as gardens by the river-side; as aloes planted of the LORD, as cedars beside the waters;
24.7 ז  יִזַּל-מַיִם מִדָּלְיָו, וְזַרְעוֹ בְּמַיִם רַבִּים; וְיָרֹם מֵאֲגַג מַלְכּוֹ, וְתִנַּשֵּׂא מַלְכֻתוֹ.	7 Water shall flow from his branches, and his seed shall be in many waters; and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
24.8 ח  אֵל מוֹצִיאוֹ מִמִּצְרַיִם, כְּתוֹעֲפֹת רְאֵם לוֹ; יֹאכַל גּוֹיִם צָרָיו, וְעַצְמֹתֵיהֶם יְגָרֵם--וְחִצָּיו יִמְחָץ.	8 God who brought him forth out of Egypt is for him like the lofty horns of the wild-ox; he shall eat up the nations that are his adversaries, and shall break their bones in pieces, and pierce them through with his arrows.
24.9 ט  כָּרַע שָׁכַב כַּאֲרִי וּכְלָבִיא, מִי יְקִימֶנּוּ; מְבָרְכֶיךָ בָרוּךְ, וְאֹרְרֶיךָ אָרוּר.	9 He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a lioness; who shall rouse him up? Blessed be every one that blesseth thee, and cursed be every one that curseth thee.
24.10 י  וַיִּחַר-אַף בָּלָק אֶל-בִּלְעָם, וַיִּסְפֹּק אֶת-כַּפָּיו; וַיֹּאמֶר בָּלָק אֶל-בִּלְעָם, לָקֹב אֹיְבַי קְרָאתִיךָ, וְהִנֵּה בֵּרַכְתָּ בָרֵךְ, זֶה שָׁלֹשׁ פְּעָמִים.	10 And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together; and Balak said unto Balaam: 'I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times.
24.11 יא  וְעַתָּה, בְּרַח-לְךָ אֶל-מְקוֹמֶךָ; אָמַרְתִּי כַּבֵּד אֲכַבֶּדְךָ, וְהִנֵּה מְנָעֲךָ יְהוָה מִכָּבוֹד.	11 Therefore now flee thou to thy place; I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but, lo, the LORD hath kept thee back from honour.'
24.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר בִּלְעָם, אֶל-בָּלָק:  הֲלֹא, גַּם אֶל-מַלְאָכֶיךָ אֲשֶׁר-שָׁלַחְתָּ אֵלַי--דִּבַּרְתִּי לֵאמֹר.	12 And Balaam said unto Balak: 'Spoke I not also to thy messengers that thou didst send unto me, saying:
24.13 יג  אִם-יִתֶּן-לִי בָלָק מְלֹא בֵיתוֹ, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב--לֹא אוּכַל לַעֲבֹר אֶת-פִּי יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת טוֹבָה אוֹ רָעָה מִלִּבִּי:  אֲשֶׁר-יְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֹתוֹ אֲדַבֵּר.	13 If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the LORD, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; what the LORD speaketh, that will I speak?
24.14 יד  וְעַתָּה, הִנְנִי הוֹלֵךְ לְעַמִּי; לְכָה, אִיעָצְךָ, אֲשֶׁר יַעֲשֶׂה הָעָם הַזֶּה לְעַמְּךָ, בְּאַחֲרִית הַיָּמִים.	14 And now, behold, I go unto my people; come, and I will announce to thee what this people shall do to thy people in the end of days.'
24.15 טו  וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  נְאֻם בִּלְעָם בְּנוֹ בְעֹר, וּנְאֻם הַגֶּבֶר שְׁתֻם הָעָיִן.	15 And he took up his parable, and said: The saying of Balaam the son of Beor, and the saying of the man whose eye is opened;
24.16 טז  נְאֻם, שֹׁמֵעַ אִמְרֵי-אֵל, וְיֹדֵעַ, דַּעַת עֶלְיוֹן; מַחֲזֵה שַׁדַּי יֶחֱזֶה, נֹפֵל וּגְלוּי עֵינָיִם.	16 The saying of him who heareth the words of God, and knoweth the knowledge of the Most High, who seeth the vision of the Almighty, fallen down, yet with opened eyes:
24.17 יז  אֶרְאֶנּוּ וְלֹא עַתָּה, אֲשׁוּרֶנּוּ וְלֹא קָרוֹב; דָּרַךְ כּוֹכָב מִיַּעֲקֹב, וְקָם שֵׁבֶט מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל, וּמָחַץ פַּאֲתֵי מוֹאָב, וְקַרְקַר כָּל-בְּנֵי-שֵׁת.	17 I see him, but not now; I behold him, but not nigh; there shall step forth a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite through the corners of Moab, and break down all the sons of Seth.
24.18 יח  וְהָיָה אֱדוֹם יְרֵשָׁה, וְהָיָה יְרֵשָׁה שֵׂעִיר--אֹיְבָיו; וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, עֹשֶׂה חָיִל.	18 And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also, even his enemies, shall be a possession; while Israel doeth valiantly.
24.19 יט  וְיֵרְדְּ, מִיַּעֲקֹב; וְהֶאֱבִיד שָׂרִיד, מֵעִיר.	19 And out of Jacob shall one have dominion, and shall destroy the remnant from the city.
24.20 כ  וַיַּרְא, אֶת-עֲמָלֵק, וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  רֵאשִׁית גּוֹיִם עֲמָלֵק, וְאַחֲרִיתוֹ עֲדֵי אֹבֵד.	20 And he looked on Amalek, and took up his parable, and said: Amalek was the first of the nations; but his end shall come to destruction.
24.21 כא  וַיַּרְא, אֶת-הַקֵּינִי, וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  אֵיתָן, מוֹשָׁבֶךָ, וְשִׂים בַּסֶּלַע, קִנֶּךָ.	21 And he looked on the Kenite, and took up his parable, and said: Though firm be thy dwelling-place, and though thy nest be set in the rock;
24.22 כב  כִּי אִם-יִהְיֶה, לְבָעֵר קָיִן--עַד-מָה, אַשּׁוּר תִּשְׁבֶּךָּ.	22 Nevertheless Kain shall be wasted; How long? Asshur shall carry thee away captive.
24.23 כג  וַיִּשָּׂא מְשָׁלוֹ, וַיֹּאמַר:  אוֹי, מִי יִחְיֶה מִשֻּׂמוֹ אֵל.	23 And he took up his parable, and said: Alas, who shall live after God hath appointed him?
24.24 כד  וְצִים מִיַּד כִּתִּים, וְעִנּוּ אַשּׁוּר וְעִנּוּ-עֵבֶר; וְגַם-הוּא, עֲדֵי אֹבֵד.	24 But ships shall come from the coast of Kittim, and they shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall come to destruction.
24.25 כה  וַיָּקָם בִּלְעָם, וַיֵּלֶךְ וַיָּשָׁב לִמְקֹמוֹ; וְגַם-בָּלָק, הָלַךְ לְדַרְכּוֹ.  {פ}	25 And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place; and Balak also went his way. {P}
25.1 א  וַיֵּשֶׁב יִשְׂרָאֵל, בַּשִּׁטִּים; וַיָּחֶל הָעָם, לִזְנוֹת אֶל-בְּנוֹת מוֹאָב.	1 And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit harlotry with the daughters of Moab.
25.2 ב  וַתִּקְרֶאןָ לָעָם, לְזִבְחֵי אֱלֹהֵיהֶן; וַיֹּאכַל הָעָם, וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ לֵאלֹהֵיהֶן.	2 And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods; and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.
25.3 ג  וַיִּצָּמֶד יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְבַעַל פְּעוֹר; וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	3 And Israel joined himself unto the Baal of Peor; and the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel.
25.4 ד  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, קַח אֶת-כָּל-רָאשֵׁי הָעָם, וְהוֹקַע אוֹתָם לַיהוָה, נֶגֶד הַשָּׁמֶשׁ; וְיָשֹׁב חֲרוֹן אַף-יְהוָה, מִיִּשְׂרָאֵל.	4 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Take all the chiefs of the people, and hang them up unto the LORD in face of the sun, that the fierce anger of the LORD may turn away from Israel.'
25.5 ה  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-שֹׁפְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  הִרְגוּ אִישׁ אֲנָשָׁיו, הַנִּצְמָדִים לְבַעַל פְּעוֹר.	5 And Moses said unto the judges of Israel: 'Slay ye every one his men that have joined themselves unto the Baal of Peor.'
25.6 ו  וְהִנֵּה אִישׁ מִבְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל בָּא, וַיַּקְרֵב אֶל-אֶחָיו אֶת-הַמִּדְיָנִית, לְעֵינֵי מֹשֶׁה, וּלְעֵינֵי כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל; וְהֵמָּה בֹכִים, פֶּתַח אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד.	6 And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, while they were weeping at the door of the tent of meeting.
25.7 ז  וַיַּרְא, פִּינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר, בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן, הַכֹּהֵן; וַיָּקָם מִתּוֹךְ הָעֵדָה, וַיִּקַּח רֹמַח בְּיָדוֹ.	7 And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from the midst of the congregation, and took a spear in his hand.
25.8 ח  וַיָּבֹא אַחַר אִישׁ-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶל-הַקֻּבָּה, וַיִּדְקֹר אֶת-שְׁנֵיהֶם--אֵת אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאֶת-הָאִשָּׁה אֶל-קֳבָתָהּ; וַתֵּעָצַר, הַמַּגֵּפָה, מֵעַל, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	8 And he went after the man of Israel into the chamber, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.
25.9 ט  וַיִּהְיוּ, הַמֵּתִים בַּמַּגֵּפָה--אַרְבָּעָה וְעֶשְׂרִים, אָלֶף.  {פ}	9 And those that died by the plague were twenty and four thousand. {P}
25.10 י  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	10 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
25.11 יא  פִּינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן, הֵשִׁיב אֶת-חֲמָתִי מֵעַל בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּקַנְאוֹ אֶת-קִנְאָתִי, בְּתוֹכָם; וְלֹא-כִלִּיתִי אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּקִנְאָתִי.	11 'Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned My wrath away from the children of Israel, in that he was very jealous for My sake among them, so that I consumed not the children of Israel in My jealousy.
25.12 יב  לָכֵן, אֱמֹר:  הִנְנִי נֹתֵן לוֹ אֶת-בְּרִיתִי, שָׁלוֹם.	12 Wherefore say: Behold, I give unto him My covenant of peace;
25.13 יג  וְהָיְתָה לּוֹ וּלְזַרְעוֹ אַחֲרָיו, בְּרִית כְּהֻנַּת עוֹלָם--תַּחַת, אֲשֶׁר קִנֵּא לֵאלֹהָיו, וַיְכַפֵּר, עַל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	13 and it shall be unto him, and to his seed after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was jealous for his God, and made atonement for the children of Israel.'
25.14 יד  וְשֵׁם אִישׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמֻּכֶּה, אֲשֶׁר הֻכָּה אֶת-הַמִּדְיָנִית--זִמְרִי, בֶּן-סָלוּא:  נְשִׂיא בֵית-אָב, לַשִּׁמְעֹנִי.	14 Now the name of the man of Israel that was slain, who was slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a fathers' house among the Simeonites.
25.15 טו  וְשֵׁם הָאִשָּׁה הַמֻּכָּה הַמִּדְיָנִית, כָּזְבִּי בַת-צוּר:  רֹאשׁ אֻמּוֹת בֵּית-אָב בְּמִדְיָן, הוּא.  {פ}	15 And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was head of the people of a fathers' house in Midian. {P}
25.16 טז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	16 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
25.17 יז  צָרוֹר, אֶת-הַמִּדְיָנִים; וְהִכִּיתֶם, אוֹתָם.	17 'Harass the Midianites, and smite them;
25.18 יח  כִּי צֹרְרִים הֵם לָכֶם, בְּנִכְלֵיהֶם אֲשֶׁר-נִכְּלוּ לָכֶם עַל-דְּבַר-פְּעוֹר; וְעַל-דְּבַר כָּזְבִּי בַת-נְשִׂיא מִדְיָן, אֲחֹתָם, הַמֻּכָּה בְיוֹם-הַמַּגֵּפָה, עַל-דְּבַר-פְּעוֹר.	18 for they harass you, by their wiles wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of the prince of Midian, their sister, who was slain on the day of the plague in the matter of Peor.'
26.1 א  וַיְהִי, אַחֲרֵי הַמַּגֵּפָה;  {פ}	1 וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, וְאֶל אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן-אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן לֵאמֹר.	1 And it came to pass after the plague, {P} that the LORD spoke unto Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying:
26.2 ב  שְׂאוּ אֶת-רֹאשׁ כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה--לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם:  כָּל-יֹצֵא צָבָא, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל.	2 'Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers' houses, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel.'
26.3 ג  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, אֹתָם--בְּעַרְבֹת מוֹאָב:  עַל-יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ, לֵאמֹר.	3 And Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying:
26.4 ד  מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה, וָמָעְלָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַיֹּצְאִים מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם.	4 '[Take the sum of the people,] from twenty years old and upward, as the LORD commanded Moses and the children of Israel, that came forth out of the land of Egypt.'
26.5 ה  רְאוּבֵן, בְּכוֹר יִשְׂרָאֵל; בְּנֵי רְאוּבֵן, חֲנוֹךְ מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֲנֹכִי, לְפַלּוּא, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַפַּלֻּאִי.	5 Reuben, the first-born of Israel: the sons of Reuben: of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the family of the Palluites;
26.6 ו  לְחֶצְרֹן, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶצְרוֹנִי; לְכַרְמִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַכַּרְמִי.	6 of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
26.7 ז  אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחֹת הָראוּבֵנִי; וַיִּהְיוּ פְקֻדֵיהֶם, שְׁלֹשָׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים.	7 These are the families of the Reubenites; and they that were numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
26.8 ח  וּבְנֵי פַלּוּא, אֱלִיאָב.	8 And the sons of Pallu: Eliab.
26.9 ט  וּבְנֵי אֱלִיאָב, נְמוּאֵל וְדָתָן וַאֲבִירָם:  הוּא-דָתָן וַאֲבִירָם קרואי (קְרִיאֵי) הָעֵדָה, אֲשֶׁר הִצּוּ עַל-מֹשֶׁה וְעַל-אַהֲרֹן בַּעֲדַת-קֹרַח, בְּהַצֹּתָם, עַל-יְהוָה.	9 And the sons of Eliab: Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. These are that Dathan and Abiram, the elect of the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they strove against the LORD;
26.10 י  וַתִּפְתַּח הָאָרֶץ אֶת-פִּיהָ, וַתִּבְלַע אֹתָם וְאֶת-קֹרַח--בְּמוֹת הָעֵדָה:  בַּאֲכֹל הָאֵשׁ, אֵת חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתַיִם אִישׁ, וַיִּהְיוּ, לְנֵס.	10 and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died; what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they became a sign.
26.11 יא  וּבְנֵי-קֹרַח, לֹא-מֵתוּ.  {ס}	11 Notwithstanding the sons of Korah died not. {S}
26.12 יב  בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לִנְמוּאֵל מִשְׁפַּחַת הַנְּמוּאֵלִי, לְיָמִין מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיָּמִינִי; לְיָכִין, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיָּכִינִי.	12 The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites;
26.13 יג  לְזֶרַח, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַזַּרְחִי; לְשָׁאוּל, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשָּׁאוּלִי.	13 of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
26.14 יד  אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַשִּׁמְעֹנִי--שְׁנַיִם וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף, וּמָאתָיִם.  {ס}	14 These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred. {S}
26.15 טו  בְּנֵי גָד, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לִצְפוֹן מִשְׁפַּחַת הַצְּפוֹנִי, לְחַגִּי מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחַגִּי; לְשׁוּנִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשּׁוּנִי.	15 The sons of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites;
26.16 טז  לְאָזְנִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הָאָזְנִי; לְעֵרִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הָעֵרִי.	16 of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of Eri, the family of the Erites;
26.17 יז  לַאֲרוֹד, מִשְׁפַּחַת הָאֲרוֹדִי; לְאַרְאֵלִי--מִשְׁפַּחַת, הָאַרְאֵלִי.	17 of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
26.18 יח  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי-גָד, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם--אַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	18 These are the families of the sons of Gad according to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred. {S}
26.19 יט  בְּנֵי יְהוּדָה, עֵר וְאוֹנָן; וַיָּמָת עֵר וְאוֹנָן, בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן.	19 The sons of Judah: Er and Onan; and Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
26.20 כ  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-יְהוּדָה, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְשֵׁלָה מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשֵּׁלָנִי, לְפֶרֶץ מִשְׁפַּחַת הַפַּרְצִי; לְזֶרַח, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַזַּרְחִי.	20 And the sons of Judah after their families were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.
26.21 כא  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-פֶרֶץ--לְחֶצְרֹן, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶצְרֹנִי; לְחָמוּל, מִשְׁפַּחַת הֶחָמוּלִי.	21 And the sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
26.22 כב  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת יְהוּדָה, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם--שִׁשָּׁה וְשִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	22 These are the families of Judah according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred. {S}
26.23 כג  בְּנֵי יִשָּׂשכָר, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--תּוֹלָע, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַתּוֹלָעִי; לְפֻוָה, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַפּוּנִי.	23 The sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of the Punites;
26.24 כד  לְיָשׁוּב, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיָּשֻׁבִי; לְשִׁמְרֹן, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשִּׁמְרֹנִי.	24 of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
26.25 כה  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת יִשָּׂשכָר, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם--אַרְבָּעָה וְשִׁשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וּשְׁלֹשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	25 These are the families of Issachar according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred. {S}
26.26 כו  בְּנֵי זְבוּלֻן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְסֶרֶד מִשְׁפַּחַת הַסַּרְדִּי, לְאֵלוֹן מִשְׁפַּחַת הָאֵלֹנִי; לְיַחְלְאֵל--מִשְׁפַּחַת, הַיַּחְלְאֵלִי.	26 The sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
26.27 כז  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַזְּבוּלֹנִי, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם--שִׁשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	27 These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred. {S}
26.28 כח  בְּנֵי יוֹסֵף, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--מְנַשֶּׁה, וְאֶפְרָיִם.	28 The sons of Joseph after their families: Manasseh and Ephraim.
26.29 כט  בְּנֵי מְנַשֶּׁה, לְמָכִיר מִשְׁפַּחַת הַמָּכִירִי, וּמָכִיר, הוֹלִיד אֶת-גִּלְעָד; לְגִלְעָד, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַגִּלְעָדִי.	29 The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites--and Machir begot Gilead; of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.
26.30 ל  אֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי גִלְעָד--אִיעֶזֶר, מִשְׁפַּחַת הָאִיעֶזְרִי; לְחֵלֶק, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶלְקִי.	30 These are the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the Helekites;
26.31 לא  וְאַשְׂרִיאֵל--מִשְׁפַּחַת, הָאַשְׂרִאֵלִי; וְשֶׁכֶם, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשִּׁכְמִי.	31 and of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites; and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;
26.32 לב  וּשְׁמִידָע, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשְּׁמִידָעִי; וְחֵפֶר, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶפְרִי.	32 and of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
26.33 לג  וּצְלָפְחָד בֶּן-חֵפֶר, לֹא-הָיוּ לוֹ בָּנִים--כִּי אִם-בָּנוֹת:  וְשֵׁם, בְּנוֹת צְלָפְחָד--מַחְלָה וְנֹעָה, חָגְלָה מִלְכָּה וְתִרְצָה.	33 And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters; and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
26.34 לד  אֵלֶּה, מִשְׁפְּחֹת מְנַשֶּׁה; וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם, שְׁנַיִם וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף וּשְׁבַע מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	34 These are the families of Manasseh; and they that were numbered of them were fifty and two thousand and seven hundred. {S}
26.35 לה  אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְשׁוּתֶלַח מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשֻּׁתַלְחִי, לְבֶכֶר מִשְׁפַּחַת הַבַּכְרִי; לְתַחַן, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַתַּחֲנִי.	35 These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
26.36 לו  וְאֵלֶּה, בְּנֵי שׁוּתָלַח--לְעֵרָן, מִשְׁפַּחַת הָעֵרָנִי.	36 And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
26.37 לז  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם, שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת; אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-יוֹסֵף, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.  {ס}	37 These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their families. {S}
26.38 לח  בְּנֵי בִנְיָמִן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְבֶלַע מִשְׁפַּחַת הַבַּלְעִי, לְאַשְׁבֵּל מִשְׁפַּחַת הָאַשְׁבֵּלִי; לַאֲחִירָם, מִשְׁפַּחַת הָאֲחִירָמִי.	38 The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;
26.39 לט  לִשְׁפוּפָם, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשּׁוּפָמִי; לְחוּפָם, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחוּפָמִי.	39 of Shephupham, the family of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
26.40 מ  וַיִּהְיוּ בְנֵי-בֶלַע, אַרְדְּ וְנַעֲמָן--מִשְׁפַּחַת, הָאַרְדִּי, לְנַעֲמָן, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַנַּעֲמִי.	40 And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman; [of Ard,] the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
26.41 מא  אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-בִנְיָמִן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם; וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם, חֲמִשָּׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף וְשֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	41 These are the sons of Benjamin after their families; and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred. {S}
26.42 מב  אֵלֶּה בְנֵי-דָן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְשׁוּחָם, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשּׁוּחָמִי; אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת דָּן, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם.	42 These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their families.
26.43 מג  כָּל-מִשְׁפְּחֹת הַשּׁוּחָמִי, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם--אַרְבָּעָה וְשִׁשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	43 All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred. {S}
26.44 מד  בְּנֵי אָשֵׁר, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְיִמְנָה מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיִּמְנָה, לְיִשְׁוִי מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיִּשְׁוִי; לִבְרִיעָה, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַבְּרִיעִי.	44 The sons of Asher after their families: of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
26.45 מה  לִבְנֵי בְרִיעָה--לְחֶבֶר, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶבְרִי; לְמַלְכִּיאֵל--מִשְׁפַּחַת, הַמַּלְכִּיאֵלִי.	45 Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
26.46 מו  וְשֵׁם בַּת-אָשֵׁר, שָׂרַח.	46 And the name of the daughter of Asher was Serah.
26.47 מז  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי-אָשֵׁר, לִפְקֻדֵיהֶם--שְׁלֹשָׁה וַחֲמִשִּׁים אֶלֶף, וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.  {ס}	47 These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those that were numbered of them, fifty and three thousand and four hundred. {S}
26.48 מח  בְּנֵי נַפְתָּלִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְיַחְצְאֵל, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיַּחְצְאֵלִי; לְגוּנִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַגּוּנִי.	48 The sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family of the Gunites;
26.49 מט  לְיֵצֶר, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַיִּצְרִי; לְשִׁלֵּם, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַשִּׁלֵּמִי.	49 of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
26.50 נ  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת נַפְתָּלִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם; וּפְקֻדֵיהֶם, חֲמִשָּׁה וְאַרְבָּעִים אֶלֶף וְאַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת.	50 These are the families of Naphtali according to their families; and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and four hundred.
26.51 נא  אֵלֶּה, פְּקוּדֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף, וָאָלֶף; שְׁבַע מֵאוֹת, וּשְׁלֹשִׁים.  {פ}	51 These are they that were numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand and seven hundred and thirty. {P}
26.52 נב  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	52 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
26.53 נג  לָאֵלֶּה, תֵּחָלֵק הָאָרֶץ בְּנַחֲלָה--בְּמִסְפַּר שֵׁמוֹת.	53 'Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
26.54 נד  לָרַב, תַּרְבֶּה נַחֲלָתוֹ, וְלַמְעַט, תַּמְעִיט נַחֲלָתוֹ:  אִישׁ לְפִי פְקֻדָיו, יֻתַּן נַחֲלָתוֹ.	54 To the more thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to the fewer thou shalt give the less inheritance; to each one according to those that were numbered of it shall its inheritance be given.
26.55 נה  אַךְ-בְּגוֹרָל, יֵחָלֵק אֶת-הָאָרֶץ:  לִשְׁמוֹת מַטּוֹת-אֲבֹתָם, יִנְחָלוּ.	55 Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot; according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.
26.56 נו  עַל-פִּי, הַגּוֹרָל, תֵּחָלֵק, נַחֲלָתוֹ--בֵּין רַב, לִמְעָט.  {ס}	56 According to the lot shall their inheritance be divided between the more and the fewer.' {S}
26.57 נז  וְאֵלֶּה פְקוּדֵי הַלֵּוִי, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתָם--לְגֵרְשׁוֹן מִשְׁפַּחַת הַגֵּרְשֻׁנִּי, לִקְהָת מִשְׁפַּחַת הַקְּהָתִי; לִמְרָרִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַמְּרָרִי.	57 And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
26.58 נח  אֵלֶּה מִשְׁפְּחֹת לֵוִי, מִשְׁפַּחַת הַלִּבְנִי מִשְׁפַּחַת הַחֶבְרֹנִי מִשְׁפַּחַת הַמַּחְלִי מִשְׁפַּחַת הַמּוּשִׁי, מִשְׁפַּחַת, הַקָּרְחִי; וּקְהָת, הוֹלִד אֶת-עַמְרָם.	58 These are the families of Levi: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. And Kohath begot Amram.
26.59 נט  וְשֵׁם אֵשֶׁת עַמְרָם, יוֹכֶבֶד בַּת-לֵוִי, אֲשֶׁר יָלְדָה אֹתָהּ לְלֵוִי, בְּמִצְרָיִם; וַתֵּלֶד לְעַמְרָם, אֶת-אַהֲרֹן וְאֶת-מֹשֶׁה, וְאֵת, מִרְיָם אֲחֹתָם.	59 And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; and she bore unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
26.60 ס  וַיִּוָּלֵד לְאַהֲרֹן, אֶת-נָדָב וְאֶת-אֲבִיהוּא, אֶת-אֶלְעָזָר, וְאֶת-אִיתָמָר.	60 And unto Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
26.61 סא  וַיָּמָת נָדָב, וַאֲבִיהוּא, בְּהַקְרִיבָם אֵשׁ-זָרָה, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	61 And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the LORD.
26.62 סב  וַיִּהְיוּ פְקֻדֵיהֶם, שְׁלֹשָׁה וְעֶשְׂרִים אֶלֶף--כָּל-זָכָר, מִבֶּן-חֹדֶשׁ וָמָעְלָה:  כִּי לֹא הָתְפָּקְדוּ, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי לֹא-נִתַּן לָהֶם נַחֲלָה, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	62 And they that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand, every male from a month old and upward; for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.
26.63 סג  אֵלֶּה פְּקוּדֵי מֹשֶׁה, וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן--אֲשֶׁר פָּקְדוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּעַרְבֹת מוֹאָב, עַל, יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ.	63 These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
26.64 סד  וּבְאֵלֶּה, לֹא-הָיָה אִישׁ, מִפְּקוּדֵי מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן--אֲשֶׁר פָּקְדוּ אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּמִדְבַּר סִינָי.	64 But among these there was not a man of them that were numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
26.65 סה  כִּי-אָמַר יְהוָה לָהֶם, מוֹת יָמֻתוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר; וְלֹא-נוֹתַר מֵהֶם, אִישׁ--כִּי אִם-כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן.  {ס}	65 For the LORD had said of them: 'They shall surely die in the wilderness.' And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun. {S}
27.1 א  וַתִּקְרַבְנָה בְּנוֹת צְלָפְחָד, בֶּן-חֵפֶר בֶּן-גִּלְעָד בֶּן-מָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה, לְמִשְׁפְּחֹת, מְנַשֶּׁה בֶן-יוֹסֵף; וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת בְּנֹתָיו--מַחְלָה נֹעָה, וְחָגְלָה וּמִלְכָּה וְתִרְצָה.	1 Then drew near the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph; and these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.
27.2 ב  וַתַּעֲמֹדְנָה לִפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה, וְלִפְנֵי אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְלִפְנֵי הַנְּשִׂיאִם, וְכָל-הָעֵדָה--פֶּתַח אֹהֶל-מוֹעֵד, לֵאמֹר.	2 And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all the congregation, at the door of the tent of meeting, saying:
27.3 ג  אָבִינוּ, מֵת בַּמִּדְבָּר, וְהוּא לֹא-הָיָה בְּתוֹךְ הָעֵדָה הַנּוֹעָדִים עַל-יְהוָה, בַּעֲדַת-קֹרַח:  כִּי-בְחֶטְאוֹ מֵת, וּבָנִים לֹא-הָיוּ לוֹ.	3 'Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not among the company of them that gathered themselves together against the LORD in the company of Korah, but he died in his own sin; and he had no sons.
27.4 ד  לָמָּה יִגָּרַע שֵׁם-אָבִינוּ מִתּוֹךְ מִשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ, כִּי אֵין לוֹ בֵּן; תְּנָה-לָּנוּ אֲחֻזָּה, בְּתוֹךְ אֲחֵי אָבִינוּ.	4 Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he had no son? Give unto us a possession among the brethren of our father.'
27.5 ה  וַיַּקְרֵב מֹשֶׁה אֶת-מִשְׁפָּטָן, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.  {פ}	5 And Moses brought their cause before the LORD. {P}
27.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	6 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
27.7 ז  כֵּן, בְּנוֹת צְלָפְחָד דֹּבְרֹת--נָתֹן תִּתֵּן לָהֶם אֲחֻזַּת נַחֲלָה, בְּתוֹךְ אֲחֵי אֲבִיהֶם; וְהַעֲבַרְתָּ אֶת-נַחֲלַת אֲבִיהֶן, לָהֶן.	7 'The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass unto them.
27.8 ח  וְאֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, תְּדַבֵּר לֵאמֹר:  אִישׁ כִּי-יָמוּת, וּבֵן אֵין לוֹ--וְהַעֲבַרְתֶּם אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ, לְבִתּוֹ.	8 And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying: If a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.
27.9 ט  וְאִם-אֵין לוֹ, בַּת--וּנְתַתֶּם אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ, לְאֶחָיו.	9 And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.
27.10 י  וְאִם-אֵין לוֹ, אַחִים--וּנְתַתֶּם אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ, לַאֲחֵי אָבִיו.	10 And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his father's brethren.
27.11 יא  וְאִם-אֵין אַחִים, לְאָבִיו--וּנְתַתֶּם אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ לִשְׁאֵרוֹ הַקָּרֹב אֵלָיו מִמִּשְׁפַּחְתּוֹ, וְיָרַשׁ אֹתָהּ; וְהָיְתָה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְחֻקַּת מִשְׁפָּט, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	11 And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it. And it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment, as the LORD commanded Moses.' {P}
27.12 יב  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עֲלֵה אֶל-הַר הָעֲבָרִים הַזֶּה; וּרְאֵה, אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר נָתַתִּי, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	12 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Get thee up into this mountain of Abarim, and behold the land which I have given unto the children of Israel.
27.13 יג  וְרָאִיתָה אֹתָהּ, וְנֶאֱסַפְתָּ אֶל-עַמֶּיךָ גַּם-אָתָּה, כַּאֲשֶׁר נֶאֱסַף, אַהֲרֹן אָחִיךָ.	13 And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered;
27.14 יד  כַּאֲשֶׁר מְרִיתֶם פִּי בְּמִדְבַּר-צִן, בִּמְרִיבַת הָעֵדָה, לְהַקְדִּישֵׁנִי בַמַּיִם, לְעֵינֵיהֶם:  הֵם מֵי-מְרִיבַת קָדֵשׁ, מִדְבַּר-צִן.  {ס}	14 because ye rebelled against My commandment in the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify Me at the waters before their eyes.'--These are the waters of Meribath-kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.-- {S}
27.15 טו  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-יְהוָה לֵאמֹר.	15 And Moses spoke unto the LORD, saying:
27.16 טז  יִפְקֹד יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי הָרוּחֹת לְכָל-בָּשָׂר, אִישׁ, עַל-הָעֵדָה.	16 'Let the LORD, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27.17 יז  אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַאֲשֶׁר יָבֹא לִפְנֵיהֶם, וַאֲשֶׁר יוֹצִיאֵם, וַאֲשֶׁר יְבִיאֵם; וְלֹא תִהְיֶה, עֲדַת יְהוָה, כַּצֹּאן, אֲשֶׁר אֵין-לָהֶם רֹעֶה.	17 who may go out before them, and who may come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in; that the congregation of the LORD be not as sheep which have no shepherd.'
27.18 יח  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, קַח-לְךָ אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן--אִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר-רוּחַ בּוֹ; וְסָמַכְתָּ אֶת-יָדְךָ, עָלָיו.	18 And the LORD said unto Moses: 'Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is spirit, and lay thy hand upon him;
27.19 יט  וְהַעֲמַדְתָּ אֹתוֹ, לִפְנֵי אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְלִפְנֵי, כָּל-הָעֵדָה; וְצִוִּיתָה אֹתוֹ, לְעֵינֵיהֶם.	19 and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight.
27.20 כ  וְנָתַתָּה מֵהוֹדְךָ, עָלָיו--לְמַעַן יִשְׁמְעוּ, כָּל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	20 And thou shalt put of thy honour upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may hearken.
27.21 כא  וְלִפְנֵי אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן יַעֲמֹד, וְשָׁאַל לוֹ בְּמִשְׁפַּט הָאוּרִים לִפְנֵי יְהוָה:  עַל-פִּיו יֵצְאוּ וְעַל-פִּיו יָבֹאוּ, הוּא וְכָל-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אִתּוֹ--וְכָל-הָעֵדָה.	21 And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the Urim before the LORD; at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.'
27.22 כב  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֹתוֹ; וַיִּקַּח אֶת-יְהוֹשֻׁעַ, וַיַּעֲמִדֵהוּ לִפְנֵי אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְלִפְנֵי, כָּל-הָעֵדָה.	22 And Moses did as the LORD commanded him; and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation.
27.23 כג  וַיִּסְמֹךְ אֶת-יָדָיו עָלָיו, וַיְצַוֵּהוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה, בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	23 And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the LORD spoke by the hand of Moses. {P}
28.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
28.2 ב  צַו אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  אֶת-קָרְבָּנִי לַחְמִי לְאִשַּׁי, רֵיחַ נִיחֹחִי, תִּשְׁמְרוּ, לְהַקְרִיב לִי בְּמוֹעֲדוֹ.	2 Command the children of Israel, and say unto them: My food which is presented unto Me for offerings made by fire, of a sweet savour unto Me, shall ye observe to offer unto Me in its due season.
28.3 ג  וְאָמַרְתָּ לָהֶם--זֶה הָאִשֶּׁה, אֲשֶׁר תַּקְרִיבוּ לַיהוָה:  כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה תְמִימִם שְׁנַיִם לַיּוֹם, עֹלָה תָמִיד.	3 And thou shalt say unto them: This is the offering made by fire which ye shall bring unto the LORD: he-lambs of the first year without blemish, two day by day, for a continual burnt-offering.
28.4 ד  אֶת-הַכֶּבֶשׂ אֶחָד, תַּעֲשֶׂה בַבֹּקֶר; וְאֵת הַכֶּבֶשׂ הַשֵּׁנִי, תַּעֲשֶׂה בֵּין הָעַרְבָּיִם.	4 The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at dusk;
28.5 ה  וַעֲשִׂירִית הָאֵיפָה סֹלֶת, לְמִנְחָה, בְּלוּלָה בְּשֶׁמֶן כָּתִית, רְבִיעִת הַהִין.	5 and the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil.
28.6 ו  עֹלַת, תָּמִיד--הָעֲשֻׂיָה, בְּהַר סִינַי, לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.	6 It is a continual burnt-offering, which was offered in mount Sinai, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
28.7 ז  וְנִסְכּוֹ רְבִיעִת הַהִין, לַכֶּבֶשׂ הָאֶחָד; בַּקֹּדֶשׁ, הַסֵּךְ נֶסֶךְ שֵׁכָר--לַיהוָה.	7 And the drink-offering thereof shall be the fourth part of a hin for the one lamb; in the holy place shalt thou pour out a drink-offering of strong drink unto the LORD.
28.8 ח  וְאֵת הַכֶּבֶשׂ הַשֵּׁנִי, תַּעֲשֶׂה בֵּין הָעַרְבָּיִם:  כְּמִנְחַת הַבֹּקֶר וּכְנִסְכּוֹ תַּעֲשֶׂה, אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ לַיהוָה.  {פ}	8 And the other lamb shalt thou present at dusk; as the meal-offering of the morning, and as the drink-offering thereof, thou shalt present it, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD. {P}
28.9 ט  וּבְיוֹם, הַשַּׁבָּת--שְׁנֵי-כְבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה, תְּמִימִם; וּשְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים, סֹלֶת מִנְחָה בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן--וְנִסְכּוֹ.	9 And on the sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, and the drink-offering thereof.
28.10 י  עֹלַת שַׁבַּת, בְּשַׁבַּתּוֹ, עַל-עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וְנִסְכָּהּ.  {פ}	10 This is the burnt-offering of every sabbath, beside the continual burnt-offering, and the drink-offering thereof. {P}
28.11 יא  וּבְרָאשֵׁי, חָדְשֵׁיכֶם--תַּקְרִיבוּ עֹלָה, לַיהוָה:  פָּרִים בְּנֵי-בָקָר שְׁנַיִם וְאַיִל אֶחָד, כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שִׁבְעָה תְּמִימִם.	11 And in your new moons ye shall present a burnt-offering unto the LORD: two young bullocks, and one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
28.12 יב  וּשְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים, סֹלֶת מִנְחָה בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, לַפָּר, הָאֶחָד; וּשְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים, סֹלֶת מִנְחָה בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, לָאַיִל, הָאֶחָד.	12 and three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, for each bullock; and two tenth parts of fine flour for a meal-offering, mingled with oil, for the one ram;
28.13 יג  וְעִשָּׂרֹן עִשָּׂרוֹן, סֹלֶת מִנְחָה בְּלוּלָה בַשֶּׁמֶן, לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד; עֹלָה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.	13 and a several tenth part of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal-offering unto every lamb; for a burnt-offering of a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
28.14 יד  וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם, חֲצִי הַהִין יִהְיֶה לַפָּר וּשְׁלִישִׁת הַהִין לָאַיִל וּרְבִיעִת הַהִין לַכֶּבֶשׂ--יָיִן:  זֹאת עֹלַת חֹדֶשׁ בְּחָדְשׁוֹ, לְחָדְשֵׁי הַשָּׁנָה.	14 And their drink-offerings shall be half a hin of wine for a bullock, and the third part of a hin for the ram, and the fourth part of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt-offering of every new moon throughout the months of the year.
28.15 טו  וּשְׂעִיר עִזִּים אֶחָד לְחַטָּאת, לַיהוָה, עַל-עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד יֵעָשֶׂה, וְנִסְכּוֹ.  {ס}	15 And one he-goat for a sin-offering unto the LORD; it shall be offered beside the continual burnt-offering, and the drink-offering thereof. {S}
28.16 טז  וּבַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, בְּאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר יוֹם--לַחֹדֶשׁ:  פֶּסַח, לַיהוָה.	16 And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is the LORD'S passover.
28.17 יז  וּבַחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, חָג:  שִׁבְעַת יָמִים, מַצּוֹת יֵאָכֵל.	17 And on the fifteenth day of this month shall be a feast; seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.
28.18 יח  בַּיּוֹם הָרִאשׁוֹן, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ:  כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.	18 In the first day shall be a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work;
28.19 יט  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם אִשֶּׁה עֹלָה לַיהוָה, פָּרִים בְּנֵי-בָקָר שְׁנַיִם וְאַיִל אֶחָד; וְשִׁבְעָה כְבָשִׂים בְּנֵי שָׁנָה, תְּמִימִם יִהְיוּ לָכֶם.	19 but ye shall present an offering made by fire, a burnt-offering unto the LORD: two young bullocks, and one ram, and seven he-lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish;
28.20 כ  וּמִנְחָתָם--סֹלֶת, בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן:  שְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים לַפָּר, וּשְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים לָאַיִל--תַּעֲשׂוּ.	20 and their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil; three tenth parts shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenth parts for the ram;
28.21 כא  עִשָּׂרוֹן עִשָּׂרוֹן, תַּעֲשֶׂה, לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד--לְשִׁבְעַת, הַכְּבָשִׂים.	21 a several tenth part shalt thou offer for every lamb of the seven lambs;
28.22 כב  וּשְׂעִיר חַטָּאת, אֶחָד, לְכַפֵּר, עֲלֵיכֶם.	22 and one he-goat for a sin-offering, to make atonement for you.
28.23 כג  מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַבֹּקֶר, אֲשֶׁר לְעֹלַת הַתָּמִיד--תַּעֲשׂוּ, אֶת-אֵלֶּה.	23 Ye shall offer these beside the burnt-offering of the morning, which is for a continual burnt-offering.
28.24 כד  כָּאֵלֶּה תַּעֲשׂוּ לַיּוֹם, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים--לֶחֶם אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ-נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה; עַל-עוֹלַת הַתָּמִיד יֵעָשֶׂה, וְנִסְכּוֹ.	24 After this manner ye shall offer daily, for seven days, the food of the offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; it shall be offered beside the continual burnt-offering, and the drink-offering thereof.
28.25 כה  וּבַיּוֹם, הַשְּׁבִיעִי--מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם:  כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.  {ס}	25 And on the seventh day ye shall have a holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work. {S}
28.26 כו  וּבְיוֹם הַבִּכּוּרִים, בְּהַקְרִיבְכֶם מִנְחָה חֲדָשָׁה לַיהוָה--בְּשָׁבֻעֹתֵיכֶם:  מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.	26 Also in the day of the first-fruits, when ye bring a new meal-offering unto the LORD in your feast of weeks, ye shall have a holy convocation: ye shall do no manner of servile work;
28.27 כז  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם עוֹלָה לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה--פָּרִים בְּנֵי-בָקָר שְׁנַיִם, אַיִל אֶחָד; שִׁבְעָה כְבָשִׂים, בְּנֵי שָׁנָה.	27 but ye shall present a burnt-offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD: two young bullocks, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year;
28.28 כח  וּמִנְחָתָם--סֹלֶת, בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן:  שְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים, לַפָּר הָאֶחָד, שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים, לָאַיִל הָאֶחָד.	28 and their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for each bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
28.29 כט  עִשָּׂרוֹן, עִשָּׂרוֹן, לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד--לְשִׁבְעַת, הַכְּבָשִׂים.	29 a several tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs;
28.30 ל  שְׂעִיר עִזִּים, אֶחָד, לְכַפֵּר, עֲלֵיכֶם.	30 one he-goat, to make atonement for you.
28.31 לא  מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וּמִנְחָתוֹ--תַּעֲשׂוּ; תְּמִימִם יִהְיוּ-לָכֶם, וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם.  {פ}	31 Beside the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, ye shall offer them--they shall be unto you without blemish--and their drink-offerings. {P}
29.1 א  וּבַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם--כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ:  יוֹם תְּרוּעָה, יִהְיֶה לָכֶם.	1 And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have a holy convocation: ye shall do no manner of servile work; it is a day of blowing the horn unto you.
29.2 ב  וַעֲשִׂיתֶם עֹלָה לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה--פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר אֶחָד, אַיִל אֶחָד; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שִׁבְעָה, תְּמִימִם.	2 And ye shall prepare a burnt-offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD: one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.3 ג  וּמִנְחָתָם--סֹלֶת, בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן:  שְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים לַפָּר, שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים לָאָיִל.	3 and their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth part for the ram,
29.4 ד  וְעִשָּׂרוֹן אֶחָד, לַכֶּבֶשׂ הָאֶחָד, לְשִׁבְעַת, הַכְּבָשִׂים.	4 and one tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs;
29.5 ה  וּשְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, חַטָּאת, לְכַפֵּר, עֲלֵיכֶם.	5 and one he-goat for a sin-offering, to make atonement for you;
29.6 ו  מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַחֹדֶשׁ וּמִנְחָתָהּ, וְעֹלַת הַתָּמִיד וּמִנְחָתָהּ, וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם, כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם:  לְרֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, אִשֶּׁה לַיהוָה.  {ס}	6 beside the burnt-offering of the new moon, and the meal-offering thereof, and the continual burnt-offering and the meal-offering thereof, and their drink-offerings, according unto their ordinance, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD. {S}
29.7 ז  וּבֶעָשׂוֹר לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי הַזֶּה, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, וְעִנִּיתֶם, אֶת-נַפְשֹׁתֵיכֶם; כָּל-מְלָאכָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.	7 And on the tenth day of this seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls; ye shall do no manner of work;
29.8 ח  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם עֹלָה לַיהוָה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, פַּר בֶּן-בָּקָר אֶחָד אַיִל אֶחָד; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שִׁבְעָה, תְּמִימִם יִהְיוּ לָכֶם.	8 but ye shall present a burnt-offering unto the LORD for a sweet savour: one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish;
29.9 ט  וּמִנְחָתָם--סֹלֶת, בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן:  שְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים, לַפָּר, שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים, לָאַיִל הָאֶחָד.	9 and their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
29.10 י  עִשָּׂרוֹן, עִשָּׂרוֹן, לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד--לְשִׁבְעַת, הַכְּבָשִׂים.	10 a several tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs;
29.11 יא  שְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, חַטָּאת; מִלְּבַד חַטַּאת הַכִּפֻּרִים, וְעֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וּמִנְחָתָהּ, וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם.  {ס}	11 one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the sin-offering of atonement, and the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and their drink-offerings. {S}
29.12 יב  וּבַחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הַשְּׁבִיעִי, מִקְרָא-קֹדֶשׁ יִהְיֶה לָכֶם--כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ; וְחַגֹּתֶם חַג לַיהוָה, שִׁבְעַת יָמִים.	12 And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation: ye shall do no manner of servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD seven days;
29.13 יג  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם עֹלָה אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה--פָּרִים בְּנֵי-בָקָר שְׁלֹשָׁה עָשָׂר, אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם יִהְיוּ.	13 and ye shall present a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: thirteen young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year; they shall be without blemish;
29.14 יד  וּמִנְחָתָם--סֹלֶת, בְּלוּלָה בַשָּׁמֶן:  שְׁלֹשָׁה עֶשְׂרֹנִים לַפָּר הָאֶחָד, לִשְׁלֹשָׁה עָשָׂר פָּרִים, שְׁנֵי עֶשְׂרֹנִים לָאַיִל הָאֶחָד, לִשְׁנֵי הָאֵילִם.	14 and their meal-offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth parts for each ram of the two rams,
29.15 טו  וְעִשָּׂרוֹן, עִשָּׂרוֹן, לַכֶּבֶשׂ, הָאֶחָד--לְאַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, כְּבָשִׂים.	15 and a several tenth part for every lamb of the fourteen lambs;
29.16 טז  וּשְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, חַטָּאת; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, מִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכָּהּ.  {ס}	16 and one he-goat for a sin-offering beside the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. {S}
29.17 יז  וּבַיּוֹם הַשֵּׁנִי, פָּרִים בְּנֵי-בָקָר שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר--אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם.	17 And on the second day ye shall present twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.18 יח  וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם לַפָּרִים לָאֵילִם וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.	18 and their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.19 יט  וּשְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, חַטָּאת; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וּמִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם.  {ס}	19 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and their drink-offerings. {S}
29.20 כ  וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי פָּרִים עַשְׁתֵּי-עָשָׂר, אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם.	20 And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.21 כא  וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם לַפָּרִים לָאֵילִם וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.	21 and their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.22 כב  וּשְׂעִיר חַטָּאת, אֶחָד; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וּמִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכָּהּ.  {ס}	22 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. {S}
29.23 כג  וּבַיּוֹם הָרְבִיעִי פָּרִים עֲשָׂרָה, אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם.	23 And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.24 כד  מִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם לַפָּרִים לָאֵילִם וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.	24 their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.25 כה  וּשְׂעִיר-עִזִּים אֶחָד, חַטָּאת; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, מִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכָּהּ.  {ס}	25 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. {S}
29.26 כו  וּבַיּוֹם הַחֲמִישִׁי פָּרִים תִּשְׁעָה, אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם.	26 And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.27 כז  וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם לַפָּרִים לָאֵילִם וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.	27 and their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.28 כח  וּשְׂעִיר חַטָּאת, אֶחָד; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וּמִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכָּהּ.  {ס}	28 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. {S}
29.29 כט  וּבַיּוֹם הַשִּׁשִּׁי פָּרִים שְׁמֹנָה, אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם.	29 And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.30 ל  וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם לַפָּרִים לָאֵילִם וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.	30 and their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.31 לא  וּשְׂעִיר חַטָּאת, אֶחָד; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, מִנְחָתָהּ וּנְסָכֶיהָ.  {ס}	31 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offerings thereof. {S}
29.32 לב  וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי פָּרִים שִׁבְעָה, אֵילִם שְׁנָיִם; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר, תְּמִימִם.	32 And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.33 לג  וּמִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּהֶם לַפָּרִים לָאֵילִם וְלַכְּבָשִׂים, בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כְּמִשְׁפָּטָם.	33 and their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.34 לד  וּשְׂעִיר חַטָּאת, אֶחָד; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, מִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכָּהּ.  {ס}	34 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof. {S}
29.35 לה  בַּיּוֹם, הַשְּׁמִינִי--עֲצֶרֶת, תִּהְיֶה לָכֶם:  כָּל-מְלֶאכֶת עֲבֹדָה, לֹא תַעֲשׂוּ.	35 On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do no manner of servile work;
29.36 לו  וְהִקְרַבְתֶּם עֹלָה אִשֵּׁה רֵיחַ נִיחֹחַ, לַיהוָה--פַּר אֶחָד, אַיִל אֶחָד; כְּבָשִׂים בְּנֵי-שָׁנָה שִׁבְעָה, תְּמִימִם.	36 but ye shall present a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs of the first year without blemish;
29.37 לז  מִנְחָתָם וְנִסְכֵּיהֶם, לַפָּר לָאַיִל וְלַכְּבָשִׂים בְּמִסְפָּרָם--כַּמִּשְׁפָּט.	37 their meal-offering and their drink-offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the ordinance;
29.38 לח  וּשְׂעִיר חַטָּאת, אֶחָד; מִלְּבַד עֹלַת הַתָּמִיד, וּמִנְחָתָהּ וְנִסְכָּהּ.	38 and one he-goat for a sin-offering; beside the continual burnt-offering, and the meal-offering thereof, and the drink-offering thereof.
29.39 לט  אֵלֶּה תַּעֲשׂוּ לַיהוָה, בְּמוֹעֲדֵיכֶם--לְבַד מִנִּדְרֵיכֶם וְנִדְבֹתֵיכֶם, לְעֹלֹתֵיכֶם וּלְמִנְחֹתֵיכֶם, וּלְנִסְכֵּיכֶם, וּלְשַׁלְמֵיכֶם.	39 These ye shall offer unto the LORD in your appointed seasons, beside your vows, and your freewill-offerings, whether they be your burnt-offerings, or your meal-offerings, or your drink-offerings, or your peace-offerings.
29.40 א  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, כְּכֹל אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.  {פ}	1 And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the LORD commanded Moses. {P}
30.1 ב  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-רָאשֵׁי הַמַּטּוֹת, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  זֶה הַדָּבָר, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה.	2 And Moses spoke unto the heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, saying: This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded.
30.2 ג  אִישׁ כִּי-יִדֹּר נֶדֶר לַיהוָה, אוֹ-הִשָּׁבַע שְׁבֻעָה לֶאְסֹר אִסָּר עַל-נַפְשׁוֹ--לֹא יַחֵל, דְּבָרוֹ:  כְּכָל-הַיֹּצֵא מִפִּיו, יַעֲשֶׂה.	3 When a man voweth a vow unto the LORD, or sweareth an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word; he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.
30.3 ד  וְאִשָּׁה, כִּי-תִדֹּר נֶדֶר לַיהוָה, וְאָסְרָה אִסָּר בְּבֵית אָבִיהָ, בִּנְעֻרֶיהָ.	4 Also when a woman voweth a vow unto the LORD, and bindeth herself by a bond, being in her father's house, in her youth,
30.4 ה  וְשָׁמַע אָבִיהָ אֶת-נִדְרָהּ, וֶאֱסָרָהּ אֲשֶׁר אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ, וְהֶחֱרִישׁ לָהּ, אָבִיהָ--וְקָמוּ, כָּל-נְדָרֶיהָ, וְכָל-אִסָּר אֲשֶׁר-אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ, יָקוּם.	5 and her father heareth her vow, or her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father holdeth his peace at her, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.
30.5 ו  וְאִם-הֵנִיא אָבִיהָ אֹתָהּ, בְּיוֹם שָׁמְעוֹ--כָּל-נְדָרֶיהָ וֶאֱסָרֶיהָ אֲשֶׁר-אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ, לֹא יָקוּם; וַיהוָה, יִסְלַח-לָהּ, כִּי-הֵנִיא אָבִיהָ, אֹתָהּ.	6 But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth, none of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand; and the LORD will forgive her, because her father disallowed her.
30.6 ז  וְאִם-הָיוֹ תִהְיֶה לְאִישׁ, וּנְדָרֶיהָ עָלֶיהָ, אוֹ מִבְטָא שְׂפָתֶיהָ, אֲשֶׁר אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ.	7 And if she be married to a husband, while her vows are upon her, or the clear utterance of her lips, wherewith she hath bound her soul;
30.7 ח  וְשָׁמַע אִישָׁהּ בְּיוֹם שָׁמְעוֹ, וְהֶחֱרִישׁ לָהּ:  וְקָמוּ נְדָרֶיהָ, וֶאֱסָרֶהָ אֲשֶׁר-אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ--יָקֻמוּ.	8 and her husband hear it, whatsoever day it be that he heareth it, and hold his peace at her; then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.
30.8 ט  וְאִם בְּיוֹם שְׁמֹעַ אִישָׁהּ, יָנִיא אוֹתָהּ, וְהֵפֵר אֶת-נִדְרָהּ אֲשֶׁר עָלֶיהָ, וְאֵת מִבְטָא שְׂפָתֶיהָ אֲשֶׁר אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ--וַיהוָה, יִסְלַח-לָהּ.	9 But if her husband disallow her in the day that he heareth it, then he shall make void her vow which is upon her, and the clear utterance of her lips, wherewith she hath bound her soul; and the LORD will forgive her.
30.9 י  וְנֵדֶר אַלְמָנָה, וּגְרוּשָׁה--כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ, יָקוּם עָלֶיהָ.	10 But the vow of a widow, or of her that is divorced, even every thing wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand against her.
30.10 יא  וְאִם-בֵּית אִישָׁהּ, נָדָרָה, אוֹ-אָסְרָה אִסָּר עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ, בִּשְׁבֻעָה.	11 And if a woman vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath,
30.11 יב  וְשָׁמַע אִישָׁהּ וְהֶחֱרִשׁ לָהּ, לֹא הֵנִיא אֹתָהּ--וְקָמוּ, כָּל-נְדָרֶיהָ, וְכָל-אִסָּר אֲשֶׁר-אָסְרָה עַל-נַפְשָׁהּ, יָקוּם.	12 and her husband heard it, and held his peace at her, and disallowed her not, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
30.12 יג  וְאִם-הָפֵר יָפֵר אֹתָם אִישָׁהּ, בְּיוֹם שָׁמְעוֹ--כָּל-מוֹצָא שְׂפָתֶיהָ לִנְדָרֶיהָ וּלְאִסַּר נַפְשָׁהּ, לֹא יָקוּם:  אִישָׁהּ הֲפֵרָם, וַיהוָה יִסְלַח-לָהּ.	13 But if her husband make them null and void in the day that he heareth them, then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips, whether it were her vows, or the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the LORD will forgive her.
30.13 יד  כָּל-נֵדֶר וְכָל-שְׁבֻעַת אִסָּר, לְעַנֹּת נָפֶשׁ--אִישָׁהּ יְקִימֶנּוּ, וְאִישָׁהּ יְפֵרֶנּוּ.	14 Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may let it stand, or her husband may make it void.
30.14 טו  וְאִם-הַחֲרֵשׁ יַחֲרִישׁ לָהּ אִישָׁהּ, מִיּוֹם אֶל-יוֹם, וְהֵקִים אֶת-כָּל-נְדָרֶיהָ, אוֹ אֶת-כָּל-אֱסָרֶיהָ אֲשֶׁר עָלֶיהָ--הֵקִים אֹתָם, כִּי-הֶחֱרִשׁ לָהּ בְּיוֹם שָׁמְעוֹ.	15 But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day, then he causeth all her vows to stand, or all her bonds, which are upon her; he hath let them stand, because he held his peace at her in the day that he heard them.
30.15 טז  וְאִם-הָפֵר יָפֵר אֹתָם, אַחֲרֵי שָׁמְעוֹ--וְנָשָׂא, אֶת-עֲוֺנָהּ.	16 But if he shall make them null and void after that he hath heard them, then he shall bear her iniquity.
30.16 יז  אֵלֶּה הַחֻקִּים, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, בֵּין אִישׁ, לְאִשְׁתּוֹ--בֵּין-אָב לְבִתּוֹ, בִּנְעֻרֶיהָ בֵּית אָבִיהָ.  {פ}	17 These are the statutes, which the LORD commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between a father and his daughter, being in her youth, in her father's house. {P}
31.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
31.2 ב  נְקֹם, נִקְמַת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵאֵת, הַמִּדְיָנִים; אַחַר, תֵּאָסֵף אֶל-עַמֶּיךָ.	2 'Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites; afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.'
31.3 ג  וַיְדַבֵּר מֹשֶׁה אֶל-הָעָם לֵאמֹר, הֵחָלְצוּ מֵאִתְּכֶם אֲנָשִׁים לַצָּבָא; וְיִהְיוּ, עַל-מִדְיָן, לָתֵת נִקְמַת-יְהוָה, בְּמִדְיָן.	3 And Moses spoke unto the people, saying: 'Arm ye men from among you for the war, that they may go against Midian, to execute the LORD'S vengeance on Midian.
31.4 ד  אֶלֶף, לַמַּטֶּה, אֶלֶף, לַמַּטֶּה--לְכֹל מַטּוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל, תִּשְׁלְחוּ לַצָּבָא.	4 Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.'
31.5 ה  וַיִּמָּסְרוּ מֵאַלְפֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶלֶף לַמַּטֶּה--שְׁנֵים-עָשָׂר אֶלֶף, חֲלוּצֵי צָבָא.	5 So there were delivered, out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.
31.6 ו  וַיִּשְׁלַח אֹתָם מֹשֶׁה אֶלֶף לַמַּטֶּה, לַצָּבָא:  אֹתָם וְאֶת-פִּינְחָס בֶּן-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, לַצָּבָא, וּכְלֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ וַחֲצֹצְרוֹת הַתְּרוּעָה, בְּיָדוֹ.	6 And Moses sent them, a thousand of every tribe, to the war, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy vessels and the trumpets for the alarm in his hand.
31.7 ז  וַיִּצְבְּאוּ, עַל-מִדְיָן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה; וַיַּהַרְגוּ, כָּל-זָכָר.	7 And they warred against Midian, as the LORD commanded Moses; and they slew every male.
31.8 ח  וְאֶת-מַלְכֵי מִדְיָן הָרְגוּ עַל-חַלְלֵיהֶם, אֶת-אֱוִי וְאֶת-רֶקֶם וְאֶת-צוּר וְאֶת-חוּר וְאֶת-רֶבַע--חֲמֵשֶׁת, מַלְכֵי מִדְיָן; וְאֵת בִּלְעָם בֶּן-בְּעוֹר, הָרְגוּ בֶּחָרֶב.	8 And they slew the kings of Midian with the rest of their slain: Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the five kings of Midian; Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.
31.9 ט  וַיִּשְׁבּוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת-נְשֵׁי מִדְיָן, וְאֶת-טַפָּם; וְאֵת כָּל-בְּהֶמְתָּם וְאֶת-כָּל-מִקְנֵהֶם וְאֶת-כָּל-חֵילָם, בָּזָזוּ.	9 And the children of Israel took captive the women of Midian and their little ones; and all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods, they took for a prey.
31.10 י  וְאֵת כָּל-עָרֵיהֶם בְּמוֹשְׁבֹתָם, וְאֵת כָּל-טִירֹתָם--שָׂרְפוּ, בָּאֵשׁ.	10 And all their cities in the places wherein they dwelt, and all their encampments, they burnt with fire.
31.11 יא  וַיִּקְחוּ, אֶת-כָּל-הַשָּׁלָל, וְאֵת, כָּל-הַמַּלְקוֹחַ--בָּאָדָם, וּבַבְּהֵמָה.	11 And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of man and of beast.
31.12 יב  וַיָּבִאוּ אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן וְאֶל-עֲדַת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הַשְּׁבִי וְאֶת-הַמַּלְקוֹחַ וְאֶת-הַשָּׁלָל--אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה:  אֶל-עַרְבֹת מוֹאָב, אֲשֶׁר עַל-יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ.  {ס}	12 And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and unto Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp, unto the plains of Moab, which are by the Jordan at Jericho. {S}
31.13 יג  וַיֵּצְאוּ מֹשֶׁה וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְכָל-נְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה--לִקְרָאתָם:  אֶל-מִחוּץ, לַמַּחֲנֶה.	13 And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.
31.14 יד  וַיִּקְצֹף מֹשֶׁה, עַל פְּקוּדֵי הֶחָיִל, שָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים וְשָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת, הַבָּאִים מִצְּבָא הַמִּלְחָמָה.	14 And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, who came from the service of the war.
31.15 טו  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם, מֹשֶׁה:  הַחִיִּיתֶם, כָּל-נְקֵבָה.	15 And Moses said unto them: 'Have ye saved all the women alive?
31.16 טז  הֵן הֵנָּה הָיוּ לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּדְבַר בִּלְעָם, לִמְסָר-מַעַל בַּיהוָה, עַל-דְּבַר-פְּעוֹר; וַתְּהִי הַמַּגֵּפָה, בַּעֲדַת יְהוָה.	16 Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to revolt so as to break faith with the LORD in the matter of Peor, and so the plague was among the congregation of the LORD.
31.17 יז  וְעַתָּה, הִרְגוּ כָל-זָכָר בַּטָּף; וְכָל-אִשָּׁה, יֹדַעַת אִישׁ לְמִשְׁכַּב זָכָר--הֲרֹגוּ.	17 Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him.
31.18 יח  וְכֹל הַטַּף בַּנָּשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדְעוּ מִשְׁכַּב זָכָר--הַחֲיוּ, לָכֶם.	18 But all the women children, that have not known man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
31.19 יט  וְאַתֶּם, חֲנוּ מִחוּץ לַמַּחֲנֶה--שִׁבְעַת יָמִים:  כֹּל הֹרֵג נֶפֶשׁ וְכֹל נֹגֵעַ בֶּחָלָל, תִּתְחַטְּאוּ בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁלִישִׁי וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי--אַתֶּם, וּשְׁבִיכֶם.	19 And encamp ye without the camp seven days; whosoever hath killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, ye and your captives.
31.20 כ  וְכָל-בֶּגֶד וְכָל-כְּלִי-עוֹר וְכָל-מַעֲשֵׂה עִזִּים, וְכָל-כְּלִי-עֵץ--תִּתְחַטָּאוּ.  {ס}	20 And as to every garment, and all that is made of skin, and all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood, ye shall purify.' {S}
31.21 כא  וַיֹּאמֶר אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן אֶל-אַנְשֵׁי הַצָּבָא, הַבָּאִים לַמִּלְחָמָה:  זֹאת חֻקַּת הַתּוֹרָה, אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	21 And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war that went to the battle: 'This is the statute of the law which the LORD hath commanded Moses:
31.22 כב  אַךְ אֶת-הַזָּהָב, וְאֶת-הַכָּסֶף; אֶת-הַנְּחֹשֶׁת, אֶת-הַבַּרְזֶל, אֶת-הַבְּדִיל, וְאֶת-הָעֹפָרֶת.	22 Howbeit the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
31.23 כג  כָּל-דָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-יָבֹא בָאֵשׁ, תַּעֲבִירוּ בָאֵשׁ וְטָהֵר--אַךְ, בְּמֵי נִדָּה יִתְחַטָּא; וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָבֹא בָּאֵשׁ, תַּעֲבִירוּ בַמָּיִם.	23 every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make to go through the fire, and it shall be clean; nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of sprinkling; and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make to go through the water.
31.24 כד  וְכִבַּסְתֶּם בִּגְדֵיכֶם בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי, וּטְהַרְתֶּם; וְאַחַר, תָּבֹאוּ אֶל-הַמַּחֲנֶה.  {ס}	24 And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye may come into the camp.' {S}
31.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	25 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
31.26 כו  שָׂא, אֵת רֹאשׁ מַלְקוֹחַ הַשְּׁבִי, בָּאָדָם, וּבַבְּהֵמָה--אַתָּה וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְרָאשֵׁי אֲבוֹת הָעֵדָה.	26 'Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the heads of the fathers' houses of the congregation;
31.27 כז  וְחָצִיתָ, אֶת-הַמַּלְקוֹחַ, בֵּין תֹּפְשֵׂי הַמִּלְחָמָה, הַיֹּצְאִים לַצָּבָא--וּבֵין, כָּל-הָעֵדָה.	27 and divide the prey into two parts: between the men skilled in war, that went out to battle, and all the congregation;
31.28 כח  וַהֲרֵמֹתָ מֶכֶס לַיהוָה, מֵאֵת אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה הַיֹּצְאִים לַצָּבָא--אֶחָד נֶפֶשׁ, מֵחֲמֵשׁ הַמֵּאוֹת:  מִן-הָאָדָם, וּמִן-הַבָּקָר, וּמִן-הַחֲמֹרִים, וּמִן-הַצֹּאן.	28 and levy a tribute unto the LORD of the men of war that went out to battle: one soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the flocks;
31.29 כט  מִמַּחֲצִיתָם, תִּקָּחוּ; וְנָתַתָּה לְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה.	29 take it of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the priest, as a portion set apart for the LORD.
31.30 ל  וּמִמַּחֲצִת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל תִּקַּח אֶחָד אָחֻז מִן-הַחֲמִשִּׁים, מִן-הָאָדָם מִן-הַבָּקָר מִן-הַחֲמֹרִים וּמִן-הַצֹּאן--מִכָּל-הַבְּהֵמָה; וְנָתַתָּה אֹתָם, לַלְוִיִּם, שֹׁמְרֵי, מִשְׁמֶרֶת מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה.	30 And of the children of Israel's half, thou shalt take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks, even of all the cattle, and give them unto the Levites, that keep the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.'
31.31 לא  וַיַּעַשׂ מֹשֶׁה, וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	31 And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD commanded Moses.
31.32 לב  וַיְהִי, הַמַּלְקוֹחַ--יֶתֶר הַבָּז, אֲשֶׁר בָּזְזוּ עַם הַצָּבָא:  צֹאן, שֵׁשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף וְשִׁבְעִים אֶלֶף--וַחֲמֵשֶׁת אֲלָפִים.	32 Now the prey, over and above the booty which the men of war took, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand sheep,
31.33 לג  וּבָקָר, שְׁנַיִם וְשִׁבְעִים אָלֶף.	33 and threescore and twelve thousand beeves,
31.34 לד  וַחֲמֹרִים, אֶחָד וְשִׁשִּׁים אָלֶף.	34 and threescore and one thousand asses,
31.35 לה  וְנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם--מִן-הַנָּשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדְעוּ מִשְׁכַּב זָכָר:  כָּל-נֶפֶשׁ, שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אָלֶף.	35 and thirty and two thousand persons in all, of the women that had not known man by lying with him.
31.36 לו  וַתְּהִי, הַמֶּחֱצָה--חֵלֶק, הַיֹּצְאִים בַּצָּבָא:  מִסְפַּר הַצֹּאן, שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, וְשִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים, וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	36 And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to war, was in number three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred sheep.
31.37 לז  וַיְהִי הַמֶּכֶס לַיהוָה, מִן-הַצֹּאן--שֵׁשׁ מֵאוֹת, חָמֵשׁ וְשִׁבְעִים.	37 And the LORD'S tribute of the sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.
31.38 לח  וְהַבָּקָר--שִׁשָּׁה וּשְׁלֹשִׁים, אָלֶף; וּמִכְסָם לַיהוָה, שְׁנַיִם וְשִׁבְעִים.	38 And the beeves were thirty and six thousand, of which the LORD'S tribute was threescore and twelve.
31.39 לט  וַחֲמֹרִים, שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת; וּמִכְסָם לַיהוָה, אֶחָד וְשִׁשִּׁים.	39 And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred, of which the LORD'S tribute was threescore and one.
31.40 מ  וְנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם, שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר אָלֶף; וּמִכְסָם, לַיהוָה--שְׁנַיִם וּשְׁלֹשִׁים, נָפֶשׁ.	40 And the persons were sixteen thousand, of whom the LORD'S tribute was thirty and two persons.
31.41 מא  וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-מֶכֶס תְּרוּמַת יְהוָה, לְאֶלְעָזָר, הַכֹּהֵן--כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	41 And Moses gave the tribute, which was set apart for the LORD, unto Eleazar the priest, as the LORD commanded Moses.
31.42 מב  וּמִמַּחֲצִית, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר חָצָה מֹשֶׁה, מִן-הָאֲנָשִׁים הַצֹּבְאִים.	42 And of the children of Israel's half, which Moses divided off from the men that warred--
31.43 מג  וַתְּהִי מֶחֱצַת הָעֵדָה, מִן-הַצֹּאן--שְׁלֹשׁ-מֵאוֹת אֶלֶף וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף, שִׁבְעַת אֲלָפִים וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	43 now the congregation's half was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred sheep,
31.44 מד  וּבָקָר, שִׁשָּׁה וּשְׁלֹשִׁים אָלֶף.	44 and thirty and six thousand beeves,
31.45 מה  וַחֲמֹרִים, שְׁלֹשִׁים אֶלֶף וַחֲמֵשׁ מֵאוֹת.	45 and thirty thousand and five hundred asses,
31.46 מו  וְנֶפֶשׁ אָדָם, שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר אָלֶף.	46 and sixteen thousand persons--
31.47 מז  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה מִמַּחֲצִת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶת-הָאָחֻז אֶחָד מִן-הַחֲמִשִּׁים--מִן-הָאָדָם, וּמִן-הַבְּהֵמָה; וַיִּתֵּן אֹתָם לַלְוִיִּם, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁמֶרֶת מִשְׁכַּן יְהוָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה.	47 even of the children of Israel's half, Moses took one drawn out of every fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, that kept the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.
31.48 מח  וַיִּקְרְבוּ, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, הַפְּקֻדִים, אֲשֶׁר לְאַלְפֵי הַצָּבָא--שָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים, וְשָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת.	48 And the officers that were over the thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses;
31.49 מט  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, עֲבָדֶיךָ נָשְׂאוּ אֶת-רֹאשׁ אַנְשֵׁי הַמִּלְחָמָה, אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדֵנוּ; וְלֹא-נִפְקַד מִמֶּנּוּ, אִישׁ.	49 and they said unto Moses: 'Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war that are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.
31.50 נ  וַנַּקְרֵב אֶת-קָרְבַּן יְהוָה, אִישׁ אֲשֶׁר מָצָא כְלִי-זָהָב אֶצְעָדָה וְצָמִיד, טַבַּעַת, עָגִיל וְכוּמָז--לְכַפֵּר עַל-נַפְשֹׁתֵינוּ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	50 And we have brought the LORD'S offering, what every man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, armlets, and bracelets, signet-rings, ear-rings, and girdles, to make atonement for our souls before the LORD.'
31.51 נא  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַזָּהָב--מֵאִתָּם:  כֹּל, כְּלִי מַעֲשֶׂה.	51 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all wrought jewels.
31.52 נב  וַיְהִי כָּל-זְהַב הַתְּרוּמָה, אֲשֶׁר הֵרִימוּ לַיהוָה--שִׁשָּׁה עָשָׂר אֶלֶף שְׁבַע-מֵאוֹת וַחֲמִשִּׁים, שָׁקֶל:  מֵאֵת שָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים, וּמֵאֵת שָׂרֵי הַמֵּאוֹת.	52 And all the gold of the gift that they set apart for the LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.--
31.53 נג  אַנְשֵׁי, הַצָּבָא, בָּזְזוּ, אִישׁ לוֹ.	53 For the men of war had taken booty, every man for himself.--
31.54 נד  וַיִּקַּח מֹשֶׁה וְאֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, אֶת-הַזָּהָב, מֵאֵת שָׂרֵי הָאֲלָפִים, וְהַמֵּאוֹת; וַיָּבִאוּ אֹתוֹ אֶל-אֹהֶל מוֹעֵד, זִכָּרוֹן לִבְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.  {פ}	54 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tent of meeting, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the LORD. {P}
32.1 א  וּמִקְנֶה רַב, הָיָה לִבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן וְלִבְנֵי-גָד--עָצוּם מְאֹד; וַיִּרְאוּ אֶת-אֶרֶץ יַעְזֵר, וְאֶת-אֶרֶץ גִּלְעָד, וְהִנֵּה הַמָּקוֹם, מְקוֹם מִקְנֶה.	1 Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle; and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle,
32.2 ב  וַיָּבֹאוּ בְנֵי-גָד, וּבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן; וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל-מֹשֶׁה וְאֶל-אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֶל-נְשִׂיאֵי הָעֵדָה לֵאמֹר.	2 the children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spoke unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying:
32.3 ג  עֲטָרוֹת וְדִיבֹן וְיַעְזֵר וְנִמְרָה, וְחֶשְׁבּוֹן וְאֶלְעָלֵה, וּשְׂבָם וּנְבוֹ, וּבְעֹן.	3 'Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon,
32.4 ד  הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה יְהוָה לִפְנֵי עֲדַת יִשְׂרָאֵל--אֶרֶץ מִקְנֶה, הִוא; וְלַעֲבָדֶיךָ, מִקְנֶה.  {ס}	4 the land which the LORD smote before the congregation of Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle.' {S}
32.5 ה  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אִם-מָצָאנוּ חֵן בְּעֵינֶיךָ--יֻתַּן אֶת-הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, לַאֲחֻזָּה:  אַל-תַּעֲבִרֵנוּ, אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן.	5 And they said: 'If we have found favour in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy servants for a possession; bring us not over the Jordan.'
32.6 ו  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה, לִבְנֵי-גָד וְלִבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן:  הַאַחֵיכֶם, יָבֹאוּ לַמִּלְחָמָה, וְאַתֶּם, תֵּשְׁבוּ פֹה.	6 And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben: 'Shall your brethren go to the war, and shall ye sit here?
32.7 ז  וְלָמָּה תנואון (תְנִיאוּן), אֶת-לֵב בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--מֵעֲבֹר, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן לָהֶם, יְהוָה.	7 And wherefore will ye turn away the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the land which the LORD hath given them?
32.8 ח  כֹּה עָשׂוּ, אֲבֹתֵיכֶם, בְּשָׁלְחִי אֹתָם מִקָּדֵשׁ בַּרְנֵעַ, לִרְאוֹת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	8 Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.
32.9 ט  וַיַּעֲלוּ עַד-נַחַל אֶשְׁכּוֹל, וַיִּרְאוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וַיָּנִיאוּ, אֶת-לֵב בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְבִלְתִּי-בֹא, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר-נָתַן לָהֶם, יְהוָה.	9 For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they turned away the heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into the land which the LORD had given them.
32.10 י  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא; וַיִּשָּׁבַע, לֵאמֹר.	10 And the LORD'S anger was kindled in that day, and He swore, saying:
32.11 יא  אִם-יִרְאוּ הָאֲנָשִׁים הָעֹלִים מִמִּצְרַיִם, מִבֶּן עֶשְׂרִים שָׁנָה וָמַעְלָה, אֵת הָאֲדָמָה, אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי לְאַבְרָהָם לְיִצְחָק וּלְיַעֲקֹב:  כִּי לֹא-מִלְאוּ, אַחֲרָי.	11 Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I swore unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not wholly followed Me;
32.12 יב  בִּלְתִּי כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה, הַקְּנִזִּי, וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ, בִּן-נוּן:  כִּי מִלְאוּ, אַחֲרֵי יְהוָה.	12 save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, and Joshua the son of Nun; because they have wholly followed the LORD.
32.13 יג  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיְנִעֵם בַּמִּדְבָּר, אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה--עַד-תֹּם, כָּל-הַדּוֹר, הָעֹשֶׂה הָרַע, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה.	13 And the LORD'S anger was kindled against Israel, and He made them wander to and fro in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation, that had done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed.
32.14 יד  וְהִנֵּה קַמְתֶּם, תַּחַת אֲבֹתֵיכֶם--תַּרְבּוּת, אֲנָשִׁים חַטָּאִים:  לִסְפּוֹת עוֹד, עַל חֲרוֹן אַף-יְהוָה--אֶל-יִשְׂרָאֵל.	14 And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, a brood of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward Israel.
32.15 טו  כִּי תְשׁוּבֻן, מֵאַחֲרָיו, וְיָסַף עוֹד, לְהַנִּיחוֹ בַּמִּדְבָּר; וְשִׁחַתֶּם, לְכָל-הָעָם הַזֶּה.  {ס}	15 For if ye turn away from after Him, He will yet again leave them in the wilderness; and so ye will destroy all this people.' {S}
32.16 טז  וַיִּגְּשׁוּ אֵלָיו וַיֹּאמְרוּ, גִּדְרֹת צֹאן נִבְנֶה לְמִקְנֵנוּ פֹּה, וְעָרִים, לְטַפֵּנוּ.	16 And they came near unto him, and said: 'We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones;
32.17 יז  וַאֲנַחְנוּ נֵחָלֵץ חֻשִׁים, לִפְנֵי בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַד אֲשֶׁר אִם-הֲבִיאֹנֻם, אֶל-מְקוֹמָם; וְיָשַׁב טַפֵּנוּ בְּעָרֵי הַמִּבְצָר, מִפְּנֵי יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ.	17 but we ourselves will be ready armed to go before the children of Israel, until we have brought them unto their place; and our little ones shall dwell in the fortified cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
32.18 יח  לֹא נָשׁוּב, אֶל-בָּתֵּינוּ--עַד, הִתְנַחֵל בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִישׁ, נַחֲלָתוֹ.	18 We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.
32.19 יט  כִּי לֹא נִנְחַל אִתָּם, מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן וָהָלְאָה:  כִּי בָאָה נַחֲלָתֵנוּ אֵלֵינוּ, מֵעֵבֶר הַיַּרְדֵּן מִזְרָחָה.  {פ}	19 For we will not inherit with them on the other side of the Jordan, and forward, because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side of the Jordan eastward.' {P}
32.20 כ  וַיֹּאמֶר אֲלֵיהֶם מֹשֶׁה, אִם-תַּעֲשׂוּן אֶת-הַדָּבָר הַזֶּה:  אִם-תֵּחָלְצוּ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, לַמִּלְחָמָה.	20 And Moses said unto them: 'If ye will do this thing: if ye will arm yourselves to go before the LORD to the war,
32.21 כא  וְעָבַר לָכֶם כָּל-חָלוּץ אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, עַד הוֹרִישׁוֹ אֶת-אֹיְבָיו, מִפָּנָיו.	21 and every armed man of you will pass over the Jordan before the LORD, until He hath driven out His enemies from before Him,
32.22 כב  וְנִכְבְּשָׁה הָאָרֶץ לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְאַחַר תָּשֻׁבוּ--וִהְיִיתֶם נְקִיִּם מֵיְהוָה, וּמִיִּשְׂרָאֵל; וְהָיְתָה הָאָרֶץ הַזֹּאת לָכֶם, לַאֲחֻזָּה--לִפְנֵי יְהוָה.	22 and the land be subdued before the LORD, and ye return afterward; then ye shall be clear before the LORD, and before Israel, and this land shall be unto you for a possession before the LORD.
32.23 כג  וְאִם-לֹא תַעֲשׂוּן כֵּן, הִנֵּה חֲטָאתֶם לַיהוָה; וּדְעוּ, חַטַּאתְכֶם, אֲשֶׁר תִּמְצָא, אֶתְכֶם.	23 But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the LORD; and know ye your sin which will find you.
32.24 כד  בְּנוּ-לָכֶם עָרִים לְטַפְּכֶם, וּגְדֵרֹת לְצֹנַאֲכֶם; וְהַיֹּצֵא מִפִּיכֶם, תַּעֲשׂוּ.	24 Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep; and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.'
32.25 כה  וַיֹּאמֶר בְּנֵי-גָד וּבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵאמֹר:  עֲבָדֶיךָ יַעֲשׂוּ, כַּאֲשֶׁר אֲדֹנִי מְצַוֶּה.	25 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spoke unto Moses, saying: 'Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.
32.26 כו  טַפֵּנוּ נָשֵׁינוּ, מִקְנֵנוּ וְכָל-בְּהֶמְתֵּנוּ--יִהְיוּ-שָׁם, בְּעָרֵי הַגִּלְעָד.	26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead;
32.27 כז  וַעֲבָדֶיךָ יַעַבְרוּ כָּל-חֲלוּץ צָבָא, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--לַמִּלְחָמָה:  כַּאֲשֶׁר אֲדֹנִי, דֹּבֵר.	27 but thy servants will pass over, every man that is armed for war, before the LORD to battle, as my lord saith.'
32.28 כח  וַיְצַו לָהֶם, מֹשֶׁה, אֵת אֶלְעָזָר הַכֹּהֵן, וְאֵת יְהוֹשֻׁעַ בִּן-נוּן; וְאֶת-רָאשֵׁי אֲבוֹת הַמַּטּוֹת, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	28 So Moses gave charge concerning them to Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of the fathers' houses of the tribes of the children of Israel.
32.29 כט  וַיֹּאמֶר מֹשֶׁה אֲלֵהֶם, אִם-יַעַבְרוּ בְנֵי-גָד וּבְנֵי-רְאוּבֵן אִתְּכֶם אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן כָּל-חָלוּץ לַמִּלְחָמָה לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, וְנִכְבְּשָׁה הָאָרֶץ, לִפְנֵיכֶם--וּנְתַתֶּם לָהֶם אֶת-אֶרֶץ הַגִּלְעָד, לַאֲחֻזָּה.	29 And Moses said unto them: 'If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over the Jordan, every man that is armed to battle, before the LORD, and the land shall be subdued before you, then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession;
32.30 ל  וְאִם-לֹא יַעַבְרוּ חֲלוּצִים, אִתְּכֶם--וְנֹאחֲזוּ בְתֹכְכֶם, בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן.	30 but if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.'
32.31 לא  וַיַּעֲנוּ בְנֵי-גָד וּבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן, לֵאמֹר:  אֵת אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר יְהוָה אֶל-עֲבָדֶיךָ, כֵּן נַעֲשֶׂה.	31 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying: 'As the LORD hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.
32.32 לב  נַחְנוּ נַעֲבֹר חֲלוּצִים לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן; וְאִתָּנוּ אֲחֻזַּת נַחֲלָתֵנוּ, מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן.	32 We will pass over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan, and the possession of our inheritance shall remain with us beyond the Jordan.'
32.33 לג  וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם מֹשֶׁה לִבְנֵי-גָד וְלִבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן וְלַחֲצִי שֵׁבֶט מְנַשֶּׁה בֶן-יוֹסֵף, אֶת-מַמְלֶכֶת סִיחֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, וְאֶת-מַמְלֶכֶת, עוֹג מֶלֶךְ הַבָּשָׁן:  הָאָרֶץ, לְעָרֶיהָ בִּגְבֻלֹת--עָרֵי הָאָרֶץ, סָבִיב.	33 And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto the half-tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, according to the cities thereof with their borders, even the cities of the land round about.
32.34 לד  וַיִּבְנוּ בְנֵי-גָד, אֶת-דִּיבֹן וְאֶת-עֲטָרֹת, וְאֵת, עֲרֹעֵר.	34 And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer;
32.35 לה  וְאֶת-עַטְרֹת שׁוֹפָן וְאֶת-יַעְזֵר, וְיָגְבְּהָה.	35 and Atroth-shophan, and Jazer, and Jogbehah;
32.36 לו  וְאֶת-בֵּית נִמְרָה, וְאֶת-בֵּית הָרָן:  עָרֵי מִבְצָר, וְגִדְרֹת צֹאן.	36 and Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran; fortified cities, and folds for sheep.
32.37 לז  וּבְנֵי רְאוּבֵן בָּנוּ, אֶת-חֶשְׁבּוֹן וְאֶת-אֶלְעָלֵא, וְאֵת, קִרְיָתָיִם.	37 And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kiriathaim;
32.38 לח  וְאֶת-נְבוֹ וְאֶת-בַּעַל מְעוֹן, מוּסַבֹּת שֵׁם--וְאֶת-שִׂבְמָה; וַיִּקְרְאוּ בְשֵׁמֹת, אֶת-שְׁמוֹת הֶעָרִים אֲשֶׁר בָּנוּ.	38 and Nebo, and Baal-meon--their names being changed--and Sibmah; and gave their names unto the cities which they builded.
32.39 לט  וַיֵּלְכוּ בְּנֵי מָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה, גִּלְעָדָה--וַיִּלְכְּדֻהָ; וַיּוֹרֶשׁ, אֶת-הָאֱמֹרִי אֲשֶׁר-בָּהּ.	39 And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorites that were therein.
32.40 מ  וַיִּתֵּן מֹשֶׁה אֶת-הַגִּלְעָד, לְמָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה; וַיֵּשֶׁב, בָּהּ.	40 And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.
32.41 מא  וְיָאִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה הָלַךְ, וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-חַוֺּתֵיהֶם; וַיִּקְרָא אֶתְהֶן, חַוֺּת יָאִיר.	41 And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the villages thereof, and called them Havvoth-jair.
32.42 מב  וְנֹבַח הָלַךְ, וַיִּלְכֹּד אֶת-קְנָת וְאֶת-בְּנֹתֶיהָ; וַיִּקְרָא לָה נֹבַח, בִּשְׁמוֹ.  {פ}	42 And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his own name. {P}
33.1 א  אֵלֶּה מַסְעֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֲשֶׁר יָצְאוּ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם--לְצִבְאֹתָם:  בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה, וְאַהֲרֹן.	1 These are the stages of the children of Israel, by which they went forth out of the land of Egypt by their hosts under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
33.2 ב  וַיִּכְתֹּב מֹשֶׁה אֶת-מוֹצָאֵיהֶם, לְמַסְעֵיהֶם--עַל-פִּי יְהוָה; וְאֵלֶּה מַסְעֵיהֶם, לְמוֹצָאֵיהֶם.	2 And Moses wrote their goings forth, stage by stage, by the commandment of the LORD; and these are their stages at their goings forth.
33.3 ג  וַיִּסְעוּ מֵרַעְמְסֵס בַּחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן, בַּחֲמִשָּׁה עָשָׂר יוֹם לַחֹדֶשׁ הָרִאשׁוֹן:  מִמָּחֳרַת הַפֶּסַח, יָצְאוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּיָד רָמָה--לְעֵינֵי, כָּל-מִצְרָיִם.	3 And they journeyed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the children of Israel went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians,
33.4 ד  וּמִצְרַיִם מְקַבְּרִים, אֵת אֲשֶׁר הִכָּה יְהוָה בָּהֶם--כָּל-בְּכוֹר; וּבֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, עָשָׂה יְהוָה שְׁפָטִים.	4 while the Egyptians were burying them that the LORD had smitten among them, even all their first-born; upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments.
33.5 ה  וַיִּסְעוּ בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, מֵרַעְמְסֵס; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּסֻכֹּת.	5 And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth.
33.6 ו  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִסֻּכֹּת; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְאֵתָם, אֲשֶׁר בִּקְצֵה הַמִּדְבָּר.	6 And they journeyed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness.
33.7 ז  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵאֵתָם, וַיָּשָׁב עַל-פִּי הַחִירֹת, אֲשֶׁר עַל-פְּנֵי בַּעַל צְפוֹן; וַיַּחֲנוּ, לִפְנֵי מִגְדֹּל.	7 And they journeyed from Etham, and turned back unto Pihahiroth, which is before Baal-zephon; and they pitched before Migdol.
33.8 ח  וַיִּסְעוּ מִפְּנֵי הַחִירֹת, וַיַּעַבְרוּ בְתוֹךְ-הַיָּם הַמִּדְבָּרָה; וַיֵּלְכוּ דֶּרֶךְ שְׁלֹשֶׁת יָמִים, בְּמִדְבַּר אֵתָם, וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמָרָה.	8 And they journeyed from Penehahiroth, and passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness; and they went three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.
33.9 ט  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִמָּרָה, וַיָּבֹאוּ, אֵילִמָה; וּבְאֵילִם שְׁתֵּים עֶשְׂרֵה עֵינֹת מַיִם, וְשִׁבְעִים תְּמָרִים--וַיַּחֲנוּ-שָׁם.	9 And they journeyed from Marah, and came unto Elim; and in Elim were twelve springs of water, and threescore and ten palm-trees; and they pitched there.
33.10 י  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵאֵילִם; וַיַּחֲנוּ, עַל-יַם-סוּף.	10 And they journeyed from Elim, and pitched by the Red Sea.
33.11 יא  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִיַּם-סוּף; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמִדְבַּר-סִין.	11 And they journeyed from the Red Sea, and pitched in the wilderness of Sin.
33.12 יב  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִמִּדְבַּר-סִין; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּדָפְקָה.	12 And they journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, and pitched in Dophkah.
33.13 יג  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִדָּפְקָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּאָלוּשׁ.	13 And they journeyed from Dophkah, and pitched in Alush.
33.14 יד  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵאָלוּשׁ; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בִּרְפִידִם, וְלֹא-הָיָה שָׁם מַיִם לָעָם, לִשְׁתּוֹת.	14 And they journeyed from Alush, and pitched in Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink.
33.15 טו  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵרְפִידִם; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמִדְבַּר סִינָי.	15 And they journeyed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of Sinai.
33.16 טז  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִמִּדְבַּר סִינָי; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּקִבְרֹת הַתַּאֲוָה.	16 And they journeyed from the wilderness of Sinai, and pitched in Kibroth-hattaavah.
33.17 יז  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִקִּבְרֹת הַתַּאֲוָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בַּחֲצֵרֹת.	17 And they journeyed from Kibroth-hattaavah, and pitched in Hazeroth.
33.18 יח  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵחֲצֵרֹת; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּרִתְמָה.	18 And they journeyed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.
33.19 יט  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵרִתְמָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּרִמֹּן פָּרֶץ.	19 And they journeyed from Rithmah, and pitched in Rimmon-perez.
33.20 כ  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵרִמֹּן פָּרֶץ; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּלִבְנָה.	20 And they journeyed from Rimmon-perez, and pitched in Libnah.
33.21 כא  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִלִּבְנָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּרִסָּה.	21 And they journeyed from Libnah, and pitched in Rissah.
33.22 כב  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵרִסָּה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בִּקְהֵלָתָה.	22 And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelah.
33.23 כג  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִקְּהֵלָתָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּהַר-שָׁפֶר.	23 And they journeyed from Kehelah, and pitched in mount Shepher.
33.24 כד  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵהַר-שָׁפֶר; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בַּחֲרָדָה.	24 And they journeyed from mount Shepher, and pitched in Haradah.
33.25 כה  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵחֲרָדָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמַקְהֵלֹת.	25 And they journeyed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.
33.26 כו  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִמַּקְהֵלֹת; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּתָחַת.	26 And they journeyed from Makheloth, and pitched in Tahath.
33.27 כז  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִתָּחַת; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּתָרַח.	27 And they journeyed from Tahath, and pitched in Terah.
33.28 כח  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִתָּרַח; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמִתְקָה.	28 And they journeyed from Terah, and pitched in Mithkah.
33.29 כט  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִמִּתְקָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּחַשְׁמֹנָה.	29 And they journeyed from Mithkah, and pitched in Hashmonah.
33.30 ל  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵחַשְׁמֹנָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּמֹסֵרוֹת.	30 And they journeyed from Hashmonah, and pitched in Moseroth.
33.31 לא  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִמֹּסֵרוֹת; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בִּבְנֵי יַעֲקָן.	31 And they journeyed from Moseroth, and pitched in Bene-jaakan.
33.32 לב  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִבְּנֵי יַעֲקָן; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּחֹר הַגִּדְגָּד.	32 And they journeyed from Bene-jaakan, and pitched in Hor-haggidgad.
33.33 לג  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵחֹר הַגִּדְגָּד; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּיָטְבָתָה.	33 And they journeyed from Hor-haggidgad, and pitched in Jotbah.
33.34 לד  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִיָּטְבָתָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּעַבְרֹנָה.	34 And they journeyed from Jotbah, and pitched in Abronah.
33.35 לה  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵעַבְרֹנָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּעֶצְיֹן גָּבֶר.	35 And they journeyed from Abronah, and pitched in Ezion-geber.
33.36 לו  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵעֶצְיֹן גָּבֶר; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְמִדְבַּר-צִן, הִוא קָדֵשׁ.	36 And they journeyed from Ezion-geber, and pitched in the wilderness of Zin--the same is Kadesh.
33.37 לז  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִקָּדֵשׁ; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּהֹר הָהָר, בִּקְצֵה אֶרֶץ אֱדוֹם.	37 And they journeyed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.--
33.38 לח  וַיַּעַל אַהֲרֹן הַכֹּהֵן אֶל-הֹר הָהָר, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה--וַיָּמָת שָׁם:  בִּשְׁנַת הָאַרְבָּעִים, לְצֵאת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, בַּחֹדֶשׁ הַחֲמִישִׁי, בְּאֶחָד לַחֹדֶשׁ.	38 And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of the LORD, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month.
33.39 לט  וְאַהֲרֹן, בֶּן-שָׁלֹשׁ וְעֶשְׂרִים וּמְאַת שָׁנָה, בְּמֹתוֹ, בְּהֹר הָהָר.  {ס}	39 And Aaron was a hundred and twenty and three years old when he died in mount Hor. {S}
33.40 מ  וַיִּשְׁמַע, הַכְּנַעֲנִי מֶלֶךְ עֲרָד, וְהוּא-יֹשֵׁב בַּנֶּגֶב, בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן--בְּבֹא, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	40 And the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the South in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.--
33.41 מא  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵהֹר הָהָר; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּצַלְמֹנָה.	41 And they journeyed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.
33.42 מב  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִצַּלְמֹנָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּפוּנֹן.	42 And they journeyed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.
33.43 מג  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִפּוּנֹן; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּאֹבֹת.	43 And they journeyed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.
33.44 מד  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵאֹבֹת; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּעִיֵּי הָעֲבָרִים, בִּגְבוּל מוֹאָב.	44 And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched in Ije-abarim, in the border of Moab.
33.45 מה  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵעִיִּים; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּדִיבֹן גָּד.	45 And they journeyed from Ijim, and pitched in Dibon-gad.
33.46 מו  וַיִּסְעוּ, מִדִּיבֹן גָּד; וַיַּחֲנוּ, בְּעַלְמֹן דִּבְלָתָיְמָה.	46 And they journeyed from Dibon-gad, and pitched in Almon-diblathaim.
33.47 מז  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵעַלְמֹן דִּבְלָתָיְמָה; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּהָרֵי הָעֲבָרִים, לִפְנֵי נְבוֹ.	47 And they journeyed from Almon-diblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, in front of Nebo.
33.48 מח  וַיִּסְעוּ, מֵהָרֵי הָעֲבָרִים; וַיַּחֲנוּ בְּעַרְבֹת מוֹאָב, עַל יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ.	48 And they journeyed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
33.49 מט  וַיַּחֲנוּ עַל-הַיַּרְדֵּן מִבֵּית הַיְשִׁמֹת, עַד אָבֵל הַשִּׁטִּים, בְּעַרְבֹת, מוֹאָב.  {ס}	49 And they pitched by the Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth even unto Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab. {S}
33.50 נ  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בְּעַרְבֹת מוֹאָב, עַל-יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ, לֵאמֹר.	50 And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying:
33.51 נא  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  כִּי אַתֶּם עֹבְרִים אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, אֶל-אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן.	51 'Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
33.52 נב  וְהוֹרַשְׁתֶּם אֶת-כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, מִפְּנֵיכֶם, וְאִבַּדְתֶּם, אֵת כָּל-מַשְׂכִּיֹּתָם; וְאֵת כָּל-צַלְמֵי מַסֵּכֹתָם תְּאַבֵּדוּ, וְאֵת כָּל-בָּמוֹתָם תַּשְׁמִידוּ.	52 then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their figured stones, and destroy all their molten images, and demolish all their high places.
33.53 נג  וְהוֹרַשְׁתֶּם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, וִישַׁבְתֶּם-בָּהּ:  כִּי לָכֶם נָתַתִּי אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, לָרֶשֶׁת אֹתָהּ.	53 And ye shall drive out the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein; for unto you have I given the land to possess it.
33.54 נד  וְהִתְנַחַלְתֶּם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ בְּגוֹרָל לְמִשְׁפְּחֹתֵיכֶם, לָרַב תַּרְבּוּ אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ וְלַמְעַט תַּמְעִיט אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ--אֶל אֲשֶׁר-יֵצֵא לוֹ שָׁמָּה הַגּוֹרָל, לוֹ יִהְיֶה:  לְמַטּוֹת אֲבֹתֵיכֶם, תִּתְנֶחָלוּ.	54 And ye shall inherit the land by lot according to your families--to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and to the fewer thou shalt give the less inheritance; wheresoever the lot falleth to any man, that shall be his; according to the tribes of your fathers shall ye inherit.
33.55 נה  וְאִם-לֹא תוֹרִישׁוּ אֶת-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ, מִפְּנֵיכֶם--וְהָיָה אֲשֶׁר תּוֹתִירוּ מֵהֶם, לְשִׂכִּים בְּעֵינֵיכֶם וְלִצְנִינִם בְּצִדֵּיכֶם; וְצָרְרוּ אֶתְכֶם--עַל-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם יֹשְׁבִים בָּהּ.	55 But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then shall those that ye let remain of them be as thorns in your eyes, and as pricks in your sides, and they shall harass you in the land wherein ye dwell.
33.56 נו  וְהָיָה, כַּאֲשֶׁר דִּמִּיתִי לַעֲשׂוֹת לָהֶם--אֶעֱשֶׂה לָכֶם.  {פ}	56 And it shall come to pass, that as I thought to do unto them, so will I do unto you. {P}
34.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
34.2 ב  צַו אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם, כִּי-אַתֶּם בָּאִים, אֶל-הָאָרֶץ כְּנָעַן:  זֹאת הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר תִּפֹּל לָכֶם בְּנַחֲלָה, אֶרֶץ כְּנַעַן, לִגְבֻלֹתֶיהָ.	2 'Command the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye come into the land of Canaan, this shall be the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan according to the borders thereof.
34.3 ג  וְהָיָה לָכֶם פְּאַת-נֶגֶב מִמִּדְבַּר-צִן, עַל-יְדֵי אֱדוֹם; וְהָיָה לָכֶם גְּבוּל נֶגֶב, מִקְצֵה יָם-הַמֶּלַח קֵדְמָה.	3 Thus your south side shall be from the wilderness of Zin close by the side of Edom, and your south border shall begin at the end of the Salt Sea eastward;
34.4 ד  וְנָסַב לָכֶם הַגְּבוּל מִנֶּגֶב לְמַעֲלֵה עַקְרַבִּים, וְעָבַר צִנָה, והיה (וְהָיוּ) תּוֹצְאֹתָיו, מִנֶּגֶב לְקָדֵשׁ בַּרְנֵעַ; וְיָצָא חֲצַר-אַדָּר, וְעָבַר עַצְמֹנָה.	4 and your border shall turn about southward of the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass along to Zin; and the goings out thereof shall be southward of Kadesh-barnea; and it shall go forth to Hazar-addar, and pass along to Azmon;
34.5 ה  וְנָסַב הַגְּבוּל מֵעַצְמוֹן, נַחְלָה מִצְרָיִם; וְהָיוּ תוֹצְאֹתָיו, הַיָּמָּה.	5 and the border shall turn about from Azmon unto the Brook of Egypt, and the goings out thereof shall be at the Sea.
34.6 ו  וּגְבוּל יָם, וְהָיָה לָכֶם הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל וּגְבוּל; זֶה-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, גְּבוּל יָם.	6 And for the western border, ye shall have the Great Sea for a border; this shall be your west border.
34.7 ז  וְזֶה-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, גְּבוּל צָפוֹן:  מִן-הַיָּם, הַגָּדֹל, תְּתָאוּ לָכֶם, הֹר הָהָר.	7 And this shall be your north border: from the Great Sea ye shall mark out your line unto mount Hor;
34.8 ח  מֵהֹר הָהָר, תְּתָאוּ לְבֹא חֲמָת; וְהָיוּ תּוֹצְאֹת הַגְּבֻל, צְדָדָה.	8 from mount Hor ye shall mark out a line unto the entrance to Hamath; and the goings out of the border shall be at Zedad;
34.9 ט  וְיָצָא הַגְּבֻל זִפְרֹנָה, וְהָיוּ תוֹצְאֹתָיו חֲצַר עֵינָן; זֶה-יִהְיֶה לָכֶם, גְּבוּל צָפוֹן.	9 and the border shall go forth to Ziphron, and the goings out thereof shall be at Hazar-enan; this shall be your north border.
34.10 י  וְהִתְאַוִּיתֶם לָכֶם, לִגְבוּל קֵדְמָה, מֵחֲצַר עֵינָן, שְׁפָמָה.	10 And ye shall mark out your line for the east border from Hazar-enan to Shepham;
34.11 יא  וְיָרַד הַגְּבֻל מִשְּׁפָם הָרִבְלָה, מִקֶּדֶם לָעָיִן; וְיָרַד הַגְּבֻל, וּמָחָה עַל-כֶּתֶף יָם-כִּנֶּרֶת קֵדְמָה.	11 and the border shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall go down, and shall strike upon the slope of the sea of Chinnereth eastward;
34.12 יב  וְיָרַד הַגְּבוּל הַיַּרְדֵּנָה, וְהָיוּ תוֹצְאֹתָיו יָם הַמֶּלַח; זֹאת תִּהְיֶה לָכֶם הָאָרֶץ לִגְבֻלֹתֶיהָ, סָבִיב.	12 and the border shall go down to the Jordan, and the goings out thereof shall be at the Salt Sea; this shall be your land according to the borders thereof round about.'
34.13 יג  וַיְצַו מֹשֶׁה, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לֵאמֹר:  זֹאת הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְנַחֲלוּ אֹתָהּ בְּגוֹרָל, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, לָתֵת לְתִשְׁעַת הַמַּטּוֹת וַחֲצִי הַמַּטֶּה.	13 And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying: 'This is the land wherein ye shall receive inheritance by lot, which the LORD hath commanded to give unto the nine tribes, and to the half-tribe;
34.14 יד  כִּי לָקְחוּ מַטֵּה בְנֵי הָראוּבֵנִי, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם, וּמַטֵּה בְנֵי-הַגָּדִי, לְבֵית אֲבֹתָם; וַחֲצִי מַטֵּה מְנַשֶּׁה, לָקְחוּ נַחֲלָתָם.	14 for the tribe of the children of Reuben according to their fathers' houses, and the tribe of the children of Gad according to their fathers' houses, have received, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received, their inheritance;
34.15 טו  שְׁנֵי הַמַּטּוֹת, וַחֲצִי הַמַּטֶּה:  לָקְחוּ נַחֲלָתָם, מֵעֵבֶר לְיַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ--קֵדְמָה מִזְרָחָה.  {פ}	15 the two tribes and the half-tribe have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, toward the sun-rising.' {P}
34.16 טז  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	16 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
34.17 יז  אֵלֶּה שְׁמוֹת הָאֲנָשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-יִנְחֲלוּ לָכֶם אֶת-הָאָרֶץ:  אֶלְעָזָר, הַכֹּהֵן, וִיהוֹשֻׁעַ, בִּן-נוּן.	17 'These are the names of the men that shall take possession of the land for you: Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun.
34.18 יח  וְנָשִׂיא אֶחָד נָשִׂיא אֶחָד, מִמַּטֶּה--תִּקְחוּ, לִנְחֹל אֶת-הָאָרֶץ.	18 And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to take possession of the land.
34.19 יט  וְאֵלֶּה, שְׁמוֹת הָאֲנָשִׁים:  לְמַטֵּה יְהוּדָה, כָּלֵב בֶּן-יְפֻנֶּה.	19 And these are the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
34.20 כ  וּלְמַטֵּה בְּנֵי שִׁמְעוֹן, שְׁמוּאֵל בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד.	20 And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.
34.21 כא  לְמַטֵּה בִנְיָמִן, אֱלִידָד בֶּן-כִּסְלוֹן.	21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
34.22 כב  וּלְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-דָן, נָשִׂיא--בֻּקִּי, בֶּן-יָגְלִי.	22 And of the tribe of the children of Dan a prince, Bukki the son of Jogli.
34.23 כג  לִבְנֵי יוֹסֵף, לְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה נָשִׂיא--חַנִּיאֵל, בֶּן-אֵפֹד.	23 Of the children of Joseph: of the tribe of the children of Manasseh a prince, Hanniel the son of Ephod;
34.24 כד  וּלְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם, נָשִׂיא--קְמוּאֵל, בֶּן-שִׁפְטָן.	24 and of the tribe of the children of Ephraim a prince, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
34.25 כה  וּלְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-זְבוּלֻן, נָשִׂיא--אֱלִיצָפָן, בֶּן-פַּרְנָךְ.	25 And of the tribe of the children of Zebulun a prince, Eli-zaphan the son of Parnach.
34.26 כו  וּלְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-יִשָּׂשכָר, נָשִׂיא--פַּלְטִיאֵל, בֶּן-עַזָּן.	26 And of the tribe of the children of Issachar a prince, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
34.27 כז  וּלְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-אָשֵׁר, נָשִׂיא--אֲחִיהוּד, בֶּן-שְׁלֹמִי.	27 And of the tribe of the children of Asher a prince, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
34.28 כח  וּלְמַטֵּה בְנֵי-נַפְתָּלִי, נָשִׂיא--פְּדַהְאֵל, בֶּן-עַמִּיהוּד.	28 And of the tribe of the children of Naphtali a prince, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
34.29 כט  אֵלֶּה, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, לְנַחֵל אֶת-בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן.  {פ}	29 These are they whom the LORD commanded to divide the inheritance unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.' {P}
35.1 א  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה אֶל-מֹשֶׁה, בְּעַרְבֹת מוֹאָב, עַל-יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ, לֵאמֹר.	1 And the LORD spoke unto Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying:
35.2 ב  צַו, אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְנָתְנוּ לַלְוִיִּם מִנַּחֲלַת אֲחֻזָּתָם, עָרִים לָשָׁבֶת; וּמִגְרָשׁ, לֶעָרִים סְבִיבֹתֵיהֶם, תִּתְּנוּ, לַלְוִיִּם.	2 'Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in; and open land round about the cities shall ye give unto the Levites.
35.3 ג  וְהָיוּ הֶעָרִים לָהֶם, לָשָׁבֶת; וּמִגְרְשֵׁיהֶם, יִהְיוּ לִבְהֶמְתָּם וְלִרְכֻשָׁם, וּלְכֹל, חַיָּתָם.	3 And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and their open land shall be for their cattle, and for their substance, and for all their beasts.
35.4 ד  וּמִגְרְשֵׁי, הֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְּנוּ, לַלְוִיִּם--מִקִּיר הָעִיר וָחוּצָה, אֶלֶף אַמָּה סָבִיב.	4 And the open land about the cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, shall be from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.
35.5 ה  וּמַדֹּתֶם מִחוּץ לָעִיר, אֶת-פְּאַת-קֵדְמָה אַלְפַּיִם בָּאַמָּה וְאֶת-פְּאַת-נֶגֶב אַלְפַּיִם בָּאַמָּה וְאֶת-פְּאַת-יָם אַלְפַּיִם בָּאַמָּה וְאֵת פְּאַת צָפוֹן אַלְפַּיִם בָּאַמָּה--וְהָעִיר בַּתָּוֶךְ; זֶה יִהְיֶה לָהֶם, מִגְרְשֵׁי הֶעָרִים.	5 And ye shall measure without the city for the east side two thousand cubits, and for the south side two thousand cubits, and for the west side two thousand cubits, and for the north side two thousand cubits, the city being in the midst. This shall be to them the open land about the cities.
35.6 ו  וְאֵת הֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְּנוּ לַלְוִיִּם--אֵת שֵׁשׁ-עָרֵי הַמִּקְלָט, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְּנוּ לָנֻס שָׁמָּה הָרֹצֵחַ; וַעֲלֵיהֶם תִּתְּנוּ, אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁתַּיִם עִיר.	6 And the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, they shall be the six cities of refuge, which ye shall give for the manslayer to flee thither; and beside them ye shall give forty and two cities.
35.7 ז  כָּל-הֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְּנוּ לַלְוִיִּם--אַרְבָּעִים וּשְׁמֹנֶה, עִיר:  אֶתְהֶן, וְאֶת-מִגְרְשֵׁיהֶן.	7 All the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with the open land about them.
35.8 ח  וְהֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר תִּתְּנוּ מֵאֲחֻזַּת בְּנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל--מֵאֵת הָרַב תַּרְבּוּ, וּמֵאֵת הַמְעַט תַּמְעִיטוּ:  אִישׁ, כְּפִי נַחֲלָתוֹ אֲשֶׁר יִנְחָלוּ, יִתֵּן מֵעָרָיו, לַלְוִיִּם.  {פ}	8 And concerning the cities which ye shall give of the possession of the children of Israel, from the many ye shall take many, and from the few ye shall take few; each tribe according to its inheritance which it inheriteth shall give of its cities unto the Levites.' {P}
35.9 ט  וַיְדַבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶל-מֹשֶׁה לֵּאמֹר.	9 And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying:
35.10 י  דַּבֵּר אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָמַרְתָּ אֲלֵהֶם:  כִּי אַתֶּם עֹבְרִים אֶת-הַיַּרְדֵּן, אַרְצָה כְּנָעַן.	10 'Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them: When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
35.11 יא  וְהִקְרִיתֶם לָכֶם עָרִים, עָרֵי מִקְלָט תִּהְיֶינָה לָכֶם; וְנָס שָׁמָּה רֹצֵחַ, מַכֵּה-נֶפֶשׁ בִּשְׁגָגָה.	11 then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you, that the manslayer that killeth any person through error may flee thither.
35.12 יב  וְהָיוּ לָכֶם הֶעָרִים לְמִקְלָט, מִגֹּאֵל; וְלֹא יָמוּת הָרֹצֵחַ, עַד-עָמְדוֹ לִפְנֵי הָעֵדָה לַמִּשְׁפָּט.	12 And the cities shall be unto you for refuge from the avenger, that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation for judgment.
35.13 יג  וְהֶעָרִים, אֲשֶׁר תִּתֵּנוּ--שֵׁשׁ-עָרֵי מִקְלָט, תִּהְיֶינָה לָכֶם.	13 And as to the cities which ye shall give, there shall be for you six cities of refuge.
35.14 יד  אֵת שְׁלֹשׁ הֶעָרִים, תִּתְּנוּ מֵעֵבֶר לַיַּרְדֵּן, וְאֵת שְׁלֹשׁ הֶעָרִים, תִּתְּנוּ בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן:  עָרֵי מִקְלָט, תִּהְיֶינָה.	14 Ye shall give three cities beyond the Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan; they shall be cities of refuge.
35.15 טו  לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְלַגֵּר וְלַתּוֹשָׁב בְּתוֹכָם, תִּהְיֶינָה שֵׁשׁ-הֶעָרִים הָאֵלֶּה, לְמִקְלָט--לָנוּס שָׁמָּה, כָּל-מַכֵּה-נֶפֶשׁ בִּשְׁגָגָה.	15 For the children of Israel, and for the stranger and for the settler among them, shall these six cities be for refuge, that every one that killeth any person through error may flee thither.
35.16 טז  וְאִם-בִּכְלִי בַרְזֶל הִכָּהוּ וַיָּמֹת, רֹצֵחַ הוּא:  מוֹת יוּמַת, הָרֹצֵחַ.	16 But if he smote him with an instrument of iron, so that he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death.
35.17 יז  וְאִם בְּאֶבֶן יָד אֲשֶׁר-יָמוּת בָּהּ הִכָּהוּ, וַיָּמֹת--רֹצֵחַ הוּא:  מוֹת יוּמַת, הָרֹצֵחַ.	17 And if he smote him with a stone in the hand, whereby a man may die, and he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death.
35.18 יח  אוֹ בִּכְלִי עֵץ-יָד אֲשֶׁר-יָמוּת בּוֹ הִכָּהוּ, וַיָּמֹת--רֹצֵחַ הוּא:  מוֹת יוּמַת, הָרֹצֵחַ.	18 Or if he smote him with a weapon of wood in the hand, whereby a man may die, and he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall surely be put to death.
35.19 יט  גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, הוּא יָמִית אֶת-הָרֹצֵחַ:  בְּפִגְעוֹ-בוֹ, הוּא יְמִתֶנּוּ.	19 The avenger of blood shall himself put the murderer to death; when he meeteth him, he shall put him to death.
35.20 כ  וְאִם-בְּשִׂנְאָה, יֶהְדֳּפֶנּוּ, אוֹ-הִשְׁלִיךְ עָלָיו בִּצְדִיָּה, וַיָּמֹת.	20 And if he thrust him of hatred, or hurled at him any thing, lying in wait, so that he died;
35.21 כא  אוֹ בְאֵיבָה הִכָּהוּ בְיָדוֹ, וַיָּמֹת--מוֹת-יוּמַת הַמַּכֶּה, רֹצֵחַ הוּא:  גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, יָמִית אֶת-הָרֹצֵחַ--בְּפִגְעוֹ-בוֹ.	21 or in enmity smote him with his hand, that he died; he that smote him shall surely be put to death: he is a murderer; the avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death when he meeteth him.
35.22 כב  וְאִם-בְּפֶתַע בְּלֹא-אֵיבָה, הֲדָפוֹ, אוֹ-הִשְׁלִיךְ עָלָיו כָּל-כְּלִי, בְּלֹא צְדִיָּה.	22 But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or hurled upon him any thing without lying in wait,
35.23 כג  אוֹ בְכָל-אֶבֶן אֲשֶׁר-יָמוּת בָּהּ, בְּלֹא רְאוֹת, וַיַּפֵּל עָלָיו, וַיָּמֹת--וְהוּא לֹא-אוֹיֵב לוֹ, וְלֹא מְבַקֵּשׁ רָעָתוֹ.	23 or with any stone, whereby a man may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon him, so that he died, and he was not his enemy, neither sought his harm;
35.24 כד  וְשָׁפְטוּ, הָעֵדָה, בֵּין הַמַּכֶּה, וּבֵין גֹּאֵל הַדָּם--עַל הַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, הָאֵלֶּה.	24 then the congregation shall judge between the smiter and the avenger of blood according to these ordinances;
35.25 כה  וְהִצִּילוּ הָעֵדָה אֶת-הָרֹצֵחַ, מִיַּד גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, וְהֵשִׁיבוּ אֹתוֹ הָעֵדָה, אֶל-עִיר מִקְלָטוֹ אֲשֶׁר-נָס שָׁמָּה; וְיָשַׁב בָּהּ, עַד-מוֹת הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדֹל, אֲשֶׁר-מָשַׁח אֹתוֹ, בְּשֶׁמֶן הַקֹּדֶשׁ.	25 and the congregation shall deliver the manslayer out of the hand of the avenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to his city of refuge, whither he was fled; and he shall dwell therein until the death of the high priest, who was anointed with the holy oil.
35.26 כו  וְאִם-יָצֹא יֵצֵא, הָרֹצֵחַ, אֶת-גְּבוּל עִיר מִקְלָטוֹ, אֲשֶׁר יָנוּס שָׁמָּה.	26 But if the manslayer shall at any time go beyond the border of his city of refuge, whither he fleeth;
35.27 כז  וּמָצָא אֹתוֹ, גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, מִחוּץ, לִגְבוּל עִיר מִקְלָטוֹ:  וְרָצַח גֹּאֵל הַדָּם, אֶת-הָרֹצֵחַ--אֵין לוֹ, דָּם.	27 and the avenger of blood find him without the border of his city of refuge, and the avenger of blood slay the manslayer; there shall be no bloodguiltiness for him;
35.28 כח  כִּי בְעִיר מִקְלָטוֹ יֵשֵׁב, עַד-מוֹת הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדֹל; וְאַחֲרֵי מוֹת, הַכֹּהֵן הַגָּדֹל--יָשׁוּב הָרֹצֵחַ, אֶל-אֶרֶץ אֲחֻזָּתוֹ.	28 because he must remain in his city of refuge until the death of the high priest; but after the death of the high priest the manslayer may return into the land of his possession.
35.29 כט  וְהָיוּ אֵלֶּה לָכֶם לְחֻקַּת מִשְׁפָּט, לְדֹרֹתֵיכֶם, בְּכֹל, מוֹשְׁבֹתֵיכֶם.	29 And these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
35.30 ל  כָּל-מַכֵּה-נֶפֶשׁ--לְפִי עֵדִים, יִרְצַח אֶת-הָרֹצֵחַ; וְעֵד אֶחָד, לֹא-יַעֲנֶה בְנֶפֶשׁ לָמוּת.	30 Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be slain at the mouth of witnesses; but one witness shall not testify against any person that he die.
35.31 לא  וְלֹא-תִקְחוּ כֹפֶר לְנֶפֶשׁ רֹצֵחַ, אֲשֶׁר-הוּא רָשָׁע לָמוּת:  כִּי-מוֹת, יוּמָת.	31 Moreover ye shall take no ransom for the life of a murderer, that is guilty of death; but he shall surely be put to death.
35.32 לב  וְלֹא-תִקְחוּ כֹפֶר, לָנוּס אֶל-עִיר מִקְלָטוֹ, לָשׁוּב לָשֶׁבֶת בָּאָרֶץ, עַד-מוֹת הַכֹּהֵן.	32 And ye shall take no ransom for him that is fled to his city of refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
35.33 לג  וְלֹא-תַחֲנִיפוּ אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם בָּהּ, כִּי הַדָּם, הוּא יַחֲנִיף אֶת-הָאָרֶץ; וְלָאָרֶץ לֹא-יְכֻפַּר, לַדָּם אֲשֶׁר שֻׁפַּךְ-בָּהּ, כִּי-אִם, בְּדַם שֹׁפְכוֹ.	33 So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are; for blood, it polluteth the land; and no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.
35.34 לד  וְלֹא תְטַמֵּא אֶת-הָאָרֶץ, אֲשֶׁר אַתֶּם יֹשְׁבִים בָּהּ--אֲשֶׁר אֲנִי, שֹׁכֵן בְּתוֹכָהּ:  כִּי, אֲנִי יְהוָה--שֹׁכֵן, בְּתוֹךְ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.  {פ}	34 And thou shalt not defile the land which ye inhabit, in the midst of which I dwell; for I the LORD dwell in the midst of the children of Israel.' {P}
36.1 א  וַיִּקְרְבוּ רָאשֵׁי הָאָבוֹת, לְמִשְׁפַּחַת בְּנֵי-גִלְעָד בֶּן-מָכִיר בֶּן-מְנַשֶּׁה--מִמִּשְׁפְּחֹת, בְּנֵי יוֹסֵף; וַיְדַבְּרוּ לִפְנֵי מֹשֶׁה, וְלִפְנֵי הַנְּשִׂאִים--רָאשֵׁי אָבוֹת, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	1 And the heads of the fathers' houses of the family of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spoke before Moses, and before the princes, the heads of the fathers' houses of the children of Israel;
36.2 ב  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, אֶת-אֲדֹנִי צִוָּה יְהוָה, לָתֵת אֶת-הָאָרֶץ בְּנַחֲלָה בְּגוֹרָל, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל; וַאדֹנִי, צֻוָּה בַיהוָה, לָתֵת אֶת-נַחֲלַת צְלָפְחָד אָחִינוּ, לִבְנֹתָיו.	2 and they said: 'The LORD commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by lot to the children of Israel; and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.
36.3 ג  וְהָיוּ לְאֶחָד מִבְּנֵי שִׁבְטֵי בְנֵי-יִשְׂרָאֵל, לְנָשִׁים, וְנִגְרְעָה נַחֲלָתָן מִנַּחֲלַת אֲבֹתֵינוּ, וְנוֹסַף עַל נַחֲלַת הַמַּטֶּה אֲשֶׁר תִּהְיֶינָה לָהֶם; וּמִגֹּרַל נַחֲלָתֵנוּ, יִגָּרֵעַ.	3 And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then will their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers, and will be added to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they shall belong; so will it be taken away from the lot of our inheritance.
36.4 ד  וְאִם-יִהְיֶה הַיֹּבֵל, לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְנוֹסְפָה נַחֲלָתָן, עַל נַחֲלַת הַמַּטֶּה אֲשֶׁר תִּהְיֶינָה לָהֶם; וּמִנַּחֲלַת מַטֵּה אֲבֹתֵינוּ, יִגָּרַע נַחֲלָתָן.	4 And when the jubilee of the children of Israel shall be, then will their inheritance be added unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they shall belong; so will their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.'
36.5 ה  וַיְצַו מֹשֶׁה אֶת-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עַל-פִּי יְהוָה לֵאמֹר:  כֵּן מַטֵּה בְנֵי-יוֹסֵף, דֹּבְרִים.	5 And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word of the LORD, saying: 'The tribe of the sons of Joseph speaketh right.
36.6 ו  זֶה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר-צִוָּה יְהוָה, לִבְנוֹת צְלָפְחָד לֵאמֹר, לַטּוֹב בְּעֵינֵיהֶם, תִּהְיֶינָה לְנָשִׁים:  אַךְ, לְמִשְׁפַּחַת מַטֵּה אֲבִיהֶם--תִּהְיֶינָה לְנָשִׁים.	6 This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying: Let them be married to whom they think best; only into the family of the tribe of their father shall they be married.
36.7 ז  וְלֹא-תִסֹּב נַחֲלָה לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמַּטֶּה אֶל-מַטֶּה:  כִּי אִישׁ, בְּנַחֲלַת מַטֵּה אֲבֹתָיו, יִדְבְּקוּ, בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	7 So shall no inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe; for the children of Israel shall cleave every one to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
36.8 ח  וְכָל-בַּת יֹרֶשֶׁת נַחֲלָה, מִמַּטּוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--לְאֶחָד מִמִּשְׁפַּחַת מַטֵּה אָבִיהָ, תִּהְיֶה לְאִשָּׁה:  לְמַעַן, יִירְשׁוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִישׁ, נַחֲלַת אֲבֹתָיו.	8 And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may possess every man the inheritance of his fathers.
36.9 ט  וְלֹא-תִסֹּב נַחֲלָה מִמַּטֶּה, לְמַטֶּה אַחֵר:  כִּי-אִישׁ, בְּנַחֲלָתוֹ, יִדְבְּקוּ, מַטּוֹת בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.	9 So shall no inheritance remove from one tribe to another tribe; for the tribes of the children of Israel shall cleave each one to its own inheritance.'
36.10 י  כַּאֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה, אֶת-מֹשֶׁה, כֵּן עָשׂוּ, בְּנוֹת צְלָפְחָד.	10 Even as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad.
36.11 יא  וַתִּהְיֶינָה מַחְלָה תִרְצָה, וְחָגְלָה וּמִלְכָּה וְנֹעָה--בְּנוֹת צְלָפְחָד:  לִבְנֵי דֹדֵיהֶן, לְנָשִׁים.	11 For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father's brothers' sons.
36.12 יב  מִמִּשְׁפְּחֹת בְּנֵי-מְנַשֶּׁה בֶן-יוֹסֵף, הָיוּ לְנָשִׁים; וַתְּהִי, נַחֲלָתָן, עַל-מַטֵּה, מִשְׁפַּחַת אֲבִיהֶן.	12 They were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.
36.13 יג  אֵלֶּה הַמִּצְוֺת וְהַמִּשְׁפָּטִים, אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְהוָה בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה--אֶל-בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:  בְּעַרְבֹת מוֹאָב, עַל יַרְדֵּן יְרֵחוֹ.  {ש}	13 These are the commandments and the ordinances, which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho. {P}
