1.1 א  אַשְׁרֵי הָאִישׁ--    אֲשֶׁר לֹא הָלַךְ, בַּעֲצַת רְשָׁעִים; וּבְדֶרֶךְ חַטָּאִים, לֹא עָמָד,    וּבְמוֹשַׁב לֵצִים, לֹא יָשָׁב. 1 Happy is the man that hath not walked in the counsel of the wicked, {N} nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the scornful.
1.2 ב  כִּי אִם בְּתוֹרַת יְהוָה, חֶפְצוֹ;    וּבְתוֹרָתוֹ יֶהְגֶּה, יוֹמָם וָלָיְלָה. 2 But his delight is in the law of the LORD; and in His law doth he meditate day and night.
1.3 ג  וְהָיָה--    כְּעֵץ, שָׁתוּל עַל-פַּלְגֵי-מָיִם: אֲשֶׁר פִּרְיוֹ, יִתֵּן בְּעִתּוֹ--וְעָלֵהוּ לֹא-יִבּוֹל;    וְכֹל אֲשֶׁר-יַעֲשֶׂה יַצְלִיחַ. 3 And he shall be like a tree planted by streams of water, {N} that bringeth forth its fruit in its season, and whose leaf doth not wither; and in whatsoever he doeth he shall prosper.
1.4 ד  לֹא-כֵן הָרְשָׁעִים:    כִּי אִם-כַּמֹּץ, אֲשֶׁר-תִּדְּפֶנּוּ רוּחַ. 4 Not so the wicked; but they are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.
1.5 ה  עַל-כֵּן, לֹא-יָקֻמוּ רְשָׁעִים--בַּמִּשְׁפָּט;    וְחַטָּאִים, בַּעֲדַת צַדִּיקִים. 5 Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
1.6 ו  כִּי-יוֹדֵעַ יְהוָה, דֶּרֶךְ צַדִּיקִים;    וְדֶרֶךְ רְשָׁעִים תֹּאבֵד. 6 For the LORD regardeth the way of the righteous; but the way of the wicked shall perish. {P}
2.1 א  לָמָּה, רָגְשׁוּ גוֹיִם;    וּלְאֻמִּים, יֶהְגּוּ-רִיק. 1 Why are the nations in an uproar? And why do the peoples mutter in vain?
2.2 ב  יִתְיַצְּבוּ, מַלְכֵי-אֶרֶץ--    וְרוֹזְנִים נוֹסְדוּ-יָחַד: עַל-יְהוָה,    וְעַל-מְשִׁיחוֹ. 2 The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together, {N} against the LORD, and against His anointed:
2.3 ג  נְנַתְּקָה, אֶת-מוֹסְרוֹתֵימוֹ;    וְנַשְׁלִיכָה מִמֶּנּוּ עֲבֹתֵימוֹ. 3 'Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.'
2.4 ד  יוֹשֵׁב בַּשָּׁמַיִם יִשְׂחָק:    אֲדֹנָי, יִלְעַג-לָמוֹ. 4 He that sitteth in heaven laugheth, the Lord hath them in derision.
2.5 ה  אָז יְדַבֵּר אֵלֵימוֹ בְאַפּוֹ;    וּבַחֲרוֹנוֹ יְבַהֲלֵמוֹ. 5 Then will He speak unto them in His wrath, and affright them in His sore displeasure:
2.6 ו  וַאֲנִי, נָסַכְתִּי מַלְכִּי:    עַל-צִיּוֹן, הַר-קָדְשִׁי. 6 'Truly it is I that have established My king upon Zion, My holy mountain.'
2.7 ז  אֲסַפְּרָה, אֶל-חֹק:    יְהוָה, אָמַר אֵלַי בְּנִי אַתָּה--אֲנִי, הַיּוֹם יְלִדְתִּיךָ. 7 I will tell of the decree: the LORD said unto me: 'Thou art My son, this day have I begotten thee.
2.8 ח  שְׁאַל מִמֶּנִּי--וְאֶתְּנָה גוֹיִם, נַחֲלָתֶךָ;    וַאֲחֻזָּתְךָ, אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ. 8 Ask of Me, and I will give the nations for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession.
2.9 ט  תְּרֹעֵם, בְּשֵׁבֶט בַּרְזֶל:    כִּכְלִי יוֹצֵר תְּנַפְּצֵם. 9 Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.'
2.10 י  וְעַתָּה, מְלָכִים הַשְׂכִּילוּ;    הִוָּסְרוּ, שֹׁפְטֵי אָרֶץ. 10 Now therefore, O ye kings, be wise; be admonished, ye judges of the earth.
2.11 יא  עִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה בְּיִרְאָה;    וְגִילוּ, בִּרְעָדָה. 11 Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
2.12 יב  נַשְּׁקוּ-בַר, פֶּן-יֶאֱנַף וְתֹאבְדוּ דֶרֶךְ--    כִּי-יִבְעַר כִּמְעַט אַפּוֹ: אַשְׁרֵי,    כָּל-חוֹסֵי בוֹ. 12 Do homage in purity, lest He be angry, and ye perish in the way, when suddenly His wrath is kindled. {N} Happy are all they that take refuge in Him. {P}
3.1 א  מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד:    בְּבָרְחוֹ, מִפְּנֵי אַבְשָׁלוֹם בְּנוֹ. יְהוָה, מָה-רַבּוּ צָרָי;    רַבִּים, קָמִים עָלָי. 1 A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son. LORD, how many are mine adversaries become! Many are they that rise up against me.
3.2 ב רַבִּים, אֹמְרִים לְנַפְשִׁי:    אֵין יְשׁוּעָתָה לּוֹ בֵאלֹהִים סֶלָה.   2  Many there are that say of my soul: 'There is no salvation for him in God.' Selah
3.3 ג וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, מָגֵן בַּעֲדִי;    כְּבוֹדִי, וּמֵרִים רֹאשִׁי.   3  But thou, O LORD, art a shield about me; my glory, and the lifter up of my head.
3.4 ד קוֹלִי, אֶל-יְהוָה אֶקְרָא;    וַיַּעֲנֵנִי מֵהַר קָדְשׁוֹ סֶלָה.   4  With my voice I call unto the LORD, and He answereth me out of His holy mountain. Selah
3.5 ה אֲנִי שָׁכַבְתִּי, וָאִישָׁנָה;    הֱקִיצוֹתִי--כִּי יְהוָה יִסְמְכֵנִי.   5  I lay me down, and I sleep; I awake, for the LORD sustaineth me.
3.6 ו לֹא-אִירָא, מֵרִבְבוֹת עָם--    אֲשֶׁר סָבִיב, שָׁתוּ עָלָי.   6  I am not afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about.
3.7 ז קוּמָה יְהוָה, הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי אֱלֹהַי--    כִּי-הִכִּיתָ אֶת-כָּל-אֹיְבַי לֶחִי; שִׁנֵּי רְשָׁעִים    שִׁבַּרְתָּ.   7  Arise, O LORD; save me, O my God; for Thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek, {N} Thou hast broken the teeth of the wicked.
3.8 ח לַיהוָה הַיְשׁוּעָה;    עַל-עַמְּךָ בִרְכָתֶךָ סֶּלָה.   8  Salvation belongeth unto the LORD; Thy blessing be upon Thy people. Selah {P}
4.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ בִּנְגִינוֹת, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. בְּקָרְאִי, עֲנֵנִי אֱלֹהֵי צִדְקִי--בַּצָּר, הִרְחַבְתָּ לִּי;    חָנֵּנִי, וּשְׁמַע תְּפִלָּתִי. 1 For the Leader; with string-music. A Psalm of David. Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness, Thou who didst set me free when I was in distress; be gracious unto me, and hear my prayer.
4.2 ב בְּנֵי אִישׁ, עַד-מֶה כְבוֹדִי לִכְלִמָּה--תֶּאֱהָבוּן רִיק;    תְּבַקְשׁוּ כָזָב סֶלָה.   2  O ye sons of men, how long shall my glory be put to shame, in that ye love vanity, and seek after falsehood? Selah
4.3 ג וּדְעוּ--כִּי-הִפְלָה יְהוָה, חָסִיד לוֹ;    יְהוָה יִשְׁמַע, בְּקָרְאִי אֵלָיו.   3  But know that the LORD hath set apart the godly man as His own; the LORD will hear when I call unto Him.
4.4 ד רִגְזוּ, וְאַל-תֶּחֱטָאוּ:    אִמְרוּ בִלְבַבְכֶם, עַל-מִשְׁכַּבְכֶם; וְדֹמּוּ סֶלָה.   4  Tremble, and sin not; commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah
4.5 ה זִבְחוּ זִבְחֵי-צֶדֶק;    וּבִטְחוּ, אֶל-יְהוָה.   5  Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the LORD.
4.6 ו רַבִּים אֹמְרִים, מִי-יַרְאֵנוּ-טוֹב:    נְסָה עָלֵינוּ, אוֹר פָּנֶיךָ יְהוָה.   6  Many there are that say: 'Oh that we could see some good!' LORD, lift Thou up the light of Thy countenance upon us.
4.7 ז נָתַתָּה שִׂמְחָה בְלִבִּי;    מֵעֵת דְּגָנָם וְתִירוֹשָׁם רָבּוּ.   7  Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than when their corn and their wine increase.
4.8 ח בְּשָׁלוֹם יַחְדָּו, אֶשְׁכְּבָה וְאִישָׁן:    כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה לְבָדָד; לָבֶטַח, תּוֹשִׁיבֵנִי.   8  In peace will I both lay me down and sleep; for Thou, LORD, makest me dwell alone in safety. {P}
5.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ אֶל-הַנְּחִילוֹת,    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. אֲמָרַי הַאֲזִינָה יְהוָה;    בִּינָה הֲגִיגִי. 1 For the Leader; upon the Nehiloth. A Psalm of David. Give ear to my words, O LORD, consider my meditation.
5.2 ב הַקְשִׁיבָה, לְקוֹל שַׁוְעִי--מַלְכִּי וֵאלֹהָי:    כִּי-אֵלֶיךָ, אֶתְפַּלָּל.   2  Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for unto Thee do I pray.
5.3 ג יְהוָה--בֹּקֶר, תִּשְׁמַע קוֹלִי;    בֹּקֶר אֶעֱרָךְ-לְךָ, וַאֲצַפֶּה.   3  O LORD, in the morning shalt Thou hear my voice; in the morning will I order my prayer unto Thee, and will look forward.
5.4 ד כִּי, לֹא אֵל חָפֵץ רֶשַׁע אָתָּה:    לֹא יְגֻרְךָ רָע.   4  For Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness; evil shall not sojourn with Thee.
5.5 ה לֹא-יִתְיַצְּבוּ הוֹלְלִים, לְנֶגֶד עֵינֶיךָ;    שָׂנֵאתָ, כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן.   5  The boasters shall not stand in Thy sight; Thou hatest all workers of iniquity.
5.6 ו תְּאַבֵּד, דֹּבְרֵי כָזָב:    אִישׁ-דָּמִים וּמִרְמָה, יְתָעֵב יְהוָה.   6  Thou destroyest them that speak falsehood; the LORD abhorreth the man of blood and of deceit.
5.7 ז וַאֲנִי--בְּרֹב חַסְדְּךָ, אָבוֹא בֵיתֶךָ;    אֶשְׁתַּחֲוֶה אֶל-הֵיכַל-קָדְשְׁךָ, בְּיִרְאָתֶךָ.   7  But as for me, in the abundance of Thy lovingkindness will I come into Thy house; I will bow down toward Thy holy temple in the fear of Thee.
5.8 ח יְהוָה, נְחֵנִי בְצִדְקָתֶךָ--לְמַעַן שׁוֹרְרָי;    הושר (הַיְשַׁר) לְפָנַי דַּרְכֶּךָ.   8  O LORD, lead me in Thy righteousness because of them that lie in wait for me; make Thy way straight before my face.
5.9 ט   9 כִּי אֵין בְּפִיהוּ, נְכוֹנָה--קִרְבָּם הַוּוֹת:    קֶבֶר-פָּתוּחַ גְּרֹנָם; לְשׁוֹנָם, יַחֲלִיקוּן.  For there is no sincerity in their mouth; their inward part is a yawning gulf, their throat is an open sepulchre; they make smooth their tongue.
5.10 י   1 הַאֲשִׁימֵם, אֱלֹהִים--    יִפְּלוּ, מִמֹּעֲצוֹתֵיהֶם: בְּרֹב פִּשְׁעֵיהֶם, הַדִּיחֵמוֹ--    כִּי-מָרוּ בָךְ.0  Hold them guilty, O God, let them fall by their own counsels; {N} cast them down in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have rebelled against Thee.
5.11 י וְיִשְׂמְחוּ כָל-חוֹסֵי בָךְ, לְעוֹלָם יְרַנֵּנוּ--    וְתָסֵךְ עָלֵימוֹ; וְיַעְלְצוּ בְךָ,    אֹהֲבֵי שְׁמֶךָ.א   11  So shall all those that take refuge in Thee rejoice, they shall ever shout for joy, and Thou shalt shelter them; {N} let them also that love Thy name exult in Thee.
5.12 י כִּי-אַתָּה, תְּבָרֵךְ צַדִּיק:    יְהוָה--כַּצִּנָּה, רָצוֹן תַּעְטְרֶנּוּ.ב   12  For Thou dost bless the righteous; O LORD, Thou dost encompass him with favour as with a shield. {P}
6.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ בִּנְגִינוֹת, עַל-הַשְּׁמִינִית;    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. יְהוָה, אַל-בְּאַפְּךָ תוֹכִיחֵנִי;    וְאַל-בַּחֲמָתְךָ תְיַסְּרֵנִי. 1 For the Leader; with string-music; on the Sheminith. A Psalm of David. O LORD, rebuke me not in Thine anger, neither chasten me in Thy wrath.
6.2 ב חָנֵּנִי יְהוָה, כִּי אֻמְלַל-אָנִי:    רְפָאֵנִי יְהוָה--כִּי נִבְהֲלוּ עֲצָמָי.   2  Be gracious unto me, O LORD, for I languish away; heal me, O LORD, for my bones are affrighted.
6.3 ג וְנַפְשִׁי, נִבְהֲלָה מְאֹד;    ואת (וְאַתָּה) יְהוָה, עַד-מָתָי.   3  My soul also is sore affrighted; and Thou, O LORD, how long?
6.4 ד שׁוּבָה יְהוָה, חַלְּצָה נַפְשִׁי;    הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי, לְמַעַן חַסְדֶּךָ.   4  Return, O LORD, deliver my soul; save me for Thy mercy's sake.
6.5 ה כִּי אֵין בַּמָּוֶת זִכְרֶךָ;    בִּשְׁאוֹל, מִי יוֹדֶה-לָּךְ.   5  For in death there is no remembrance of Thee; in the nether-world who will give Thee thanks?
6.6 ו יָגַעְתִּי, בְּאַנְחָתִי--אַשְׂחֶה בְכָל-לַיְלָה, מִטָּתִי;    בְּדִמְעָתִי, עַרְשִׂי אַמְסֶה.   6  I am weary with my groaning; every night make I my bed to swim; I melt away my couch with my tears.
6.7 ז עָשְׁשָׁה מִכַּעַס עֵינִי;    עָתְקָה, בְּכָל-צוֹרְרָי.   7  Mine eye is dimmed because of vexation; it waxeth old because of all mine adversaries.
6.8 ח סוּרוּ מִמֶּנִּי, כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן:    כִּי-שָׁמַע יְהוָה, קוֹל בִּכְיִי.   8  Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the LORD hath heard the voice of my weeping.
6.9 ט   9 שָׁמַע יְהוָה, תְּחִנָּתִי;    יְהוָה, תְּפִלָּתִי יִקָּח.  The LORD hath heard my supplication; the LORD receiveth my prayer.
6.10 י   1 יֵבֹשׁוּ, וְיִבָּהֲלוּ מְאֹד--כָּל-אֹיְבָי;    יָשֻׁבוּ, יֵבֹשׁוּ רָגַע.0  All mine enemies shall be ashamed and sore affrighted; they shall turn back, they shall be ashamed suddenly. {P}
7.1 א  שִׁגָּיוֹן, לְדָוִד:    אֲשֶׁר-שָׁר לַיהוָה--עַל-דִּבְרֵי-כוּשׁ, בֶּן-יְמִינִי. יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי, בְּךָ חָסִיתִי;    הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי מִכָּל-רֹדְפַי, וְהַצִּילֵנִי. 1 Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the LORD, concerning Cush a Benjamite. O LORD my God, in Thee have I taken refuge; save me from all them that pursue me, and deliver me;
7.2 ב פֶּן-יִטְרֹף כְּאַרְיֵה נַפְשִׁי;    פֹּרֵק, וְאֵין מַצִּיל.   2  Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.
7.3 ג יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי, אִם-עָשִׂיתִי זֹאת;    אִם-יֶשׁ-עָוֶל בְּכַפָּי.   3  O LORD my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands;
7.4 ד אִם-גָּמַלְתִּי, שׁוֹלְמִי רָע;    וָאֲחַלְּצָה צוֹרְרִי רֵיקָם.   4  If I have requited him that did evil unto me, or spoiled mine adversary unto emptiness;
7.5 ה יִרַדֹּף אוֹיֵב נַפְשִׁי, וְיַשֵּׂג--וְיִרְמֹס לָאָרֶץ חַיָּי;    וּכְבוֹדִי, לֶעָפָר יַשְׁכֵּן סֶלָה.   5  Let the enemy pursue my soul, and overtake it, and tread my life down to the earth; yea, let him lay my glory in the dust. Selah
7.6 ו קוּמָה יְהוָה, בְּאַפֶּךָ--הִנָּשֵׂא, בְּעַבְרוֹת צוֹרְרָי;    וְעוּרָה אֵלַי, מִשְׁפָּט צִוִּיתָ.   6  Arise, O LORD, in Thine anger, lift up Thyself in indignation against mine adversaries; yea, awake for me at the judgment which Thou hast commanded.
7.7 ז וַעֲדַת לְאֻמִּים, תְּסוֹבְבֶךָּ;    וְעָלֶיהָ, לַמָּרוֹם שׁוּבָה.   7  And let the congregation of the peoples compass Thee about, and over them return Thou on high.
7.8 ח יְהוָה, יָדִין עַמִּים:    שָׁפְטֵנִי יְהוָה; כְּצִדְקִי וּכְתֻמִּי עָלָי.   8  O LORD, who ministerest judgment to the peoples, judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.
7.9 ט   9 יִגְמָר נָא רַע, רְשָׁעִים--    וּתְכוֹנֵן צַדִּיק; וּבֹחֵן לִבּוֹת, וּכְלָיוֹת--    אֱלֹהִים צַדִּיק.  Oh that a full measure of evil might come upon the wicked, and that Thou wouldest establish the righteous; {N} for the righteous God trieth the heart and reins.
7.10 י   1 מָגִנִּי עַל-אֱלֹהִים;    מוֹשִׁיעַ, יִשְׁרֵי-לֵב.0  My shield is with God, who saveth the upright in heart.
7.11 י אֱלֹהִים, שׁוֹפֵט צַדִּיק;    וְאֵל, זֹעֵם בְּכָל-יוֹם.א   11  God is a righteous judge, yea, a God that hath indignation every day:
7.12 י אִם-לֹא יָשׁוּב, חַרְבּוֹ יִלְטוֹשׁ;    קַשְׁתּוֹ דָרַךְ, וַיְכוֹנְנֶהָ.ב   12  If a man turn not, He will whet His sword, He hath bent His bow, and made it ready;
7.13 י וְלוֹ, הֵכִין כְּלֵי מָוֶת;    חִצָּיו, לְדֹלְקִים יִפְעָל.ג   13  He hath also prepared for him the weapons of death, yea, His arrows which He made sharp.
7.14 י הִנֵּה יְחַבֶּל-אָוֶן;    וְהָרָה עָמָל, וְיָלַד שָׁקֶר.ד   14  Behold, he travaileth with iniquity; yea, he conceiveth mischief, and bringeth forth falsehood.
7.15 ט בּוֹר כָּרָה, וַיַּחְפְּרֵהוּ;    וַיִּפֹּל, בְּשַׁחַת יִפְעָל.ו   15  He hath digged a pit, and hollowed it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.
7.16 ט יָשׁוּב עֲמָלוֹ בְרֹאשׁוֹ;    וְעַל קָדְקֳדוֹ, חֲמָסוֹ יֵרֵד.ז   16  His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violence shall come down upon his own pate.
7.17 י אוֹדֶה יְהוָה כְּצִדְקוֹ;    וַאֲזַמְּרָה, שֵׁם-יְהוָה עֶלְיוֹן.ז   17  I will give thanks unto the LORD according to His righteousness; and will sing praise to the name of the LORD Most High. {P}
8.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-הַגִּתִּית,    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. יְהוָה אֲדֹנֵינוּ--    מָה-אַדִּיר שִׁמְךָ, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ; אֲשֶׁר תְּנָה הוֹדְךָ,    עַל-הַשָּׁמָיִם. 1 For the Leader; upon the Gittith. A Psalm of David. O LORD, our Lord, how glorious is Thy name in all the earth! {N} whose majesty is rehearsed above the heavens.
8.2 ב מִפִּי עוֹלְלִים, וְיֹנְקִים--    יִסַּדְתָּ-עֹז: לְמַעַן צוֹרְרֶיךָ;    לְהַשְׁבִּית אוֹיֵב, וּמִתְנַקֵּם.   2  Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast Thou founded strength, {N} because of Thine adversaries; that Thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.
8.3 ג כִּי-אֶרְאֶה שָׁמֶיךָ,    מַעֲשֵׂה אֶצְבְּעֹתֶיךָ-- יָרֵחַ וְכוֹכָבִים,    אֲשֶׁר כּוֹנָנְתָּה.   3  When I behold Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers, {N} the moon and the stars, which Thou hast established;
8.4 ד מָה-אֱנוֹשׁ כִּי-תִזְכְּרֶנּוּ;    וּבֶן-אָדָם, כִּי תִפְקְדֶנּוּ.   4  What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that Thou thinkest of him?
8.5 ה וַתְּחַסְּרֵהוּ מְּעַט, מֵאֱלֹהִים;    וְכָבוֹד וְהָדָר תְּעַטְּרֵהוּ.   5  Yet Thou hast made him but little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.
8.6 ו תַּמְשִׁילֵהוּ, בְּמַעֲשֵׂי יָדֶיךָ;    כֹּל, שַׁתָּה תַחַת-רַגְלָיו.   6  Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet:
8.7 ז צֹנֶה וַאֲלָפִים כֻּלָּם;    וְגַם, בַּהֲמוֹת שָׂדָי.   7  Sheep and oxen, all of them, yea, and the beasts of the field;
8.8 ח צִפּוֹר שָׁמַיִם, וּדְגֵי הַיָּם;    עֹבֵר, אָרְחוֹת יַמִּים.   8  The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea; whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.
8.9 ט   9 יְהוָה אֲדֹנֵינוּ:    מָה-אַדִּיר שִׁמְךָ, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ.  O LORD, our Lord, how glorious is Thy name in all the earth! {P}
9.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, עַל-מוּת לַבֵּן;    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. אוֹדֶה יְהוָה, בְּכָל-לִבִּי;    אֲסַפְּרָה, כָּל-נִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ. 1 For the Leader; upon Muthlabben. A Psalm of David. I will give thanks unto the LORD with my whole heart; I will tell of all Thy marvellous works.
9.2 ב אֶשְׂמְחָה וְאֶעֶלְצָה בָךְ;    אֲזַמְּרָה שִׁמְךָ עֶלְיוֹן.   2  I will be glad and exult in Thee; I will sing praise to Thy name, O Most High:
9.3 ג בְּשׁוּב-אוֹיְבַי אָחוֹר;    יִכָּשְׁלוּ וְיֹאבְדוּ, מִפָּנֶיךָ.   3  When mine enemies are turned back, they stumble and perish at Thy presence;
9.4 ד כִּי-עָשִׂיתָ, מִשְׁפָּטִי וְדִינִי;    יָשַׁבְתָּ לְכִסֵּא, שׁוֹפֵט צֶדֶק.   4  For Thou hast maintained my right and my cause; Thou sattest upon the throne as the righteous Judge.
9.5 ה גָּעַרְתָּ גוֹיִם, אִבַּדְתָּ רָשָׁע;    שְׁמָם מָחִיתָ, לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד.   5  Thou hast rebuked the nations, Thou hast destroyed the wicked, Thou hast blotted out their name for ever and ever.
9.6 ו הָאוֹיֵב, תַּמּוּ חֳרָבוֹת--לָנֶצַח;    וְעָרִים נָתַשְׁתָּ--אָבַד זִכְרָם הֵמָּה.   6  O thou enemy, the waste places are come to an end for ever; and the cities which thou didst uproot, their very memorial is perished.
9.7 ז וַיהוָה, לְעוֹלָם יֵשֵׁב;    כּוֹנֵן לַמִּשְׁפָּט כִּסְאוֹ.   7  But the LORD is enthroned for ever; He hath established His throne for judgment.
9.8 ח וְהוּא, יִשְׁפֹּט-תֵּבֵל בְּצֶדֶק;    יָדִין לְאֻמִּים, בְּמֵישָׁרִים.   8  And He will judge the world in righteousness, He will minister judgment to the peoples with equity.
9.9 ט   9 וִיהִי יְהוָה מִשְׂגָּב לַדָּךְ;    מִשְׂגָּב, לְעִתּוֹת בַּצָּרָה.  The LORD also will be a high tower for the oppressed, a high tower in times of trouble;
9.10 י   1 וְיִבְטְחוּ בְךָ, יוֹדְעֵי שְׁמֶךָ:    כִּי לֹא-עָזַבְתָּ דֹרְשֶׁיךָ יְהוָה.0  And they that know Thy name will put their trust in Thee; for Thou, LORD, hast not forsaken them that seek Thee.
9.11 י זַמְּרוּ--לַיהוָה, יֹשֵׁב צִיּוֹן;    הַגִּידוּ בָעַמִּים, עֲלִילוֹתָיו.א   11  Sing praises to the LORD, who dwelleth in Zion; declare among the peoples His doings.
9.12 י כִּי-דֹרֵשׁ דָּמִים, אוֹתָם זָכָר;    לֹא-שָׁכַח, צַעֲקַת עניים (עֲנָוִים)ב   12  13 For He that avengeth blood hath remembered them; He hath not forgotten the cry of the humble.
9.13 יג  . חָנְנֵנִי יְהוָה--רְאֵה עָנְיִי, מִשֹּׂנְאָי;    מְרוֹמְמִי, מִשַּׁעֲרֵי מָוֶת.  Be gracious unto me, O LORD, behold mine affliction at the hands of them that hate me; Thou that liftest me up from the gates of death;
9.14 י לְמַעַן אֲסַפְּרָה, כָּל-תְּהִלָּתֶיךָ:    בְּשַׁעֲרֵי בַת-צִיּוֹן--אָגִילָה, בִּישׁוּעָתֶךָ.ד   14  That I may tell of all Thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion, that I may rejoice in Thy salvation.
9.15 ט טָבְעוּ גוֹיִם, בְּשַׁחַת עָשׂוּ;    בְּרֶשֶׁת-זוּ טָמָנוּ, נִלְכְּדָה רַגְלָם.ו   15  The nations are sunk down in the pit that they made; in the net which they hid is their own foot taken.
9.16 ט נוֹדַע, יְהוָה--מִשְׁפָּט עָשָׂה:    בְּפֹעַל כַּפָּיו, נוֹקֵשׁ רָשָׁע; הִגָּיוֹן סֶלָה.ז   16  The LORD hath made Himself known, He hath executed judgment, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah
9.17 י יָשׁוּבוּ רְשָׁעִים לִשְׁאוֹלָה:    כָּל-גּוֹיִם, שְׁכֵחֵי אֱלֹהִים.ז   17  The wicked shall return to the nether-world, even all the nations that forget God.
9.18 י כִּי לֹא לָנֶצַח, יִשָּׁכַח אֶבְיוֹן;    תִּקְוַת ענוים (עֲנִיִּים), תֹּאבַד לָעַד.ח   18  For the needy shall not alway be forgotten, nor the expectation of the poor perish for ever.
9.19 י קוּמָה יְהוָה, אַל-יָעֹז אֱנוֹשׁ;    יִשָּׁפְטוּ גוֹיִם, עַל-פָּנֶיךָ.ט   19  Arise, O LORD, let not man prevail; let the nations be judged in Thy sight.
9.20 כ   2 שִׁיתָה יְהוָה, מוֹרָה--לָהֶם:    יֵדְעוּ גוֹיִם--אֱנוֹשׁ הֵמָּה סֶּלָה.0  Set terror over them, O LORD; let the nations know they are but men. Selah {P}
10.1 א  לָמָה יְהוָה, תַּעֲמֹד בְּרָחוֹק;    תַּעְלִים, לְעִתּוֹת בַּצָּרָה. 1 Why standest Thou afar off, O LORD? Why hidest Thou Thyself in times of trouble?
10.2 ב  בְּגַאֲוַת רָשָׁע, יִדְלַק עָנִי;    יִתָּפְשׂוּ, בִּמְזִמּוֹת זוּ חָשָׁבוּ. 2 Through the pride of the wicked the poor is hotly pursued, they are taken in the devices that they have imagined.
10.3 ג  כִּי-הִלֵּל רָשָׁע, עַל-תַּאֲוַת נַפְשׁוֹ;    וּבֹצֵעַ בֵּרֵךְ, נִאֵץ יְהוָה. 3 For the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and the covetous vaunteth himself, though he contemn the LORD.
10.4 ד  רָשָׁע--כְּגֹבַהּ אַפּוֹ, בַּל-יִדְרֹשׁ;    אֵין אֱלֹהִים, כָּל-מְזִמּוֹתָיו. 4 The wicked, in the pride of his countenance [, saith]: 'He will not require'; all his thoughts are: 'There is no God.'
10.5 ה  יָחִילוּ דְרָכָו, בְּכָל-עֵת--מָרוֹם מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ, מִנֶּגְדּוֹ;    כָּל-צוֹרְרָיו, יָפִיחַ בָּהֶם. 5 His ways prosper at all times; Thy judgments are far above out of his sight; as for all his adversaries, he puffeth at them.
10.6 ו  אָמַר בְּלִבּוֹ, בַּל-אֶמּוֹט;    לְדֹר וָדֹר, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-בְרָע. 6 He saith in his heart: 'I shall not be moved, I who to all generations shall not be in adversity.'
10.7 ז  אָלָה, פִּיהוּ מָלֵא--וּמִרְמוֹת וָתֹךְ;    תַּחַת לְשׁוֹנוֹ, עָמָל וָאָוֶן. 7 His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and oppression; under his tongue is mischief and iniquity.
10.8 ח  יֵשֵׁב, בְּמַאְרַב חֲצֵרִים--בַּמִּסְתָּרִים, יַהֲרֹג נָקִי;    עֵינָיו, לְחֵלְכָה יִצְפֹּנוּ. 8 He sitteth in the lurking-places of the villages; in secret places doth he slay the innocent; his eyes are on the watch for the helpless.
10.9 ט  יֶאֱרֹב בַּמִּסְתָּר, כְּאַרְיֵה בְסֻכֹּה--    יֶאֱרֹב, לַחֲטוֹף עָנִי; יַחְטֹף עָנִי,    בְּמָשְׁכוֹ בְרִשְׁתּוֹ. 9 He lieth in wait in a secret place as a lion in his lair, he lieth in wait to catch the poor; {N} he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him up in his net.
10.10 י  ודכה (יִדְכֶּה) יָשֹׁחַ;    וְנָפַל בַּעֲצוּמָיו, חלכאים (חֵל כָּאִים). 10 He croucheth, he boweth down, and the helpless fall into his mighty claws.
10.11 יא  אָמַר בְּלִבּוֹ, שָׁכַח אֵל;    הִסְתִּיר פָּנָיו, בַּל-רָאָה לָנֶצַח. 11 He hath said in his heart: 'God hath forgotten; He hideth His face; He will never see.'
10.12 יב  קוּמָה יְהוָה--אֵל, נְשָׂא יָדֶךָ;    אַל-תִּשְׁכַּח עניים (עֲנָוִים). 12 Arise, O LORD; O God, lift up Thy hand; forget not the humble.
10.13 יג  עַל-מֶה, נִאֵץ רָשָׁע אֱלֹהִים;    אָמַר בְּלִבּוֹ, לֹא תִדְרֹשׁ. 13 Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God, and say in his heart: 'Thou wilt not require'?
10.14 יד  רָאִתָה, כִּי-אַתָּה עָמָל וָכַעַס תַּבִּיט--    לָתֵת בְּיָדֶךָ: עָלֶיךָ, יַעֲזֹב חֵלֵכָה;    יָתוֹם, אַתָּה הָיִיתָ עוֹזֵר. 14 Thou hast seen; for Thou beholdest trouble and vexation, to requite them with Thy hand; {N} unto Thee the helpless committeth himself; Thou hast been the helper of the fatherless.
10.15 טו  שְׁבֹר, זְרוֹעַ רָשָׁע;    וָרָע, תִּדְרוֹשׁ-רִשְׁעוֹ בַל-תִּמְצָא. 15 Break Thou the arm of the wicked; and as for the evil man, search out his wickedness, till none be found.
10.16 טז  יְהוָה מֶלֶךְ, עוֹלָם וָעֶד;    אָבְדוּ גוֹיִם, מֵאַרְצוֹ. 16 The LORD is King for ever and ever; the nations are perished out of His land.
10.17 יז  תַּאֲוַת עֲנָוִים שָׁמַעְתָּ יְהוָה;    תָּכִין לִבָּם, תַּקְשִׁיב אָזְנֶךָ. 17 LORD, Thou hast heard the desire of the humble: Thou wilt direct their heart, Thou wilt cause Thine ear to attend;
10.18 יח  לִשְׁפֹּט יָתוֹם, וָדָךְ:    בַּל-יוֹסִיף עוֹד--לַעֲרֹץ אֱנוֹשׁ, מִן-הָאָרֶץ. 18 To right the fatherless and the oppressed, that man who is of the earth may be terrible no more. {P}
11.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְדָוִד: בַּיהוָה, חָסִיתִי--אֵיךְ, תֹּאמְרוּ לְנַפְשִׁי;    נודו (נוּדִי), הַרְכֶם צִפּוֹר. 1 For the Leader. [A Psalm] of David. {N} In the LORD have I taken refuge; how say ye to my soul: 'Flee thou! to your mountain, ye birds'?
11.2 ב  כִּי הִנֵּה הָרְשָׁעִים, יִדְרְכוּן קֶשֶׁת,    כּוֹנְנוּ חִצָּם עַל-יֶתֶר-- לִירוֹת בְּמוֹ-אֹפֶל,    לְיִשְׁרֵי-לֵב. 2 For, lo, the wicked bend the bow, they have made ready their arrow upon the string, {N} that they may shoot in darkness at the upright in heart.
11.3 ג  כִּי הַשָּׁתוֹת, יֵהָרֵסוּן--    צַדִּיק, מַה-פָּעָל. 3 When the foundations are destroyed, what hath the righteous wrought?
11.4 ד  יְהוָה, בְּהֵיכַל קָדְשׁוֹ--    יְהוָה, בַּשָּׁמַיִם כִּסְאוֹ: עֵינָיו יֶחֱזוּ--    עַפְעַפָּיו יִבְחֲנוּ, בְּנֵי אָדָם. 4 The LORD is in His holy temple, the LORD, His throne is in heaven; {N} His eyes behold, His eyelids try, the children of men.
11.5 ה  יְהוָה, צַדִּיק יִבְחָן:    וְרָשָׁע, וְאֹהֵב חָמָס--שָׂנְאָה נַפְשׁוֹ. 5 The LORD trieth the righteous; but the wicked and him that loveth violence His soul hateth.
11.6 ו  יַמְטֵר עַל-רְשָׁעִים, פַּחִים:    אֵשׁ וְגָפְרִית, וְרוּחַ זִלְעָפוֹת--מְנָת כּוֹסָם. 6 Upon the wicked He will cause to rain coals; fire and brimstone and burning wind shall be the portion of their cup.
11.7 ז  כִּי-צַדִּיק יְהוָה, צְדָקוֹת אָהֵב;    יָשָׁר, יֶחֱזוּ פָנֵימוֹ. 7 For the LORD is righteous, He loveth righteousness; the upright shall behold His face. {P}
12.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-הַשְּׁמִינִית,    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. הוֹשִׁיעָה יְהוָה, כִּי-גָמַר חָסִיד:    כִּי-פַסּוּ אֱמוּנִים, מִבְּנֵי אָדָם. 1 For the Leader; on the Sheminith. A Psalm of David. Help, LORD; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men.
12.2 ב שָׁוְא, יְדַבְּרוּ--אִישׁ אֶת-רֵעֵהוּ:    שְׂפַת חֲלָקוֹת--בְּלֵב וָלֵב יְדַבֵּרוּ.   2  They speak falsehood every one with his neighbour; with flattering lip, and with a double heart, do they speak.
12.3 ג יַכְרֵת יְהוָה, כָּל-שִׂפְתֵי חֲלָקוֹת--    לָשׁוֹן, מְדַבֶּרֶת גְּדֹלוֹת.   3  May the LORD cut off all flattering lips, the tongue that speaketh proud things!
12.4 ד אֲשֶׁר אָמְרוּ, לִלְשֹׁנֵנוּ נַגְבִּיר--שְׂפָתֵינוּ אִתָּנוּ:    מִי אָדוֹן לָנוּ.   4  Who have said: 'Our tongue will we make mighty; our lips are with us: who is lord over us?'
12.5 ה מִשֹּׁד עֲנִיִּים,    מֵאֶנְקַת אֶבְיוֹנִים: עַתָּה אָקוּם, יֹאמַר יְהוָה;    אָשִׁית בְּיֵשַׁע, יָפִיחַ לוֹ.   5  'For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, {N} now will I arise', saith the LORD; 'I will set him in safety at whom they puff.'
12.6 ו אִמְרוֹת יְהוָה,    אֲמָרוֹת טְהֹרוֹת: כֶּסֶף צָרוּף, בַּעֲלִיל לָאָרֶץ;    מְזֻקָּק, שִׁבְעָתָיִם.   6  The words of the LORD are pure words, {N} as silver tried in a crucible on the earth, refined seven times.
12.7 ז אַתָּה-יְהוָה תִּשְׁמְרֵם;    תִּצְּרֶנּוּ, מִן-הַדּוֹר זוּ לְעוֹלָם.   7  Thou wilt keep them, O LORD; Thou wilt preserve us from this generation for ever.
12.8 ח סָבִיב, רְשָׁעִים יִתְהַלָּכוּן;    כְּרֻם זֻלּוּת, לִבְנֵי אָדָם.   8  The wicked walk on every side, when vileness is exalted among the sons of men. {P}
13.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David.
13.2 ב  עַד-אָנָה יְהוָה, תִּשְׁכָּחֵנִי נֶצַח;    עַד-אָנָה, תַּסְתִּיר אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ מִמֶּנִּי. 2 How long, O LORD, wilt Thou forget me for ever? How long wilt Thou hide Thy face from me?
13.3 ג  עַד-אָנָה אָשִׁית עֵצוֹת, בְּנַפְשִׁי--    יָגוֹן בִּלְבָבִי יוֹמָם; עַד-אָנָה,    יָרוּם אֹיְבִי עָלָי. 3 How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart by day? {N} How long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?
13.4 ד  הַבִּיטָה עֲנֵנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי;    הָאִירָה עֵינַי, פֶּן-אִישַׁן הַמָּוֶת. 4 Behold Thou, and answer me, O LORD my God; lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;
13.5 ה  פֶּן-יֹאמַר אֹיְבִי יְכָלְתִּיו;    צָרַי יָגִילוּ, כִּי אֶמּוֹט. 5 Lest mine enemy say: 'I have prevailed against him'; lest mine adversaries rejoice when I am moved.
13.6 ו  וַאֲנִי, בְּחַסְדְּךָ בָטַחְתִּי--    יָגֵל לִבִּי, בִּישׁוּעָתֶךָ: אָשִׁירָה לַיהוָה,    כִּי גָמַל עָלָי. 6 But as for me, in Thy mercy do I trust; my heart shall rejoice in Thy salvation. {N} I will sing unto the LORD, because He hath dealt bountifully with me. {P}
14.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְדָוִד: אָמַר נָבָל בְּלִבּוֹ,    אֵין אֱלֹהִים; הִשְׁחִיתוּ, הִתְעִיבוּ עֲלִילָה--    אֵין עֹשֵׂה-טוֹב. 1 For the Leader. [A Psalm] of David. {N} The fool hath said in his heart: 'There is no God'; {N} they have dealt corruptly, they have done abominably; there is none that doeth good.
14.2 ב  יְהוָה--    מִשָּׁמַיִם, הִשְׁקִיף עַל-בְּנֵי-אָדָם: לִרְאוֹת, הֲיֵשׁ מַשְׂכִּיל--    דֹּרֵשׁ, אֶת-אֱלֹהִים. 2 The LORD looked forth from heaven upon the children of men, {N} to see if there were any man of understanding, that did seek after God.
14.3 ג  הַכֹּל סָר, יַחְדָּו נֶאֱלָחוּ:    אֵין עֹשֵׂה-טוֹב--אֵין, גַּם-אֶחָד. 3 They are all corrupt, they are together become impure; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
14.4 ד  הֲלֹא יָדְעוּ, כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי-אָוֶן:    אֹכְלֵי עַמִּי, אָכְלוּ לֶחֶם; יְהוָה, לֹא קָרָאוּ. 4 'Shall not all the workers of iniquity know it, who eat up My people as they eat bread, and call not upon the LORD?'
14.5 ה  שָׁם, פָּחֲדוּ פָחַד:    כִּי-אֱלֹהִים, בְּדוֹר צַדִּיק. 5 There are they in great fear; for God is with the righteous generation.
14.6 ו  עֲצַת-עָנִי תָבִישׁוּ:    כִּי יְהוָה מַחְסֵהוּ. 6 Ye would put to shame the counsel of the poor, but the LORD is his refuge.
14.7 ז  מִי יִתֵּן מִצִּיּוֹן,    יְשׁוּעַת יִשְׂרָאֵל: בְּשׁוּב יְהוָה, שְׁבוּת עַמּוֹ;    יָגֵל יַעֲקֹב, יִשְׂמַח יִשְׂרָאֵל. 7 Oh that the salvation of Israel {N} were come out of Zion! When the LORD turneth the captivity of His people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad. {P}
15.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְדָוִד:    יְהוָה, מִי-יָגוּר בְּאָהֳלֶךָ; מִי-יִשְׁכֹּן, בְּהַר קָדְשֶׁךָ. 1 A Psalm of David. LORD, who shall sojourn in Thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell upon Thy holy mountain?
15.2 ב  הוֹלֵךְ תָּמִים, וּפֹעֵל צֶדֶק;    וְדֹבֵר אֱמֶת, בִּלְבָבוֹ. 2 He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh truth in his heart;
15.3 ג  לֹא-רָגַל, עַל-לְשֹׁנוֹ--לֹא-עָשָׂה לְרֵעֵהוּ רָעָה;    וְחֶרְפָּה, לֹא-נָשָׂא עַל-קְרֹבוֹ. 3 That hath no slander upon his tongue, nor doeth evil to his fellow, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour;
15.4 ד  נִבְזֶה, בְּעֵינָיו נִמְאָס--    וְאֶת-יִרְאֵי יְהוָה יְכַבֵּד; נִשְׁבַּע לְהָרַע,    וְלֹא יָמִר. 4 In whose eyes a vile person is despised, but he honoureth them that fear the LORD; {N} he that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not;
15.5 ה  כַּסְפּוֹ, לֹא-נָתַן בְּנֶשֶׁךְ--    וְשֹׁחַד עַל-נָקִי, לֹא לָקָח: עֹשֵׂה-אֵלֶּה--    לֹא יִמּוֹט לְעוֹלָם. 5 He that putteth not out his money on interest, nor taketh a bribe against the innocent. {N} He that doeth these things shall never be moved. {P}
16.1 א  מִכְתָּם לְדָוִד:    שָׁמְרֵנִי אֵל, כִּי-חָסִיתִי בָךְ. 1 Michtam of David. Keep me, O God; for I have taken refuge in Thee.
16.2 ב  אָמַרְתְּ לַיהוָה, אֲדֹנָי אָתָּה;    טוֹבָתִי, בַּל-עָלֶיךָ. 2 I have said unto the LORD: 'Thou art my Lord; I have no good but in Thee';
16.3 ג  לִקְדוֹשִׁים, אֲשֶׁר-בָּאָרֶץ הֵמָּה;    וְאַדִּירֵי, כָּל-חֶפְצִי-בָם. 3 As for the holy that are in the earth, they are the excellent in whom is all my delight.
16.4 ד  יִרְבּוּ עַצְּבוֹתָם,    אַחֵר מָהָרוּ: בַּל-אַסִּיךְ נִסְכֵּיהֶם מִדָּם;    וּבַל-אֶשָּׂא אֶת-שְׁמוֹתָם, עַל-שְׂפָתָי. 4 Let the idols of them be multiplied that make suit unto another; {N} their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take their names upon my lips.
16.5 ה  יְהוָה, מְנָת-חֶלְקִי וְכוֹסִי--    אַתָּה, תּוֹמִיךְ גּוֹרָלִי. 5 O LORD, the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup, Thou maintainest my lot.
16.6 ו  חֲבָלִים נָפְלוּ-לִי, בַּנְּעִמִים;    אַף-נַחֲלָת, שָׁפְרָה עָלָי. 6 The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.
16.7 ז  אֲבָרֵךְ--אֶת-יְהוָה, אֲשֶׁר יְעָצָנִי;    אַף-לֵילוֹת, יִסְּרוּנִי כִלְיוֹתָי. 7 I will bless the LORD, who hath given me counsel; yea, in the night seasons my reins instruct me.
16.8 ח  שִׁוִּיתִי יְהוָה לְנֶגְדִּי תָמִיד:    כִּי מִימִינִי, בַּל-אֶמּוֹט. 8 I have set the LORD always before me; surely He is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
16.9 ט  לָכֵן, שָׂמַח לִבִּי--וַיָּגֶל כְּבוֹדִי;    אַף-בְּשָׂרִי, יִשְׁכֹּן לָבֶטַח. 9 Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth; my flesh also dwelleth in safety;
16.10 י  כִּי, לֹא-תַעֲזֹב נַפְשִׁי לִשְׁאוֹל;    לֹא-תִתֵּן חֲסִידְךָ, לִרְאוֹת שָׁחַת. 10 For Thou wilt not abandon my soul to the nether-world; neither wilt Thou suffer Thy godly one to see the pit.
16.11 יא  תּוֹדִיעֵנִי,    אֹרַח חַיִּים: שֹׂבַע שְׂמָחוֹת, אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ;    נְעִמוֹת בִּימִינְךָ נֶצַח. 11 Thou makest me to know the path of life; {N} in Thy presence is fulness of joy, in Thy right hand bliss for evermore. {P}
17.1 א  תְּפִלָּה, לְדָוִד: שִׁמְעָה יְהוָה, צֶדֶק--    הַקְשִׁיבָה רִנָּתִי, הַאֲזִינָה תְפִלָּתִי; בְּלֹא,    שִׂפְתֵי מִרְמָה. 1 A Prayer of David. {N} Hear the right, O LORD, attend unto my cry; give ear unto my prayer {N} from lips without deceit.
17.2 ב  מִלְּפָנֶיךָ, מִשְׁפָּטִי יֵצֵא;    עֵינֶיךָ, תֶּחֱזֶינָה מֵישָׁרִים. 2 Let my judgment come forth from Thy presence; let Thine eyes behold equity.
17.3 ג  בָּחַנְתָּ לִבִּי, פָּקַדְתָּ לַּיְלָה--    צְרַפְתַּנִי בַל-תִּמְצָא; זַמֹּתִי,    בַּל-יַעֲבָר-פִּי. 3 Thou hast tried my heart, Thou hast visited it in the night; Thou hast tested me, and Thou findest not {N} that I had a thought which should not pass my mouth.
17.4 ד  לִפְעֻלּוֹת אָדָם, בִּדְבַר שְׂפָתֶיךָ--    אֲנִי שָׁמַרְתִּי, אָרְחוֹת פָּרִיץ. 4 As for the doings of men, by the word of Thy lips I have kept me from the ways of the violent.
17.5 ה  תָּמֹךְ אֲשֻׁרַי, בְּמַעְגְּלוֹתֶיךָ;    בַּל-נָמוֹטּוּ פְעָמָי. 5 My steps have held fast to Thy paths, my feet have not slipped.
17.6 ו  אֲנִי-קְרָאתִיךָ כִי-תַעֲנֵנִי אֵל;    הַט-אָזְנְךָ לִי, שְׁמַע אִמְרָתִי. 6 As for me, I call upon Thee, for Thou wilt answer me, O God; incline Thine ear unto me, hear my speech.
17.7 ז  הַפְלֵה חֲסָדֶיךָ, מוֹשִׁיעַ חוֹסִים--    מִמִּתְקוֹמְמִים, בִּימִינֶךָ. 7 Make passing great Thy mercies, O Thou that savest by Thy right hand from assailants them that take refuge in Thee.
17.8 ח  שָׁמְרֵנִי, כְּאִישׁוֹן בַּת-עָיִן;    בְּצֵל כְּנָפֶיךָ, תַּסְתִּירֵנִי. 8 Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me in the shadow of Thy wings,
17.9 ט  מִפְּנֵי רְשָׁעִים, זוּ שַׁדּוּנִי;    אֹיְבַי בְּנֶפֶשׁ, יַקִּיפוּ עָלָי. 9 From the wicked that oppress, my deadly enemies, that compass me about.
17.10 י  חֶלְבָּמוֹ סָּגְרוּ;    פִּימוֹ, דִּבְּרוּ בְגֵאוּת. 10 Their gross heart they have shut tight, with their mouth they speak proudly.
17.11 יא  אַשֻּׁרֵינוּ, עַתָּה סבבוני (סְבָבוּנוּ);    עֵינֵיהֶם יָשִׁיתוּ, לִנְטוֹת בָּאָרֶץ. 11 At our every step they have now encompassed us; they set their eyes to cast us down to the earth.
17.12 יב  דִּמְיֹנוֹ--כְּאַרְיֵה, יִכְסוֹף לִטְרֹף;    וְכִכְפִיר, יֹשֵׁב בְּמִסְתָּרִים. 12 He is like a lion that is eager to tear in pieces, and like a young lion lurking in secret places.
17.13 יג  קוּמָה יְהוָה--    קַדְּמָה פָנָיו, הַכְרִיעֵהוּ; פַּלְּטָה נַפְשִׁי,    מֵרָשָׁע חַרְבֶּךָ. 13 Arise, O LORD, confront him, cast him down; {N} deliver my soul from the wicked, by Thy sword;
17.14 יד  מִמְתִים יָדְךָ יְהוָה,    מִמְתִים מֵחֶלֶד-- חֶלְקָם בַּחַיִּים,    וצפינך (וּצְפוּנְךָ) תְּמַלֵּא בִטְנָם: יִשְׂבְּעוּ בָנִים--    וְהִנִּיחוּ יִתְרָם, לְעוֹלְלֵיהֶם. 14 From men, by Thy hand, O LORD, from men of the world, {N} whose portion is in this life, and whose belly Thou fillest with Thy treasure; {N} who have children in plenty, and leave their abundance to their babes.
17.15 טו  אֲנִי--בְּצֶדֶק, אֶחֱזֶה פָנֶיךָ;    אֶשְׂבְּעָה בְהָקִיץ, תְּמוּנָתֶךָ. 15 As for me, I shall behold Thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with Thy likeness. {P}
18.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְעֶבֶד יְהוָה--לְדָוִד: אֲשֶׁר דִּבֶּר, לַיהוָה,    אֶת-דִּבְרֵי, הַשִּׁירָה הַזֹּאת-- בְּיוֹם הִצִּיל-יְהוָה אוֹתוֹ מִכַּף כָּל-אֹיְבָיו,    וּמִיַּד שָׁאוּל. וַיֹּאמַר--    אֶרְחָמְךָ יְהוָה חִזְקִי. 1 For the Leader. [A Psalm] of David the servant of the LORD, {N} who spoke unto the LORD the words of this song {N} in the day that the LORD delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul; And he said: I love thee, O LORD, my strength.
18.2 ב יְהוָה, סַלְעִי וּמְצוּדָתִי--    וּמְפַלְטִי: אֵלִי צוּרִי, אֶחֱסֶה-בּוֹ;    מָגִנִּי וְקֶרֶן-יִשְׁעִי, מִשְׂגַּבִּי.   2  The LORD is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; {N} my God, my rock, in Him I take refuge; my shield, and my horn of salvation, my high tower.
18.3 ג מְהֻלָּל, אֶקְרָא יְהוָה;    וּמִן-אֹיְבַי, אִוָּשֵׁעַ.   3  Praised, I cry, is the LORD, and I am saved from mine enemies.
18.4 ד אֲפָפוּנִי חֶבְלֵי-מָוֶת;    וְנַחֲלֵי בְלִיַּעַל יְבַעֲתוּנִי.   4  The cords of Death compassed me, and the floods of Belial assailed me.
18.5 ה חֶבְלֵי שְׁאוֹל סְבָבוּנִי;    קִדְּמוּנִי, מוֹקְשֵׁי מָוֶת.   5  The cords of Sheol surrounded me; the snares of Death confronted me.
18.6 ו בַּצַּר-לִי, אֶקְרָא יְהוָה--    וְאֶל-אֱלֹהַי אֲשַׁוֵּעַ: יִשְׁמַע מֵהֵיכָלוֹ קוֹלִי;    וְשַׁוְעָתִי, לְפָנָיו תָּבוֹא בְאָזְנָיו.   6  In my distress I called upon the LORD, and cried unto my God; {N} out of His temple He heard my voice, and my cry came before Him unto His ears.
18.7 ז וַתִּגְעַשׁ וַתִּרְעַשׁ, הָאָרֶץ--    וּמוֹסְדֵי הָרִים יִרְגָּזוּ; וַיִּתְגָּעֲשׁוּ,    כִּי-חָרָה לוֹ.   7  Then the earth did shake and quake, the foundations also of the mountains did tremble; {N} they were shaken, because He was wroth.
18.8 ח עָלָה עָשָׁן, בְּאַפּוֹ--    וְאֵשׁ-מִפִּיו תֹּאכֵל; גֶּחָלִים,    בָּעֲרוּ מִמֶּנּוּ.   8  Smoke arose up in His nostrils, and fire out of His mouth did devour; {N} coals flamed forth from Him.
18.9 ט   9 וַיֵּט שָׁמַיִם, וַיֵּרַד;    וַעֲרָפֶל, תַּחַת רַגְלָיו.  He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and thick darkness was under His feet.
18.10 י   1 וַיִּרְכַּב עַל-כְּרוּב, וַיָּעֹף;    וַיֵּדֶא, עַל-כַּנְפֵי-רוּחַ.0  And He rode upon a cherub, and did fly; yea, He did swoop down upon the wings of the wind.
18.11 י יָשֶׁת חֹשֶׁךְ, סִתְרוֹ--    סְבִיבוֹתָיו סֻכָּתוֹ; חֶשְׁכַת-מַיִם,    עָבֵי שְׁחָקִים.א   11  He made darkness His hiding-place, His pavilion round about Him; {N} darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
18.12 י מִנֹּגַהּ, נֶגְדּוֹ:    עָבָיו עָבְרוּ--בָּרָד, וְגַחֲלֵי-אֵשׁ.ב   12  At the brightness before Him, there passed through His thick clouds hailstones and coals of fire.
18.13 י וַיַּרְעֵם בַּשָּׁמַיִם, יְהוָה--וְעֶלְיוֹן, יִתֵּן קֹלוֹ;    בָּרָד, וְגַחֲלֵי-אֵשׁ.ג   13  The LORD also thundered in the heavens, and the Most High gave forth His voice; hailstones and coals of fire.
18.14 י וַיִּשְׁלַח חִצָּיו, וַיְפִיצֵם;    וּבְרָקִים רָב, וַיְהֻמֵּם.ד   14  And He sent out His arrows, and scattered them; and He shot forth lightnings, and discomfited them.
18.15 ט וַיֵּרָאוּ, אֲפִיקֵי מַיִם,    וַיִּגָּלוּ, מוֹסְדוֹת תֵּבֵל: מִגַּעֲרָתְךָ יְהוָה--    מִנִּשְׁמַת, רוּחַ אַפֶּךָ.ו   15  And the channels of waters appeared, and the foundations of the world were laid bare, {N} at Thy rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the breath of Thy nostrils.
18.16 ט יִשְׁלַח מִמָּרוֹם, יִקָּחֵנִי;    יַמְשֵׁנִי, מִמַּיִם רַבִּים.ז   16  He sent from on high, He took me; He drew me out of many waters.
18.17 י יַצִּילֵנִי, מֵאֹיְבִי עָז;    וּמִשֹּׂנְאַי, כִּי-אָמְצוּ מִמֶּנִּי.ז   17  He delivered me from mine enemy most strong, and from them that hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
18.18 י יְקַדְּמוּנִי בְיוֹם-אֵידִי;    וַיְהִי-יְהוָה לְמִשְׁעָן לִי.ח   18  They confronted me in the day of my calamity; but the LORD was a stay unto me.
18.19 י וַיּוֹצִיאֵנִי לַמֶּרְחָב;    יְחַלְּצֵנִי, כִּי חָפֵץ בִּי.ט   19  He brought me forth also into a large place; He delivered me, because He delighted in me.
18.20 כ   2 יִגְמְלֵנִי יְהוָה כְּצִדְקִי;    כְּבֹר יָדַי, יָשִׁיב לִי.0  The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands hath He recompensed me.
18.21 כ כִּי-שָׁמַרְתִּי, דַּרְכֵי יְהוָה;    וְלֹא-רָשַׁעְתִּי, מֵאֱלֹהָי.א   21  For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
18.22 כ כִּי כָל-מִשְׁפָּטָיו לְנֶגְדִּי;    וְחֻקֹּתָיו, לֹא-אָסִיר מֶנִּי.ב   22  For all His ordinances were before me, and I put not away His statutes from me.
18.23 כ וָאֱהִי תָמִים עִמּוֹ;    וָאֶשְׁתַּמֵּר, מֵעֲוֺנִי.ג   23  And I was single-hearted with Him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity.
18.24 כ וַיָּשֶׁב-יְהוָה לִי כְצִדְקִי;    כְּבֹר יָדַי, לְנֶגֶד עֵינָיו.ד   24  Therefore hath the LORD recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in His eyes.
18.25 כ עִם-חָסִיד תִּתְחַסָּד;    עִם-גְּבַר תָּמִים, תִּתַּמָּם.ה   25  With the merciful Thou dost show Thyself merciful, with the upright man Thou dost show Thyself upright;
18.26 כ עִם-נָבָר תִּתְבָּרָר;    וְעִם-עִקֵּשׁ, תִּתְפַּתָּל.ו   26  With the pure Thou dost show Thyself pure; and with the crooked Thou dost show Thyself subtle.
18.27 כ כִּי-אַתָּה, עַם-עָנִי תוֹשִׁיעַ;    וְעֵינַיִם רָמוֹת תַּשְׁפִּיל.ז   27  For Thou dost save the afflicted people; but the haughty eyes Thou dost humble.
18.28 כ כִּי-אַתָּה, תָּאִיר נֵרִי;    יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי, יַגִּיהַּ חָשְׁכִּי.ח   28  For Thou dost light my lamp; the LORD my God doth lighten my darkness.
18.29 כ כִּי-בְךָ, אָרֻץ גְּדוּד;    וּבֵאלֹהַי, אֲדַלֶּג-שׁוּר.ט   29  For by Thee I run upon a troop; and by my God do I scale a wall.
18.30 ל   3 הָאֵל,    תָּמִים דַּרְכּוֹ: אִמְרַת-יְהוָה צְרוּפָה;    מָגֵן הוּא, לְכֹל הַחֹסִים בּוֹ.0  As for God, His way is perfect; {N} the word of the LORD is tried; He is a shield unto all them that take refuge in Him.
18.31 ל כִּי מִי אֱלוֹהַּ, מִבַּלְעֲדֵי יְהוָה;    וּמִי צוּר, זוּלָתִי אֱלֹהֵינוּ.א   31  For who is God, save the LORD? And who is a Rock, except our God?
18.32 ל הָאֵל, הַמְאַזְּרֵנִי חָיִל;    וַיִּתֵּן תָּמִים דַּרְכִּי.ב   32  The God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way straight;
18.33 ל מְשַׁוֶּה רַגְלַי, כָּאַיָּלוֹת;    וְעַל בָּמֹתַי, יַעֲמִידֵנִי.ג   33  Who maketh my feet like hinds', and setteth me upon my high places;
18.34 ל מְלַמֵּד יָדַי, לַמִּלְחָמָה;    וְנִחֲתָה קֶשֶׁת-נְחוּשָׁה, זְרוֹעֹתָי.ד   34  Who traineth my hands for war, so that mine arms do bend a bow of brass.
18.35 ל וַתִּתֶּן-לִי, מָגֵן יִשְׁעֶךָ:    וִימִינְךָ תִסְעָדֵנִי; וְעַנְוַתְךָ תַרְבֵּנִי.ה   35  Thou hast also given me Thy shield of salvation, and Thy right hand hath holden me up; and Thy condescension hath made me great.
18.36 ל תַּרְחִיב צַעֲדִי תַחְתָּי;    וְלֹא מָעֲדוּ, קַרְסֻלָּי.ו   36  Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, and my feet have not slipped.
18.37 ל אֶרְדּוֹף אוֹיְבַי, וְאַשִּׂיגֵם;    וְלֹא-אָשׁוּב, עַד-כַּלּוֹתָם.ז   37  I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them; neither did I turn back till they were consumed.
18.38 ל אֶמְחָצֵם, וְלֹא-יֻכְלוּ קוּם;    יִפְּלוּ, תַּחַת רַגְלָי.ח   38  I have smitten them through, so that they are not able to rise; they are fallen under my feet.
18.39 ל וַתְּאַזְּרֵנִי חַיִל, לַמִּלְחָמָה;    תַּכְרִיעַ קָמַי תַּחְתָּי.ט   39  For Thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle; Thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.
18.40 מ   4 וְאֹיְבַי, נָתַתָּה לִּי עֹרֶף;    וּמְשַׂנְאַי, אַצְמִיתֵם.0  Thou hast also made mine enemies turn their backs unto me, and I did cut off them that hate me.
18.41 מ יְשַׁוְּעוּ וְאֵין-מוֹשִׁיעַ;    עַל-יְהוָה, וְלֹא עָנָם.א   41  They cried, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but He answered them not.
18.42 מ וְאֶשְׁחָקֵם, כְּעָפָר עַל-פְּנֵי-רוּחַ;    כְּטִיט חוּצוֹת אֲרִיקֵם.ב   42  Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind; I did cast them out as the mire of the streets.
18.43 מ תְּפַלְּטֵנִי, מֵרִיבֵי-עָם:    תְּשִׂימֵנִי, לְרֹאשׁ גּוֹיִם; עַם לֹא-יָדַעְתִּי יַעַבְדוּנִי.ג   43  Thou hast delivered me from the contentions of the people; Thou hast made me the head of the nations; a people whom I have not known serve me.
18.44 מ לְשֵׁמַע אֹזֶן, יִשָּׁמְעוּ לִי;    בְּנֵי-נֵכָר, יְכַחֲשׁוּ-לִי.ד   44  As soon as they hear of me, they obey me; the sons of the stranger dwindle away before me.
18.45 מ בְּנֵי-נֵכָר יִבֹּלוּ;    וְיַחְרְגוּ, מִמִּסְגְּרוֹתֵיהֶם.ה   45  The sons of the stranger fade away, and come trembling out of their close places.
18.46 מ חַי-יְהוָה, וּבָרוּךְ צוּרִי;    וְיָרוּם, אֱלוֹהֵי יִשְׁעִי.ו   46  The LORD liveth, and blessed be my Rock; and exalted be the God of my salvation;
18.47 מ הָאֵל--הַנּוֹתֵן נְקָמוֹת לִי;    וַיַּדְבֵּר עַמִּים תַּחְתָּי.ז   47  Even the God that executeth vengeance for me, and subdueth peoples under me.
18.48 מ מְפַלְּטִי, מֵאֹיְבָי:    אַף מִן-קָמַי, תְּרוֹמְמֵנִי; מֵאִישׁ חָמָס, תַּצִּילֵנִי.ח   48  He delivereth me from mine enemies; yea, Thou liftest me up above them that rise up against me; Thou deliverest me from the violent man.
18.49 מ עַל-כֵּן, אוֹדְךָ בַגּוֹיִם יְהוָה;    וּלְשִׁמְךָ אֲזַמֵּרָה.ט   49  Therefore I will give thanks unto Thee, O LORD, among the nations, and will sing praises unto Thy name.
18.50 נ   5 מַגְדִּל,    יְשׁוּעוֹת מַלְכּוֹ: וְעֹשֶׂה חֶסֶד, לִמְשִׁיחוֹ--לְדָוִד וּלְזַרְעוֹ;    עַד-עוֹלָם.0  Great salvation giveth He to His king; {N} and showeth mercy to His anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore. {P}
19.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. הַשָּׁמַיִם, מְסַפְּרִים כְּבוֹד-אֵל;    וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו, מַגִּיד הָרָקִיעַ. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth His handiwork;
19.2 ב יוֹם לְיוֹם, יַבִּיעַ אֹמֶר;    וְלַיְלָה לְּלַיְלָה, יְחַוֶּה-דָּעַת.   2  Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night revealeth knowledge;
19.3 ג אֵין-אֹמֶר, וְאֵין דְּבָרִים:    בְּלִי, נִשְׁמָע קוֹלָם.   3  There is no speech, there are no words, neither is their voice heard.
19.4 ד בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ, יָצָא קַוָּם,    וּבִקְצֵה תֵבֵל, מִלֵּיהֶם; לַשֶּׁמֶשׁ,    שָׂם-אֹהֶל בָּהֶם.   4  Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. {N} In them hath He set a tent for the sun,
19.5 ה וְהוּא--כְּחָתָן, יֹצֵא מֵחֻפָּתוֹ;    יָשִׂישׂ כְּגִבּוֹר, לָרוּץ אֹרַח.   5  Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run his course.
19.6 ו מִקְצֵה הַשָּׁמַיִם, מוֹצָאוֹ--וּתְקוּפָתוֹ עַל-קְצוֹתָם;    וְאֵין נִסְתָּר, מֵחַמָּתוֹ.   6  His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
19.7 ז תּוֹרַת יְהוָה תְּמִימָה, מְשִׁיבַת נָפֶשׁ;    עֵדוּת יְהוָה נֶאֱמָנָה, מַחְכִּימַת פֶּתִי.   7  The law of the LORD is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple.
19.8 ח פִּקּוּדֵי יְהוָה יְשָׁרִים, מְשַׂמְּחֵי-לֵב;    מִצְוַת יְהוָה בָּרָה, מְאִירַת עֵינָיִם.   8  The precepts of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes.
19.9 ט   9 יִרְאַת יְהוָה, טְהוֹרָה--עוֹמֶדֶת לָעַד:    מִשְׁפְּטֵי-יְהוָה אֱמֶת; צָדְקוּ יַחְדָּו.  The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring for ever; the ordinances of the LORD are true, they are righteous altogether;
19.10 י   1 הַנֶּחֱמָדִים--מִזָּהָב, וּמִפַּז רָב;    וּמְתוּקִים מִדְּבַשׁ, וְנֹפֶת צוּפִים.0  More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.
19.11 י גַּם-עַבְדְּךָ, נִזְהָר בָּהֶם;    בְּשָׁמְרָם, עֵקֶב רָב.א   11  Moreover by them is Thy servant warned; in keeping of them there is great reward.
19.12 י שְׁגִיאוֹת מִי-יָבִין;    מִנִּסְתָּרוֹת נַקֵּנִי.ב   12  Who can discern his errors? Clear Thou me from hidden faults.
19.13 י גַּם מִזֵּדִים, חֲשֹׂךְ עַבְדֶּךָ--    אַל-יִמְשְׁלוּ-בִי אָז אֵיתָם; וְנִקֵּיתִי,    מִפֶּשַׁע רָב.ג   13  Keep back Thy servant also from presumptuous sins, that they may not have dominion over me; {N} then shall I be faultless, and I shall be clear from great transgression.
19.14 י יִהְיוּ לְרָצוֹן אִמְרֵי-פִי, וְהֶגְיוֹן לִבִּי    לְפָנֶיךָ: יְהוָה,    צוּרִי וְגֹאֲלִי.ד   14  Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before Thee, {N} O LORD, my Rock, and my Redeemer. {P}
20.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. יַעַנְךָ יְהוָה, בְּיוֹם צָרָה;    יְשַׂגֶּבְךָ, שֵׁם אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. The LORD answer thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob set thee up on high;
20.2 ב יִשְׁלַח-עֶזְרְךָ מִקֹּדֶשׁ;    וּמִצִּיּוֹן, יִסְעָדֶךָּ.   2  Send forth thy help from the sanctuary, and support thee out of Zion;
20.3 ג יִזְכֹּר כָּל-מִנְחֹתֶךָ;    וְעוֹלָתְךָ יְדַשְּׁנֶה סֶלָה.   3  Receive the memorial of all thy meal-offerings, and accept the fat of thy burnt-sacrifice; Selah
20.4 ד יִתֶּן-לְךָ כִלְבָבֶךָ;    וְכָל-עֲצָתְךָ יְמַלֵּא.   4  Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel.
20.5 ה נְרַנְּנָה, בִּישׁוּעָתֶךָ--    וּבְשֵׁם-אֱלֹהֵינוּ נִדְגֹּל; יְמַלֵּא יְהוָה,    כָּל-מִשְׁאֲלוֹתֶיךָ.   5  We will shout for joy in thy victory, and in the name of our God we will set up our standards; {N} the LORD fulfil all thy petitions.
20.6 ו עַתָּה יָדַעְתִּי--    כִּי הוֹשִׁיעַ יְהוָה, מְשִׁיחוֹ: יַעֲנֵהוּ, מִשְּׁמֵי קָדְשׁוֹ--    בִּגְבֻרוֹת, יֵשַׁע יְמִינוֹ.   6  Now know I that the LORD saveth His anointed; {N} He will answer him from His holy heaven with the mighty acts of His saving right hand.
20.7 ז אֵלֶּה בָרֶכֶב,    וְאֵלֶּה בַסּוּסִים; וַאֲנַחְנוּ,    בְּשֵׁם-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ נַזְכִּיר.   7  Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; {N} but we will make mention of the name of the LORD our God.
20.8 ח הֵמָּה, כָּרְעוּ וְנָפָלוּ;    וַאֲנַחְנוּ קַּמְנוּ, וַנִּתְעוֹדָד.   8  They are bowed down and fallen; but we are risen, and stand upright.
20.9 ט   9 יְהוָה הוֹשִׁיעָה:    הַמֶּלֶךְ, יַעֲנֵנוּ בְיוֹם-קָרְאֵנוּ.  Save, LORD; let the King answer us in the day that we call. {P}
21.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. יְהוָה, בְּעָזְּךָ יִשְׂמַח-מֶלֶךְ;    וּבִישׁוּעָתְךָ, מַה-יגיל (יָּגֶל) מְאֹד. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. O LORD, in Thy strength the king rejoiceth; and in Thy salvation how greatly doth he exult!
21.2 ב תַּאֲוַת לִבּוֹ, נָתַתָּה לּוֹ;    וַאֲרֶשֶׁת שְׂפָתָיו, בַּל-מָנַעְתָּ סֶּלָה.   2  Thou hast given him his heart's desire, and the request of his lips Thou hast not withholden. Selah
21.3 ג כִּי-תְקַדְּמֶנּוּ, בִּרְכוֹת טוֹב;    תָּשִׁית לְרֹאשׁוֹ, עֲטֶרֶת פָּז.   3  For Thou meetest him with choicest blessings; Thou settest a crown of fine gold on his head.
21.4 ד חַיִּים, שָׁאַל מִמְּךָ--נָתַתָּה לּוֹ;    אֹרֶךְ יָמִים, עוֹלָם וָעֶד.   4  He asked life of Thee, Thou gavest it him; even length of days for ever and ever.
21.5 ה גָּדוֹל כְּבוֹדוֹ, בִּישׁוּעָתֶךָ;    הוֹד וְהָדָר, תְּשַׁוֶּה עָלָיו.   5  His glory is great through Thy salvation; honour and majesty dost Thou lay upon him.
21.6 ו כִּי-תְשִׁיתֵהוּ בְרָכוֹת לָעַד;    תְּחַדֵּהוּ בְשִׂמְחָה, אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ.   6  For Thou makest him most blessed for ever; Thou makest him glad with joy in Thy presence.
21.7 ז כִּי-הַמֶּלֶךְ, בֹּטֵחַ בַּיהוָה;    וּבְחֶסֶד עֶלְיוֹן, בַּל-יִמּוֹט.   7  For the king trusteth in the LORD, yea, in the mercy of the Most High; he shall not be moved.
21.8 ח תִּמְצָא יָדְךָ, לְכָל-אֹיְבֶיךָ;    יְמִינְךָ, תִּמְצָא שֹׂנְאֶיךָ.   8  Thy hand shall be equal to all thine enemies; thy right hand shall overtake those that hate thee.
21.9 ט   9 תְּשִׁיתֵמוֹ, כְּתַנּוּר אֵשׁ--    לְעֵת פָּנֶיךָ: יְהוָה, בְּאַפּוֹ יְבַלְּעֵם;    וְתֹאכְלֵם אֵשׁ.  Thou shalt make them as a fiery furnace in the time of thine anger; {N} the LORD shall swallow them up in His wrath, and the fire shall devour them.
21.10 י   1 פִּרְיָמוֹ, מֵאֶרֶץ תְּאַבֵּד;    וְזַרְעָם, מִבְּנֵי אָדָם.0  Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
21.11 י כִּי-נָטוּ עָלֶיךָ רָעָה;    חָשְׁבוּ מְזִמָּה, בַּל-יוּכָלוּ.א   11  For they intended evil against thee, they imagined a device, wherewith they shall not prevail.
21.12 י כִּי, תְּשִׁיתֵמוֹ שֶׁכֶם;    בְּמֵיתָרֶיךָ, תְּכוֹנֵן עַל-פְּנֵיהֶם.ב   12  For thou shalt make them turn their back, thou shalt make ready with thy bowstrings against the face of them.
21.13 י רוּמָה יְהוָה בְּעֻזֶּךָ;    נָשִׁירָה וּנְזַמְּרָה, גְּבוּרָתֶךָ.ג   13  Be Thou exalted, O LORD, in Thy strength; so will we sing and praise Thy power. {P}
22.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, עַל-אַיֶּלֶת הַשַּׁחַר;    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. אֵלִי אֵלִי, לָמָה עֲזַבְתָּנִי;    רָחוֹק מִישׁוּעָתִי, דִּבְרֵי שַׁאֲגָתִי. 1 For the Leader; upon Aijeleth ha-Shahar. A Psalm of David. My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me, and art far from my help at the words of my cry?
22.2 ב אֱלֹהַי--אֶקְרָא יוֹמָם, וְלֹא תַעֲנֶה;    וְלַיְלָה, וְלֹא-דֻמִיָּה לִי.   2  O my God, I call by day, but Thou answerest not; and at night, and there is no surcease for me.
22.3 ג וְאַתָּה קָדוֹשׁ--    יוֹשֵׁב, תְּהִלּוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל.   3  Yet Thou art holy, O Thou that art enthroned upon the praises of Israel.
22.4 ד בְּךָ, בָּטְחוּ אֲבֹתֵינוּ;    בָּטְחוּ, וַתְּפַלְּטֵמוֹ.   4  In Thee did our fathers trust; they trusted, and Thou didst deliver them.
22.5 ה אֵלֶיךָ זָעֲקוּ וְנִמְלָטוּ;    בְּךָ בָטְחוּ וְלֹא-בוֹשׁוּ.   5  Unto Thee they cried, and escaped; in Thee did they trust, and were not ashamed.
22.6 ו וְאָנֹכִי תוֹלַעַת וְלֹא-אִישׁ;    חֶרְפַּת אָדָם, וּבְזוּי עָם.   6  But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people.
22.7 ז כָּל-רֹאַי, יַלְעִגוּ לִי;    יַפְטִירוּ בְשָׂפָה, יָנִיעוּ רֹאשׁ.   7  All they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake the head:
22.8 ח גֹּל אֶל-יְהוָה יְפַלְּטֵהוּ;    יַצִּילֵהוּ, כִּי חָפֵץ בּוֹ.   8  'Let him commit himself unto the LORD! let Him rescue him; let Him deliver him, seeing He delighteth in him.'
22.9 ט   9 כִּי-אַתָּה גֹחִי מִבָּטֶן;    מַבְטִיחִי, עַל-שְׁדֵי אִמִּי.  For Thou art He that took me out of the womb; Thou madest me trust when I was upon my mother's breasts.
22.10 י   1 עָלֶיךָ, הָשְׁלַכְתִּי מֵרָחֶם;    מִבֶּטֶן אִמִּי, אֵלִי אָתָּה.0  Upon Thee I have been cast from my birth; Thou art my God from my mother's womb.
22.11 י אַל-תִּרְחַק מִמֶּנִּי, כִּי-צָרָה קְרוֹבָה:    כִּי-אֵין עוֹזֵר.א   11  Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to help.
22.12 י סְבָבוּנִי, פָּרִים רַבִּים;    אַבִּירֵי בָשָׁן כִּתְּרוּנִי.ב   12  Many bulls have encompassed me; strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.
22.13 י פָּצוּ עָלַי פִּיהֶם;    אַרְיֵה, טֹרֵף וְשֹׁאֵג.ג   13  They open wide their mouth against me, as a ravening and a roaring lion.
22.14 י כַּמַּיִם נִשְׁפַּכְתִּי--    וְהִתְפָּרְדוּ, כָּל-עַצְמוֹתָי: הָיָה לִבִּי, כַּדּוֹנָג;    נָמֵס, בְּתוֹךְ מֵעָי.ד   14  I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint; {N} my heart is become like wax; it is melted in mine inmost parts.
22.15 ט יָבֵשׁ כַּחֶרֶשׂ, כֹּחִי, וּלְשׁוֹנִי, מֻדְבָּק מַלְקוֹחָי;    וְלַעֲפַר-מָוֶת תִּשְׁפְּתֵנִי.ו   15  My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth to my throat; and Thou layest me in the dust of death.
22.16 ט כִּי סְבָבוּנִי, כְּלָבִים:    עֲדַת מְרֵעִים, הִקִּיפוּנִי; כָּאֲרִי, יָדַי וְרַגְלָי.ז   16  For dogs have encompassed me; a company of evil-doers have inclosed me; like a lion, they are at my hands and my feet.
22.17 י אֲסַפֵּר כָּל-עַצְמוֹתָי;    הֵמָּה יַבִּיטוּ, יִרְאוּ-בִי.ז   17  I may count all my bones; they look and gloat over me.
22.18 י יְחַלְּקוּ בְגָדַי לָהֶם;    וְעַל-לְבוּשִׁי, יַפִּילוּ גוֹרָל.ח   18  They part my garments among them, and for my vesture do they cast lots.
22.19 י וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, אַל-תִּרְחָק;    אֱיָלוּתִי, לְעֶזְרָתִי חוּשָׁה.ט   19  But Thou, O LORD, be not far off; O Thou my strength, hasten to help me.
22.20 כ   2 הַצִּילָה מֵחֶרֶב נַפְשִׁי;    מִיַּד-כֶּלֶב, יְחִידָתִי.0  Deliver my soul from the sword; mine only one from the power of the dog.
22.21 כ הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי, מִפִּי אַרְיֵה;    וּמִקַּרְנֵי רֵמִים עֲנִיתָנִי.א   21  Save me from the lion's mouth; yea, from the horns of the wild-oxen do Thou answer me.
22.22 כ אֲסַפְּרָה שִׁמְךָ לְאֶחָי;    בְּתוֹךְ קָהָל אֲהַלְלֶךָּ.ב   22  I will declare Thy name unto my brethren; in the midst of the congregation will I praise Thee.
22.23 כ יִרְאֵי יְהוָה, הַלְלוּהוּ--    כָּל-זֶרַע יַעֲקֹב כַּבְּדוּהוּ; וְגוּרוּ מִמֶּנּוּ,    כָּל-זֶרַע יִשְׂרָאֵל.ג   23  'Ye that fear the LORD, praise Him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify Him; {N} and stand in awe of Him, all ye the seed of Israel.
22.24 כ כִּי לֹא-בָזָה וְלֹא שִׁקַּץ, עֱנוּת עָנִי--    וְלֹא-הִסְתִּיר פָּנָיו מִמֶּנּוּ; וּבְשַׁוְּעוֹ אֵלָיו    שָׁמֵעַ.ד   24  For He hath not despised nor abhorred the lowliness of the poor; neither hath He hid His face from him; {N} but when he cried unto Him, He heard.'
22.25 כ מֵאִתְּךָ, תְּהִלָּתִי:    בְּקָהָל רָב--נְדָרַי אֲשַׁלֵּם, נֶגֶד יְרֵאָיו.ה   25  From Thee cometh my praise in the great congregation; I will pay my vows before them that fear Him.
22.26 כ יֹאכְלוּ עֲנָוִים, וְיִשְׂבָּעוּ--    יְהַלְלוּ יְהוָה, דֹּרְשָׁיו; יְחִי לְבַבְכֶם    לָעַד.ו   26  Let the humble eat and be satisfied; let them praise the LORD that seek after Him; {N} may your heart be quickened for ever!
22.27 כ יִזְכְּרוּ, וְיָשֻׁבוּ אֶל-יְהוָה--    כָּל-אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ; וְיִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לְפָנֶיךָ,    כָּל-מִשְׁפְּחוֹת גּוֹיִם.ז   27  All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn unto the LORD; {N} and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before Thee.
22.28 כ כִּי לַיהוָה, הַמְּלוּכָה;    וּמֹשֵׁל, בַּגּוֹיִם.ח   28  For the kingdom is the LORD'S; and He is the ruler over the nations.
22.29 כ אָכְלוּ וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ, כָּל-דִּשְׁנֵי-אֶרֶץ--    לְפָנָיו יִכְרְעוּ, כָּל-יוֹרְדֵי עָפָר; וְנַפְשׁוֹ,    לֹא חִיָּה.ט   29  All the fat ones of the earth shall eat and worship; all they that go down to the dust shall kneel before Him, {N} even he that cannot keep his soul alive.
22.30 ל   3 זֶרַע יַעַבְדֶנּוּ;    יְסֻפַּר לַאדֹנָי לַדּוֹר.0  A seed shall serve him; it shall be told of the Lord unto the next generation.
22.31 ל יָבֹאוּ, וְיַגִּידוּ צִדְקָתוֹ:    לְעַם נוֹלָד, כִּי עָשָׂה.א   31  They shall come and shall declare His righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that He hath done it. {P}
23.1 א  מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד:    יְהוָה רֹעִי, לֹא אֶחְסָר. 1 A Psalm of David. The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
23.2 ב  בִּנְאוֹת דֶּשֶׁא, יַרְבִּיצֵנִי;    עַל-מֵי מְנֻחוֹת יְנַהֲלֵנִי. 2 He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; He leadeth me beside the still waters.
23.3 ג  נַפְשִׁי יְשׁוֹבֵב;    יַנְחֵנִי בְמַעְגְּלֵי-צֶדֶק, לְמַעַן שְׁמוֹ. 3 He restoreth my soul; He guideth me in straight paths for His name's sake.
23.4 ד  גַּם כִּי-אֵלֵךְ בְּגֵיא צַלְמָוֶת, לֹא-אִירָא רָע--    כִּי-אַתָּה עִמָּדִי; שִׁבְטְךָ וּמִשְׁעַנְתֶּךָ,    הֵמָּה יְנַחֲמֻנִי. 4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me; {N} Thy rod and Thy staff, they comfort me.
23.5 ה  תַּעֲרֹךְ לְפָנַי, שֻׁלְחָן--    נֶגֶד צֹרְרָי; דִּשַּׁנְתָּ בַשֶּׁמֶן רֹאשִׁי,    כּוֹסִי רְוָיָה. 5 Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; {N} Thou hast anointed my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
23.6 ו  אַךְ, טוֹב וָחֶסֶד יִרְדְּפוּנִי--    כָּל-יְמֵי חַיָּי; וְשַׁבְתִּי בְּבֵית-יְהוָה,    לְאֹרֶךְ יָמִים. 6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; {N} and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD for ever. {P}
24.1 א  לְדָוִד, מִזְמוֹר: לַיהוָה, הָאָרֶץ וּמְלוֹאָהּ;    תֵּבֵל, וְיֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ. 1 A Psalm of David. {N} The earth is the LORD'S, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.
24.2 ב  כִּי-הוּא, עַל-יַמִּים יְסָדָהּ;    וְעַל-נְהָרוֹת, יְכוֹנְנֶהָ. 2 For He hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.
24.3 ג  מִי-יַעֲלֶה בְהַר-יְהוָה;    וּמִי-יָקוּם, בִּמְקוֹם קָדְשׁוֹ. 3 Who shall ascend into the mountain of the LORD? and who shall stand in His holy place?
24.4 ד  נְקִי כַפַּיִם,    וּבַר-לֵבָב: אֲשֶׁר לֹא-נָשָׂא לַשָּׁוְא נַפְשִׁי;    וְלֹא נִשְׁבַּע לְמִרְמָה. 4 He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; {N} who hath not taken My name in vain, and hath not sworn deceitfully.
24.5 ה  יִשָּׂא בְרָכָה, מֵאֵת יְהוָה;    וּצְדָקָה, מֵאֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעוֹ. 5 He shall receive a blessing from the LORD, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
24.6 ו  זֶה, דּוֹר דֹּרְשָׁו;    מְבַקְשֵׁי פָנֶיךָ יַעֲקֹב סֶלָה. 6 Such is the generation of them that seek after Him, that seek Thy face, even Jacob. Selah
24.7 ז  שְׂאוּ שְׁעָרִים, רָאשֵׁיכֶם,    וְהִנָּשְׂאוּ, פִּתְחֵי עוֹלָם; וְיָבוֹא,    מֶלֶךְ הַכָּבוֹד. 7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors; {N} that the King of glory may come in.
24.8 ח  מִי זֶה,    מֶלֶךְ הַכָּבוֹד: יְהוָה, עִזּוּז וְגִבּוֹר;    יְהוָה, גִּבּוֹר מִלְחָמָה. 8 'Who is the King of glory?' {N} 'The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in battle.'
24.9 ט  שְׂאוּ שְׁעָרִים, רָאשֵׁיכֶם,    וּשְׂאוּ, פִּתְחֵי עוֹלָם; וְיָבֹא,    מֶלֶךְ הַכָּבוֹד. 9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors; {N} that the King of glory may come in.
24.10 י  מִי הוּא זֶה,    מֶלֶךְ הַכָּבוֹד: יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--    הוּא מֶלֶךְ הַכָּבוֹד סֶלָה. 10 'Who then is the King of glory?' {N} 'The LORD of hosts; He is the King of glory.' Selah {P}
25.1 א  לְדָוִד:    אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה, נַפְשִׁי אֶשָּׂא. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Unto Thee, O LORD, do I lift up my soul.
25.2 ב  אֱלֹהַי--בְּךָ בָטַחְתִּי, אַל-אֵבוֹשָׁה;    אַל-יַעַלְצוּ אוֹיְבַי לִי. 2 O my God, in Thee have I trusted, let me not be ashamed; let not mine enemies triumph over me.
25.3 ג  גַּם כָּל-קֹוֶיךָ, לֹא יֵבֹשׁוּ;    יֵבֹשׁוּ, הַבּוֹגְדִים רֵיקָם. 3 Yea, none that wait for Thee shall be ashamed; they shall be ashamed that deal treacherously without cause.
25.4 ד  דְּרָכֶיךָ יְהוָה, הוֹדִיעֵנִי;    אֹרְחוֹתֶיךָ לַמְּדֵנִי. 4 Show me Thy ways, O LORD; teach me Thy paths.
25.5 ה  הַדְרִיכֵנִי בַאֲמִתֶּךָ, וְלַמְּדֵנִי--    כִּי-אַתָּה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעִי; אוֹתְךָ קִוִּיתִי,    כָּל-הַיּוֹם. 5 Guide me in Thy truth, and teach me; for Thou art the God of my salvation; {N} for Thee do I wait all the day.
25.6 ו  זְכֹר-רַחֲמֶיךָ יְהוָה, וַחֲסָדֶיךָ:    כִּי מֵעוֹלָם הֵמָּה. 6 Remember, O LORD, Thy compassions and Thy mercies; for they have been from of old.
25.7 ז  חַטֹּאות נְעוּרַי, וּפְשָׁעַי--    אַל-תִּזְכֹּר: כְּחַסְדְּךָ זְכָר-לִי-אַתָּה--    לְמַעַן טוּבְךָ יְהוָה. 7 Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions; {N} according to Thy mercy remember Thou me, for Thy goodness' sake, O LORD.
25.8 ח  טוֹב-וְיָשָׁר יְהוָה;    עַל-כֵּן יוֹרֶה חַטָּאִים בַּדָּרֶךְ. 8 Good and upright is the LORD; therefore doth He instruct sinners in the way.
25.9 ט  יַדְרֵךְ עֲנָוִים, בַּמִּשְׁפָּט;    וִילַמֵּד עֲנָוִים דַּרְכּוֹ. 9 He guideth the humble in justice; and He teacheth the humble His way.
25.10 י  כָּל-אָרְחוֹת יְהוָה, חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת--    לְנֹצְרֵי בְרִיתוֹ, וְעֵדֹתָיו. 10 All the paths of the LORD are mercy and truth unto such as keep His covenant and His testimonies.
25.11 יא  לְמַעַן-שִׁמְךָ יְהוָה;    וְסָלַחְתָּ לַעֲוֺנִי, כִּי רַב-הוּא. 11 For Thy name's sake, O LORD, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.
25.12 יב  מִי-זֶה הָאִישׁ, יְרֵא יְהוָה--    יוֹרֶנּוּ, בְּדֶרֶךְ יִבְחָר. 12 What man is he that feareth the LORD? Him will He instruct in the way that he should choose.
25.13 יג  נַפְשׁוֹ, בְּטוֹב תָּלִין;    וְזַרְעוֹ, יִירַשׁ אָרֶץ. 13 His soul shall abide in prosperity; and his seed shall inherit the land.
25.14 יד  סוֹד יְהוָה, לִירֵאָיו;    וּבְרִיתוֹ, לְהוֹדִיעָם. 14 The counsel of the LORD is with them that fear Him; and His covenant, to make them know it.
25.15 טו  עֵינַי תָּמִיד, אֶל-יְהוָה:    כִּי הוּא-יוֹצִיא מֵרֶשֶׁת רַגְלָי. 15 Mine eyes are ever toward the LORD; for He will bring forth my feet out of the net.
25.16 טז  פְּנֵה-אֵלַי וְחָנֵּנִי:    כִּי-יָחִיד וְעָנִי אָנִי. 16 Turn Thee unto me, and be gracious unto me; for I am solitary and afflicted.
25.17 יז  צָרוֹת לְבָבִי הִרְחִיבוּ;    מִמְּצוּקוֹתַי, הוֹצִיאֵנִי. 17 The troubles of my heart are enlarged; O bring Thou me out of my distresses.
25.18 יח  רְאֵה עָנְיִי, וַעֲמָלִי;    וְשָׂא, לְכָל-חַטֹּאותָי. 18 See mine affliction and my travail; and forgive all my sins.
25.19 יט  רְאֵה-אֹיְבַי כִּי-רָבּוּ;    וְשִׂנְאַת חָמָס שְׂנֵאוּנִי. 19 Consider how many are mine enemies, and the cruel hatred wherewith they hate me.
25.20 כ  שָׁמְרָה נַפְשִׁי, וְהַצִּילֵנִי;    אַל-אֵבוֹשׁ, כִּי-חָסִיתִי בָךְ. 20 O keep my soul, and deliver me; let me not be ashamed, for I have taken refuge in Thee.
25.21 כא  תֹּם-וָיֹשֶׁר יִצְּרוּנִי:    כִּי, קִוִּיתִיךָ. 21 Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, because I wait for Thee.
25.22 כב  פְּדֵה אֱלֹהִים, אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--    מִכֹּל, צָרוֹתָיו. 22 Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. {P}
26.1 א  לְדָוִד:  שָׁפְטֵנִי יְהוָה--    כִּי-אֲנִי, בְּתֻמִּי הָלַכְתִּי; וּבַיהוָה בָּטַחְתִּי,    לֹא אֶמְעָד. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Judge me, O LORD, for I have walked in mine integrity, {N} and I have trusted in the LORD without wavering.
26.2 ב  בְּחָנֵנִי יְהוָה וְנַסֵּנִי;    צרופה (צָרְפָה) כִלְיוֹתַי וְלִבִּי. 2 Examine me, O LORD, and try me; test my reins and my heart.
26.3 ג  כִּי-חַסְדְּךָ, לְנֶגֶד עֵינָי;    וְהִתְהַלַּכְתִּי, בַּאֲמִתֶּךָ. 3 For Thy mercy is before mine eyes; and I have walked in Thy truth.
26.4 ד  לֹא-יָשַׁבְתִּי, עִם-מְתֵי-שָׁוְא;    וְעִם נַעֲלָמִים, לֹא אָבוֹא. 4 I have not sat with men of falsehood; neither will I go in with dissemblers.
26.5 ה  שָׂנֵאתִי, קְהַל מְרֵעִים;    וְעִם-רְשָׁעִים, לֹא אֵשֵׁב. 5 I hate the gathering of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked.
26.6 ו  אֶרְחַץ בְּנִקָּיוֹן כַּפָּי;    וַאֲסֹבְבָה אֶת-מִזְבַּחֲךָ יְהוָה. 6 I will wash my hands in innocency; so will I compass Thine altar, O LORD,
26.7 ז  לַשְׁמִעַ, בְּקוֹל תּוֹדָה;    וּלְסַפֵּר, כָּל-נִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ. 7 That I may make the voice of thanksgiving to be heard, and tell of all Thy wondrous works.
26.8 ח  יְהוָה--אָהַבְתִּי, מְעוֹן בֵּיתֶךָ;    וּמְקוֹם, מִשְׁכַּן כְּבוֹדֶךָ. 8 LORD, I love the habitation of Thy house, and the place where Thy glory dwelleth.
26.9 ט  אַל-תֶּאֱסֹף עִם-חַטָּאִים נַפְשִׁי;    וְעִם-אַנְשֵׁי דָמִים חַיָּי. 9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with men of blood;
26.10 י  אֲשֶׁר-בִּידֵיהֶם זִמָּה;    וִימִינָם, מָלְאָה שֹּׁחַד. 10 In whose hands is craftiness, and their right hand is full of bribes.
26.11 יא  וַאֲנִי, בְּתֻמִּי אֵלֵךְ;    פְּדֵנִי וְחָנֵּנִי. 11 But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity; redeem me, and be gracious unto me.
26.12 יב  רַגְלִי, עָמְדָה בְמִישׁוֹר;    בְּמַקְהֵלִים, אֲבָרֵךְ יְהוָה. 12 My foot standeth in an even place; in the congregations will I bless the LORD. {P}
27.1 א  לְדָוִד:    יְהוָה, אוֹרִי וְיִשְׁעִי--מִמִּי אִירָא; יְהוָה מָעוֹז-חַיַּי,    מִמִּי אֶפְחָד. 1 [A Psalm] of David. The LORD is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? {N} The LORD is the stronghold of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
27.2 ב  בִּקְרֹב עָלַי, מְרֵעִים--    לֶאֱכֹל אֶת-בְּשָׂרִי: צָרַי וְאֹיְבַי לִי;    הֵמָּה כָשְׁלוּ וְנָפָלוּ. 2 When evil-doers came upon me to eat up my flesh, {N} even mine adversaries and my foes, they stumbled and fell.
27.3 ג  אִם-תַּחֲנֶה עָלַי, מַחֲנֶה--    לֹא-יִירָא לִבִּי: אִם-תָּקוּם עָלַי, מִלְחָמָה--    בְּזֹאת, אֲנִי בוֹטֵחַ. 3 Though a host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; {N} though war should rise up against me, even then will I be confident.
27.4 ד  אַחַת, שָׁאַלְתִּי מֵאֵת-יְהוָה--    אוֹתָהּ אֲבַקֵּשׁ: שִׁבְתִּי בְּבֵית-יְהוָה,    כָּל-יְמֵי חַיַּי; לַחֲזוֹת בְּנֹעַם-יְהוָה,    וּלְבַקֵּר בְּהֵיכָלוֹ. 4 One thing have I asked of the LORD, that will I seek after: {N} that I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, {N} to behold the graciousness of the LORD, and to visit early in His temple.
27.5 ה  כִּי יִצְפְּנֵנִי, בְּסֻכֹּה--    בְּיוֹם רָעָה: יַסְתִּרֵנִי, בְּסֵתֶר אָהֳלוֹ;    בְּצוּר, יְרוֹמְמֵנִי. 5 For He concealeth me in His pavilion in the day of evil; {N} He hideth me in the covert of His tent; He lifteth me up upon a rock.
27.6 ו  וְעַתָּה יָרוּם רֹאשִׁי, עַל אֹיְבַי סְבִיבוֹתַי,    וְאֶזְבְּחָה בְאָהֳלוֹ, זִבְחֵי תְרוּעָה; אָשִׁירָה וַאֲזַמְּרָה,    לַיהוָה. 6 And now shall my head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me; and I will offer in His tabernacle sacrifices with trumpet-sound; {N} I will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the LORD.
27.7 ז  שְׁמַע-יְהוָה קוֹלִי אֶקְרָא;    וְחָנֵּנִי וַעֲנֵנִי. 7 Hear, O LORD, when I call with my voice, and be gracious unto me, and answer me.
27.8 ח  לְךָ, אָמַר לִבִּי--בַּקְּשׁוּ פָנָי;    אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ יְהוָה אֲבַקֵּשׁ. 8 In Thy behalf my heart hath said: 'Seek ye My face'; Thy face, LORD, will I seek.
27.9 ט  אַל-תַּסְתֵּר פָּנֶיךָ, מִמֶּנִּי--    אַל תַּט-בְּאַף, עַבְדֶּךָ: עֶזְרָתִי הָיִיתָ;    אַל-תִּטְּשֵׁנִי וְאַל-תַּעַזְבֵנִי, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעִי. 9 Hide not Thy face from me; put not Thy servant away in anger; {N} Thou hast been my help; cast me not off, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.
27.10 י  כִּי-אָבִי וְאִמִּי עֲזָבוּנִי;    וַיהוָה יַאַסְפֵנִי. 10 For though my father and my mother have forsaken me, the LORD will take me up.
27.11 יא  הוֹרֵנִי יְהוָה, דַּרְכֶּךָ:    וּנְחֵנִי, בְּאֹרַח מִישׁוֹר--לְמַעַן, שׁוֹרְרָי. 11 Teach me Thy way, O LORD; and lead me in an even path, because of them that lie in wait for me.
27.12 יב  אַל-תִּתְּנֵנִי, בְּנֶפֶשׁ צָרָי:    כִּי קָמוּ-בִי עֵדֵי-שֶׁקֶר, וִיפֵחַ חָמָס. 12 Deliver me not over unto the will of mine adversaries; for false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out violence.
27.13 יג  לוּלֵא--הֶאֱמַנְתִּי, לִרְאוֹת בְּטוּב-יְהוָה:    בְּאֶרֶץ חַיִּים. 13 If I had not believed to look upon the goodness of the LORD in the land of the living!--
27.14 יד  קַוֵּה, אֶל-יְהוָה:    חֲזַק, וְיַאֲמֵץ לִבֶּךָ; וְקַוֵּה, אֶל-יְהוָה. 14 Wait on the LORD; be strong, and let thy heart take courage; yea, wait thou for the LORD. {P}
28.1 א  לְדָוִד, אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה אֶקְרָא--    צוּרִי, אַל-תֶּחֱרַשׁ מִמֶּנִּי: פֶּן-תֶּחֱשֶׁה מִמֶּנִּי;    וְנִמְשַׁלְתִּי, עִם-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Unto thee, O LORD, do I call; my Rock, be not Thou deaf unto me; {N} lest, if Thou be silent unto me, I become like them that go down into the pit.
28.2 ב  שְׁמַע קוֹל תַּחֲנוּנַי,    בְּשַׁוְּעִי אֵלֶיךָ; בְּנָשְׂאִי יָדַי,    אֶל-דְּבִיר קָדְשֶׁךָ. 2 Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto Thee, {N} when I lift up my hands toward Thy holy Sanctuary.
28.3 ג  אַל-תִּמְשְׁכֵנִי עִם-רְשָׁעִים,    וְעִם-פֹּעֲלֵי-אָוֶן: דֹּבְרֵי שָׁלוֹם, עִם-רֵעֵיהֶם;    וְרָעָה, בִּלְבָבָם. 3 Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity; {N} who speak peace with their neighbours, but evil is in their hearts.
28.4 ד  תֶּן-לָהֶם כְּפָעֳלָם,    וּכְרֹעַ מַעַלְלֵיהֶם: כְּמַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵיהֶם, תֵּן לָהֶם;    הָשֵׁב גְּמוּלָם לָהֶם. 4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the evil of their endeavours; {N} give them after the work of their hands; render to them their desert.
28.5 ה  כִּי לֹא יָבִינוּ, אֶל-פְּעֻלֹּת יְהוָה--    וְאֶל-מַעֲשֵׂה יָדָיו; יֶהֶרְסֵם,    וְלֹא יִבְנֵם. 5 Because they give no heed to the works of the LORD, nor to the operation of His hands; {N} He will break them down and not build them up.
28.6 ו  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה:    כִּי-שָׁמַע, קוֹל תַּחֲנוּנָי. 6 Blessed be the LORD, because He hath heard the voice of my supplications.
28.7 ז  יְהוָה, עֻזִּי וּמָגִנִּי--    בּוֹ בָטַח לִבִּי, וְנֶעֱזָרְתִּי: וַיַּעֲלֹז לִבִּי;    וּמִשִּׁירִי אֲהוֹדֶנּוּ. 7 The LORD is my strength and my shield, in Him hath my heart trusted, and I am helped; {N} therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth, and with my song will I praise Him.
28.8 ח  יְהוָה עֹז-לָמוֹ;    וּמָעוֹז יְשׁוּעוֹת מְשִׁיחוֹ הוּא. 8 The LORD is a strength unto them; and He is a stronghold of salvation to His anointed.
28.9 ט  הוֹשִׁיעָה, אֶת-עַמֶּךָ--    וּבָרֵךְ אֶת-נַחֲלָתֶךָ; וּרְעֵם וְנַשְּׂאֵם,    עַד-הָעוֹלָם. 9 Save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance; {N} and tend them, and carry them for ever. {P}
29.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְדָוִד:    הָבוּ לַיהוָה, בְּנֵי אֵלִים; הָבוּ לַיהוָה, כָּבוֹד וָעֹז. 1 A Psalm of David. Ascribe unto the LORD, O ye sons of might, ascribe unto the LORD glory and strength.
29.2 ב  הָבוּ לַיהוָה, כְּבוֹד שְׁמוֹ;    הִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַיהוָה, בְּהַדְרַת-קֹדֶשׁ. 2 Ascribe unto the LORD the glory due unto His name; worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness.
29.3 ג  קוֹל יְהוָה,    עַל-הַמָּיִם: אֵל-הַכָּבוֹד הִרְעִים;    יְהוָה, עַל-מַיִם רַבִּים. 3 The voice of the LORD is upon the waters; {N} the God of glory thundereth, even the LORD upon many waters.
29.4 ד  קוֹל-יְהוָה בַּכֹּחַ;    קוֹל יְהוָה, בֶּהָדָר. 4 The voice of the LORD is powerful; the voice of the LORD is full of majesty.
29.5 ה  קוֹל יְהוָה, שֹׁבֵר אֲרָזִים;    וַיְשַׁבֵּר יְהוָה, אֶת-אַרְזֵי הַלְּבָנוֹן. 5 The voice of the LORD breaketh the cedars; yea, the LORD breaketh in pieces the cedars of Lebanon.
29.6 ו  וַיַּרְקִידֵם כְּמוֹ-עֵגֶל;    לְבָנוֹן וְשִׂרְיֹן, כְּמוֹ בֶן-רְאֵמִים. 6 He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild-ox.
29.7 ז  קוֹל-יְהוָה חֹצֵב;    לַהֲבוֹת אֵשׁ. 7 The voice of the LORD heweth out flames of fire.
29.8 ח  קוֹל יְהוָה, יָחִיל מִדְבָּר;    יָחִיל יְהוָה, מִדְבַּר קָדֵשׁ. 8 The voice of the LORD shaketh the wilderness; the LORD shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh.
29.9 ט  קוֹל יְהוָה, יְחוֹלֵל אַיָּלוֹת--    וַיֶּחֱשֹׂף יְעָרוֹת: וּבְהֵיכָלוֹ--    כֻּלּוֹ, אֹמֵר כָּבוֹד. 9 The voice of the LORD maketh the hinds to calve, and strippeth the forests bare; {N} and in His temple all say: 'Glory.'
29.10 י  יְהוָה, לַמַּבּוּל יָשָׁב;    וַיֵּשֶׁב יְהוָה, מֶלֶךְ לְעוֹלָם. 10 The LORD sat enthroned at the flood; yea, the LORD sitteth as King for ever.
29.11 יא  יְהוָה--עֹז, לְעַמּוֹ יִתֵּן;    יְהוָה, יְבָרֵךְ אֶת-עַמּוֹ בַשָּׁלוֹם. 11 The LORD will give strength unto His people; the LORD will bless his people with peace. {P}
30.1 א  מִזְמוֹר:  שִׁיר-חֲנֻכַּת הַבַּיִת לְדָוִד. אֲרוֹמִמְךָ יְהוָה, כִּי דִלִּיתָנִי;    וְלֹא-שִׂמַּחְתָּ אֹיְבַי לִי. 1 A Psalm; a Song at the Dedication of the House; of David. I will extol thee, O LORD, for Thou hast raised me up, and hast not suffered mine enemies to rejoice over me.
30.2 ב יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי--    שִׁוַּעְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ, וַתִּרְפָּאֵנִי.   2  O LORD my God, I cried unto Thee, and Thou didst heal me;
30.3 ג יְהוָה--הֶעֱלִיתָ מִן-שְׁאוֹל נַפְשִׁי;    חִיִּיתַנִי, מיורדי- (מִיָּרְדִי-) בוֹר.   3  O LORD, Thou broughtest up my soul from the nether-world; Thou didst keep me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
30.4 ד זַמְּרוּ לַיהוָה חֲסִידָיו;    וְהוֹדוּ, לְזֵכֶר קָדְשׁוֹ.   4  Sing praise unto the LORD, O ye His godly ones, and give thanks to His holy name.
30.5 ה כִּי רֶגַע, בְּאַפּוֹ--    חַיִּים בִּרְצוֹנוֹ: בָּעֶרֶב, יָלִין בֶּכִי;    וְלַבֹּקֶר רִנָּה.   5  For His anger is but for a moment, His favour is for a life-time; {N} weeping may tarry for the night, but joy cometh in the morning.
30.6 ו וַאֲנִי, אָמַרְתִּי בְשַׁלְוִי--    בַּל-אֶמּוֹט לְעוֹלָם.   6  Now I had said in my security: 'I shall never be moved.'
30.7 ז יְהוָה--    בִּרְצוֹנְךָ, הֶעֱמַדְתָּה לְהַרְרִי-עֹז: הִסְתַּרְתָּ פָנֶיךָ;    הָיִיתִי נִבְהָל.   7  Thou hadst established, O LORD, in Thy favour my mountain as a stronghold-- {N} Thou didst hide Thy face; I was affrighted.
30.8 ח אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה אֶקְרָא;    וְאֶל-אֲדֹנָי, אֶתְחַנָּן.   8  Unto Thee, O LORD, did I call, and unto the LORD I made supplication:
30.9 ט   9 מַה-בֶּצַע בְּדָמִי,    בְּרִדְתִּי אֶל-שָׁחַת: הֲיוֹדְךָ עָפָר;    הֲיַגִּיד אֲמִתֶּךָ.  'What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? {N} Shall the dust praise Thee? shall it declare Thy truth?
30.10 י   1 שְׁמַע-יְהוָה וְחָנֵּנִי;    יְהוָה, הֱיֵה-עֹזֵר לִי.0  Hear, O LORD, and be gracious unto me; LORD, be Thou my helper.'
30.11 י הָפַכְתָּ מִסְפְּדִי, לְמָחוֹל לִי:    פִּתַּחְתָּ שַׂקִּי; וַתְּאַזְּרֵנִי שִׂמְחָה.א   11  Thou didst turn for me my mourning into dancing; Thou didst loose my sackcloth, and gird me with gladness;
30.12 י לְמַעַן, יְזַמֶּרְךָ כָבוֹד--    וְלֹא יִדֹּם: יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי,    לְעוֹלָם אוֹדֶךָּ.ב   12  So that my glory may sing praise to Thee, and not be silent; {N} O LORD my God, I will give thanks unto Thee for ever. {P}
31.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. בְּךָ-יְהוָה חָסִיתִי, אַל-אֵבוֹשָׁה לְעוֹלָם;    בְּצִדְקָתְךָ פַלְּטֵנִי. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. In thee, O LORD, have I taken refuge; let me never be ashamed; deliver me in Thy righteousness.
31.2 ב הַטֵּה אֵלַי, אָזְנְךָ--    מְהֵרָה הַצִּילֵנִי: הֱיֵה לִי, לְצוּר-מָעוֹז--לְבֵית מְצוּדוֹת;    לְהוֹשִׁיעֵנִי.   2  Incline Thine ear unto me, deliver me speedily; {N} be Thou to me a rock of refuge, even a fortress of defence, to save me.
31.3 ג כִּי-סַלְעִי וּמְצוּדָתִי אָתָּה;    וּלְמַעַן שִׁמְךָ, תַּנְחֵנִי וּתְנַהֲלֵנִי.   3  For Thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for Thy name's sake lead me and guide me.
31.4 ד תּוֹצִיאֵנִי--מֵרֶשֶׁת זוּ, טָמְנוּ לִי:    כִּי-אַתָּה, מָעוּזִּי.   4  Bring me forth out of the net that they have hidden for me; for Thou art my stronghold.
31.5 ה בְּיָדְךָ, אַפְקִיד רוּחִי:    פָּדִיתָ אוֹתִי יְהוָה--אֵל אֱמֶת.   5  Into Thy hand I commit my spirit; Thou hast redeemed me, O LORD, Thou God of truth.
31.6 ו שָׂנֵאתִי, הַשֹּׁמְרִים הַבְלֵי-שָׁוְא;    וַאֲנִי, אֶל-יְהוָה בָּטָחְתִּי.   6  I hate them that regard lying vanities; but I trust in the LORD.
31.7 ז אָגִילָה וְאֶשְׂמְחָה,    בְּחַסְדֶּךָ: אֲשֶׁר רָאִיתָ, אֶת-עָנְיִי;    יָדַעְתָּ, בְּצָרוֹת נַפְשִׁי.   7  I will be glad and rejoice in Thy lovingkindness; {N} for Thou hast seen mine affliction, Thou hast taken cognizance of the troubles of my soul,
31.8 ח וְלֹא הִסְגַּרְתַּנִי, בְּיַד-אוֹיֵב;    הֶעֱמַדְתָּ בַמֶּרְחָב רַגְלָי.   8  And Thou hast not given me over into the hand of the enemy; Thou hast set my feet in a broad place.
31.9 ט   9 חָנֵּנִי יְהוָה,    כִּי צַר-לִי: עָשְׁשָׁה בְכַעַס עֵינִי;    נַפְשִׁי וּבִטְנִי.  Be gracious unto me, O LORD, for I am in distress; {N} mine eye wasteth away with vexation, yea, my soul and my body.
31.10 י   1 כִּי כָלוּ בְיָגוֹן, חַיַּי--    וּשְׁנוֹתַי בַּאֲנָחָה: כָּשַׁל בַּעֲוֺנִי כֹחִי;    וַעֲצָמַי עָשֵׁשׁוּ.0  For my life is spent in sorrow, and my years in sighing; {N} my strength faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are wasted away.
31.11 י מִכָּל-צֹרְרַי הָיִיתִי חֶרְפָּה, וְלִשְׁכֵנַי מְאֹד--    וּפַחַד לִמְיֻדָּעָי: רֹאַי בַּחוּץ--    נָדְדוּ מִמֶּנִּי.א   11  Because of all mine adversaries I am become a reproach, yea, unto my neighbours exceedingly, and a dread to mine acquaintance; {N} they that see me without flee from me.
31.12 י נִשְׁכַּחְתִּי, כְּמֵת מִלֵּב;    הָיִיתִי, כִּכְלִי אֹבֵד.ב   12  I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind; I am like a useless vessel.
31.13 י כִּי שָׁמַעְתִּי, דִּבַּת רַבִּים--    מָגוֹר מִסָּבִיב: בְּהִוָּסְדָם יַחַד עָלַי;    לָקַחַת נַפְשִׁי זָמָמוּ.ג   13  For I have heard the whispering of many, terror on every side; {N} while they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.
31.14 י וַאֲנִי, עָלֶיךָ בָטַחְתִּי יְהוָה;    אָמַרְתִּי, אֱלֹהַי אָתָּה.ד   14  But as for me, I have trusted in Thee, O LORD; I have said: 'Thou art my God.'
31.15 ט בְּיָדְךָ עִתֹּתָי;    הַצִּילֵנִי מִיַּד-אוֹיְבַי, וּמֵרֹדְפָי.ו   15  My times are in Thy hand; deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me.
31.16 ט הָאִירָה פָנֶיךָ, עַל-עַבְדֶּךָ;    הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי בְחַסְדֶּךָ.ז   16  Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant; save me in Thy lovingkindness.
31.17 י יְהוָה--אַל-אֵבוֹשָׁה, כִּי קְרָאתִיךָ;    יֵבֹשׁוּ רְשָׁעִים, יִדְּמוּ לִשְׁאוֹל.ז   17  O LORD, let me not be ashamed, for I have called upon Thee; let the wicked be ashamed, let them be put to silence in the nether-world.
31.18 י תֵּאָלַמְנָה, שִׂפְתֵי-שָׁקֶר:    הַדֹּבְרוֹת עַל-צַדִּיק עָתָק--בְּגַאֲוָה וָבוּז.ח   18  Let the lying lips be dumb, which speak arrogantly against the righteous, with pride and contempt.
31.19 י מָה רַב-טוּבְךָ,    אֲשֶׁר-צָפַנְתָּ לִּירֵאֶיךָ: פָּעַלְתָּ, לַחֹסִים בָּךְ;    נֶגֶד, בְּנֵי אָדָם.ט   19  Oh how abundant is Thy goodness, which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee; {N} which Thou hast wrought for them that take their refuge in Thee, in the sight of the sons of men!
31.20 כ   2 תַּסְתִּירֵם, בְּסֵתֶר פָּנֶיךָ--    מֵרֻכְסֵי-אִישׁ: תִּצְפְּנֵם בְּסֻכָּה;    מֵרִיב לְשֹׁנוֹת.0  Thou hidest them in the covert of Thy presence from the plottings of man; {N} Thou concealest them in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
31.21 כ בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה:    כִּי הִפְלִיא חַסְדּוֹ לִי, בְּעִיר מָצוֹר.א   21  Blessed be the LORD; for He hath shown me His wondrous lovingkindness in an entrenched city.
31.22 כ וַאֲנִי, אָמַרְתִּי בְחָפְזִי--    נִגְרַזְתִּי, מִנֶּגֶד עֵינֶיךָ: אָכֵן--שָׁמַעְתָּ, קוֹל תַּחֲנוּנַי;    בְּשַׁוְּעִי אֵלֶיךָ.ב   22  As for me, I said in my haste: 'I am cut off from before Thine eyes'; {N} nevertheless Thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried unto Thee.
31.23 כ אֶהֱבוּ אֶת-יְהוָה,    כָּל-חֲסִידָיו: אֱמוּנִים, נֹצֵר יְהוָה;    וּמְשַׁלֵּם עַל-יֶתֶר, עֹשֵׂה גַאֲוָה.ג   23  O love the LORD, all ye His godly ones; {N} the LORD preserveth the faithful, and plentifully repayeth him that acteth haughtily.
31.24 כ חִזְקוּ, וְיַאֲמֵץ לְבַבְכֶם--    כָּל-הַמְיַחֲלִים, לַיהוָה.ד   24  Be strong, and let your heart take courage, all ye that wait for the LORD. {P}
32.1 א  לְדָוִד, מַשְׂכִּיל:    אַשְׁרֵי נְשׂוּי-פֶּשַׁע; כְּסוּי חֲטָאָה. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Maschil. Happy is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is pardoned.
32.2 ב  אַשְׁרֵי אָדָם--לֹא יַחְשֹׁב יְהוָה לוֹ עָוֺן;    וְאֵין בְּרוּחוֹ רְמִיָּה. 2 Happy is the man unto whom the LORD counteth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.
32.3 ג  כִּי-הֶחֱרַשְׁתִּי, בָּלוּ עֲצָמָי--    בְּשַׁאֲגָתִי, כָּל-הַיּוֹם. 3 When I kept silence, my bones wore away through my groaning all the day long.
32.4 ד  כִּי, יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה--    תִּכְבַּד עָלַי, יָדֶךָ: נֶהְפַּךְ לְשַׁדִּי--    בְּחַרְבֹנֵי קַיִץ סֶלָה. 4 For day and night Thy hand was heavy upon me; {N} my sap was turned as in the droughts of summer. Selah
32.5 ה  חַטָּאתִי אוֹדִיעֲךָ,    וַעֲוֺנִי לֹא-כִסִּיתִי-- אָמַרְתִּי,    אוֹדֶה עֲלֵי פְשָׁעַי לַיהוָה; וְאַתָּה נָשָׂאתָ עֲוֺן חַטָּאתִי    סֶלָה. 5 I acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid; {N} I said: 'I will make confession concerning my transgressions unto the LORD'-- {N} and Thou, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah
32.6 ו  עַל-זֹאת, יִתְפַּלֵּל כָּל-חָסִיד אֵלֶיךָ--    לְעֵת מְצֹא: רַק, לְשֵׁטֶף מַיִם רַבִּים--    אֵלָיו, לֹא יַגִּיעוּ. 6 For this let every one that is godly pray unto Thee in a time when Thou mayest be found; {N} surely, when the great waters overflow, they will not reach unto him.
32.7 ז  אַתָּה, סֵתֶר לִי--    מִצַּר תִּצְּרֵנִי: רָנֵּי פַלֵּט;    תְּסוֹבְבֵנִי סֶלָה. 7 Thou art my hiding-place; Thou wilt preserve me from the adversary; {N} with songs of deliverance Thou wilt compass me about. Selah
32.8 ח  אַשְׂכִּילְךָ, וְאוֹרְךָ--בְּדֶרֶךְ-זוּ תֵלֵךְ;    אִיעֲצָה עָלֶיךָ עֵינִי. 8 'I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go; I will give counsel, Mine eye being upon thee.'
32.9 ט  אַל-תִּהְיוּ, כְּסוּס כְּפֶרֶד--    אֵין הָבִין: בְּמֶתֶג-וָרֶסֶן עֶדְיוֹ לִבְלוֹם;    בַּל, קְרֹב אֵלֶיךָ. 9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding; {N} whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, that they come not near unto thee.
32.10 י  רַבִּים מַכְאוֹבִים, לָרָשָׁע:    וְהַבּוֹטֵחַ בַּיהוָה--חֶסֶד, יְסוֹבְבֶנּוּ. 10 Many are the sorrows of the wicked; but he that trusteth in the LORD, mercy compasseth him about.
32.11 יא  שִׂמְחוּ בַיהוָה וְגִילוּ, צַדִּיקִים;    וְהַרְנִינוּ, כָּל-יִשְׁרֵי-לֵב. 11 Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice, ye righteous; and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart. {P}
33.1 א  רַנְּנוּ צַדִּיקִים, בַּיהוָה;    לַיְשָׁרִים, נָאוָה תְהִלָּה. 1 Rejoice in the LORD, O ye righteous, praise is comely for the upright.
33.2 ב  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה בְּכִנּוֹר;    בְּנֵבֶל עָשׂוֹר, זַמְּרוּ-לוֹ. 2 Give thanks unto the LORD with harp, sing praises unto Him with the psaltery of ten strings.
33.3 ג  שִׁירוּ-לוֹ, שִׁיר חָדָשׁ;    הֵיטִיבוּ נַגֵּן, בִּתְרוּעָה. 3 Sing unto Him a new song; play skilfully amid shouts of joy.
33.4 ד  כִּי-יָשָׁר דְּבַר-יְהוָה;    וְכָל-מַעֲשֵׂהוּ, בֶּאֱמוּנָה. 4 For the word of the LORD is upright; and all His work is done in faithfulness.
33.5 ה  אֹהֵב, צְדָקָה וּמִשְׁפָּט;    חֶסֶד יְהוָה, מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ. 5 He loveth righteousness and justice; the earth is full of the lovingkindness of the LORD.
33.6 ו  בִּדְבַר יְהוָה, שָׁמַיִם נַעֲשׂוּ;    וּבְרוּחַ פִּיו, כָּל-צְבָאָם. 6 By the word of the LORD were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth.
33.7 ז  כֹּנֵס כַּנֵּד, מֵי הַיָּם;    נֹתֵן בְּאוֹצָרוֹת תְּהוֹמוֹת. 7 He gathereth the waters of the sea together as a heap; He layeth up the deeps in storehouses.
33.8 ח  יִירְאוּ מֵיְהוָה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ;    מִמֶּנּוּ יָגוּרוּ, כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי תֵבֵל. 8 Let all the earth fear the LORD; let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of Him.
33.9 ט  כִּי הוּא אָמַר וַיֶּהִי;    הוּא-צִוָּה, וַיַּעֲמֹד. 9 For He spoke, and it was; He commanded, and it stood.
33.10 י  יְהוָה, הֵפִיר עֲצַת-גּוֹיִם;    הֵנִיא, מַחְשְׁבוֹת עַמִּים. 10 The LORD bringeth the counsel of the nations to nought; He maketh the thoughts of the peoples to be of no effect.
33.11 יא  עֲצַת יְהוָה, לְעוֹלָם תַּעֲמֹד;    מַחְשְׁבוֹת לִבּוֹ, לְדֹר וָדֹר. 11 The counsel of the LORD standeth for ever, the thoughts of His heart to all generations.
33.12 יב  אַשְׁרֵי הַגּוֹי, אֲשֶׁר-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו;    הָעָם, בָּחַר לְנַחֲלָה לוֹ. 12 Happy is the nation whose God is the LORD; the people whom He hath chosen for His own inheritance.
33.13 יג  מִשָּׁמַיִם, הִבִּיט יְהוָה;    רָאָה, אֶת-כָּל-בְּנֵי הָאָדָם. 13 The LORD looketh from heaven; He beholdeth all the sons of men;
33.14 יד  מִמְּכוֹן-שִׁבְתּוֹ הִשְׁגִּיחַ--    אֶל כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי הָאָרֶץ. 14 From the place of His habitation He looketh intently upon all the inhabitants of the earth;
33.15 טו  הַיֹּצֵר יַחַד לִבָּם;    הַמֵּבִין, אֶל-כָּל-מַעֲשֵׂיהֶם. 15 He that fashioneth the hearts of them all, that considereth all their doings.
33.16 טז  אֵין-הַמֶּלֶךְ, נוֹשָׁע בְּרָב-חָיִל;    גִּבּוֹר, לֹא-יִנָּצֵל בְּרָב-כֹּחַ. 16 A king is not saved by the multitude of a host; a mighty man is not delivered by great strength.
33.17 יז  שֶׁקֶר הַסּוּס, לִתְשׁוּעָה;    וּבְרֹב חֵילוֹ, לֹא יְמַלֵּט. 17 A horse is a vain thing for safety; neither doth it afford escape by its great strength.
33.18 יח  הִנֵּה עֵין יְהוָה, אֶל-יְרֵאָיו;    לַמְיַחֲלִים לְחַסְדּוֹ. 18 Behold, the eye of the LORD is toward them that fear Him, toward them that wait for His mercy;
33.19 יט  לְהַצִּיל מִמָּוֶת נַפְשָׁם;    וּלְחַיּוֹתָם, בָּרָעָב. 19 To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
33.20 כ  נַפְשֵׁנוּ, חִכְּתָה לַיהוָה;    עֶזְרֵנוּ וּמָגִנֵּנוּ הוּא. 20 Our soul hath waited for the LORD; He is our help and our shield.
33.21 כא  כִּי-בוֹ, יִשְׂמַח לִבֵּנוּ:    כִּי בְשֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ בָטָחְנוּ. 21 For in Him doth our heart rejoice, because we have trusted in His holy name.
33.22 כב  יְהִי-חַסְדְּךָ יְהוָה עָלֵינוּ:    כַּאֲשֶׁר, יִחַלְנוּ לָךְ. 22 Let Thy mercy, O LORD, be upon us, according as we have waited for Thee. {P}
34.1 א  לְדָוִד--    בְּשַׁנּוֹתוֹ אֶת-טַעְמוֹ, לִפְנֵי אֲבִימֶלֶךְ; וַיְגָרְשֵׁהוּ, וַיֵּלַךְ. אֲבָרְכָה אֶת-יְהוָה בְּכָל-עֵת;    תָּמִיד, תְּהִלָּתוֹ בְּפִי. 1 [A Psalm] of David; when he changed his demeanour before Abimelech, who drove him away, and he departed. I will bless the LORD at all times; His praise shall continually be in my mouth.
34.2 ב בַּיהוָה, תִּתְהַלֵּל נַפְשִׁי;    יִשְׁמְעוּ עֲנָוִים וְיִשְׂמָחוּ.   2  My soul shall glory in the LORD; the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad.
34.3 ג גַּדְּלוּ לַיהוָה אִתִּי;    וּנְרוֹמְמָה שְׁמוֹ יַחְדָּו.   3  O magnify the LORD with me, and let us exalt His name together.
34.4 ד דָּרַשְׁתִּי אֶת-יְהוָה וְעָנָנִי;    וּמִכָּל-מְגוּרוֹתַי הִצִּילָנִי.   4  I sought the LORD, and He answered me, and delivered me from all my fears.
34.5 ה הִבִּיטוּ אֵלָיו וְנָהָרוּ;    וּפְנֵיהֶם, אַל-יֶחְפָּרוּ.   5  They looked unto Him, and were radiant; and their faces shall never be abashed.
34.6 ו זֶה עָנִי קָרָא, וַיהוָה שָׁמֵעַ;    וּמִכָּל-צָרוֹתָיו, הוֹשִׁיעוֹ.   6  This poor man cried, and the LORD heard, and saved him out of all his troubles.
34.7 ז חֹנֶה מַלְאַךְ-יְהוָה סָבִיב לִירֵאָיו;    וַיְחַלְּצֵם.   7  The angel of the LORD encampeth round about them that fear Him, and delivereth them.
34.8 ח טַעֲמוּ וּרְאוּ, כִּי-טוֹב יְהוָה;    אַשְׁרֵי הַגֶּבֶר, יֶחֱסֶה-בּוֹ.   8  O consider and see that the LORD is good; happy is the man that taketh refuge in Him.
34.9 ט   9 יְראוּ אֶת-יְהוָה קְדֹשָׁיו:    כִּי-אֵין מַחְסוֹר, לִירֵאָיו.  O fear the LORD, ye His holy ones; for there is no want to them that fear Him.
34.10 י   1 כְּפִירִים, רָשׁוּ וְרָעֵבוּ;    וְדֹרְשֵׁי יְהוָה, לֹא-יַחְסְרוּ כָל-טוֹב.0  The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger; but they that seek the LORD want not any good thing.
34.11 י לְכוּ-בָנִים, שִׁמְעוּ-לִי;    יִרְאַת יְהוָה, אֲלַמֶּדְכֶם.א   11  Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
34.12 י מִי-הָאִישׁ, הֶחָפֵץ חַיִּים;    אֹהֵב יָמִים, לִרְאוֹת טוֹב.ב   12  Who is the man that desireth life, and loveth days, that he may see good therein?
34.13 י נְצֹר לְשׁוֹנְךָ מֵרָע;    וּשְׂפָתֶיךָ, מִדַּבֵּר מִרְמָה.ג   13  Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
34.14 י סוּר מֵרָע, וַעֲשֵׂה-טוֹב;    בַּקֵּשׁ שָׁלוֹם וְרָדְפֵהוּ.ד   14  Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.
34.15 ט עֵינֵי יְהוָה, אֶל-צַדִּיקִים;    וְאָזְנָיו, אֶל-שַׁוְעָתָם.ו   15  The eyes of the LORD are toward the righteous, and His ears are open unto their cry.
34.16 ט פְּנֵי יְהוָה, בְּעֹשֵׂי רָע;    לְהַכְרִית מֵאֶרֶץ זִכְרָם.ז   16  The face of the LORD is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.
34.17 י צָעֲקוּ, וַיהוָה שָׁמֵעַ;    וּמִכָּל-צָרוֹתָם, הִצִּילָם.ז   17  They cried, and the LORD heard, and delivered them out of all their troubles.
34.18 י קָרוֹב יְהוָה, לְנִשְׁבְּרֵי-לֵב;    וְאֶת-דַּכְּאֵי-רוּחַ יוֹשִׁיעַ.ח   18  The LORD is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saveth such as are of a contrite spirit.
34.19 י רַבּוֹת, רָעוֹת צַדִּיק;    וּמִכֻּלָּם, יַצִּילֶנּוּ יְהוָה.ט   19  Many are the ills of the righteous, but the LORD delivereth him out of them all.
34.20 כ   2 שֹׁמֵר כָּל-עַצְמוֹתָיו;    אַחַת מֵהֵנָּה, לֹא נִשְׁבָּרָה.0  He keepeth all his bones; not one of them is broken.
34.21 כ תְּמוֹתֵת רָשָׁע רָעָה;    וְשֹׂנְאֵי צַדִּיק יֶאְשָׁמוּ.א   21  Evil shall kill the wicked; and they that hate the righteous shall be held guilty.
34.22 כ פֹּדֶה יְהוָה, נֶפֶשׁ עֲבָדָיו;    וְלֹא יֶאְשְׁמוּ, כָּל-הַחֹסִים בּוֹ.ב   22  The LORD redeemeth the soul of His servants; and none of them that take refuge in Him shall be desolate. {P}
35.1 א  לְדָוִד:  רִיבָה יְהוָה, אֶת-יְרִיבַי;    לְחַם, אֶת-לֹחֲמָי. 1 A Psalm of David. Strive, O LORD, with them that strive with me; fight against them that fight against me.
35.2 ב  הַחֲזֵק מָגֵן וְצִנָּה;    וְקוּמָה, בְּעֶזְרָתִי. 2 Take hold of shield and buckler, and rise up to my help.
35.3 ג  וְהָרֵק חֲנִית וּסְגֹר, לִקְרַאת רֹדְפָי;    אֱמֹר לְנַפְשִׁי, יְשֻׁעָתֵךְ אָנִי. 3 Draw out also the spear, and the battle-axe, against them that pursue me; say unto my soul: 'I am thy salvation.'
35.4 ד  יֵבֹשׁוּ וְיִכָּלְמוּ, מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשִׁי:    יִסֹּגוּ אָחוֹר וְיַחְפְּרוּ--חֹשְׁבֵי, רָעָתִי. 4 Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion that seek after my soul; let them be turned back and be abashed that devise my hurt.
35.5 ה  יִהְיוּ, כְּמֹץ לִפְנֵי-רוּחַ;    וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה דּוֹחֶה. 5 Let them be as chaff before the wind, the angel of the LORD thrusting them.
35.6 ו  יְהִי-דַרְכָּם, חֹשֶׁךְ וַחֲלַקְלַקֹּת;    וּמַלְאַךְ יְהוָה, רֹדְפָם. 6 Let their way be dark and slippery, the angel of the LORD pursuing them.
35.7 ז  כִּי-חִנָּם טָמְנוּ-לִי, שַׁחַת רִשְׁתָּם;    חִנָּם, חָפְרוּ לְנַפְשִׁי. 7 For without cause have they hid for me the pit, even their net, without cause have they digged for my soul.
35.8 ח  תְּבוֹאֵהוּ שׁוֹאָה,    לֹא-יֵדָע: וְרִשְׁתּוֹ אֲשֶׁר-טָמַן תִּלְכְּדוֹ;    בְּשׁוֹאָה, יִפָּל-בָּהּ. 8 Let destruction come upon him unawares; {N} and let his net that he hath hid catch himself; with destruction let him fall therein.
35.9 ט  וְנַפְשִׁי, תָּגִיל בַּיהוָה;    תָּשִׂישׂ, בִּישׁוּעָתוֹ. 9 And my soul shall be joyful in the LORD; it shall rejoice in His salvation.
35.10 י  כָּל עַצְמוֹתַי, תֹּאמַרְנָה--    יְהוָה, מִי כָמוֹךָ: מַצִּיל עָנִי, מֵחָזָק מִמֶּנּוּ;    וְעָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן, מִגֹּזְלוֹ. 10 All my bones shall say: 'LORD, who is like unto Thee, {N} who deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him?'
35.11 יא  יְקוּמוּן, עֵדֵי חָמָס:    אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יָדַעְתִּי, יִשְׁאָלוּנִי. 11 Unrighteous witnesses rise up; they ask me of things that I know not.
35.12 יב  יְשַׁלְּמוּנִי רָעָה, תַּחַת טוֹבָה:    שְׁכוֹל לְנַפְשִׁי. 12 They repay me evil for good; bereavement is come to my soul.
35.13 יג  וַאֲנִי, בַּחֲלוֹתָם לְבוּשִׁי שָׂק--    עִנֵּיתִי בַצּוֹם נַפְשִׁי; וּתְפִלָּתִי,    עַל-חֵיקִי תָשׁוּב. 13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth, I afflicted my soul with fasting; {N} and my prayer, may it return into mine own bosom.
35.14 יד  כְּרֵעַ-כְּאָח לִי, הִתְהַלָּכְתִּי;    כַּאֲבֶל-אֵם, קֹדֵר שַׁחוֹתִי. 14 I went about as though it had been my friend or my brother; I bowed down mournful, as one that mourneth for his mother.
35.15 טו  וּבְצַלְעִי,    שָׂמְחוּ וְנֶאֱסָפוּ: נֶאֶסְפוּ עָלַי נֵכִים,    וְלֹא יָדַעְתִּי; קָרְעוּ    וְלֹא-דָמּוּ. 15 But when I halt they rejoice, and gather themselves together; {N} the abjects gather themselves together against me, and those whom I know not; {N} they tear me, and cease not;
35.16 טז  בְּחַנְפֵי, לַעֲגֵי מָעוֹג--    חָרֹק עָלַי שִׁנֵּימוֹ. 16 With the profanest mockeries of backbiting they gnash at me with their teeth.
35.17 יז  אֲדֹנָי,    כַּמָּה תִּרְאֶה: הָשִׁיבָה נַפְשִׁי, מִשֹּׁאֵיהֶם;    מִכְּפִירִים, יְחִידָתִי. 17 Lord, how long wilt Thou look on? {N} Rescue my soul from their destructions, mine only one from the lions.
35.18 יח  אוֹדְךָ, בְּקָהָל רָב;    בְּעַם עָצוּם אֲהַלְלֶךָּ. 18 I will give Thee thanks in the great congregation; I will praise Thee among a numerous people.
35.19 יט  אַל-יִשְׂמְחוּ-לִי אֹיְבַי שֶׁקֶר;    שֹׂנְאַי חִנָּם, יִקְרְצוּ-עָיִן. 19 Let not them that are wrongfully mine enemies rejoice over me; neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.
35.20 כ  כִּי לֹא שָׁלוֹם, יְדַבֵּרוּ:    וְעַל רִגְעֵי-אֶרֶץ--דִּבְרֵי מִרְמוֹת, יַחֲשֹׁבוּן. 20 For they speak not peace; but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the land.
35.21 כא  וַיַּרְחִיבוּ עָלַי, פִּיהֶם:    אָמְרוּ, הֶאָח הֶאָח; רָאֲתָה עֵינֵנוּ. 21 Yea, they open their mouth wide against me; they say: 'Aha, aha, our eye hath seen it.'
35.22 כב  רָאִיתָה יְהוָה, אַל-תֶּחֱרַשׁ;    אֲדֹנָי, אַל-תִּרְחַק מִמֶּנִּי. 22 Thou hast seen, O LORD; keep not silence; O Lord, be not far from me.
35.23 כג  הָעִירָה וְהָקִיצָה, לְמִשְׁפָּטִי;    אֱלֹהַי וַאדֹנָי לְרִיבִי. 23 Rouse Thee, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my Lord.
35.24 כד  שָׁפְטֵנִי כְצִדְקְךָ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי;    וְאַל-יִשְׂמְחוּ-לִי. 24 Judge me, O LORD my God, according to Thy righteousness; and let them not rejoice over me.
35.25 כה  אַל-יֹאמְרוּ בְלִבָּם, הֶאָח נַפְשֵׁנוּ;    אַל-יֹאמְרוּ, בִּלַּעֲנוּהוּ. 25 Let them not say in their heart: 'Aha, we have our desire'; let them not say: 'We have swallowed him up.'
35.26 כו  יֵבֹשׁוּ וְיַחְפְּרוּ, יַחְדָּו--    שְׂמֵחֵי רָעָתִי: יִלְבְּשׁוּ-בֹשֶׁת וּכְלִמָּה--    הַמַּגְדִּילִים עָלָי. 26 Let them be ashamed and abashed together that rejoice at my hurt; {N} let them be clothed with shame and confusion that magnify themselves against me.
35.27 כז  יָרֹנּוּ וְיִשְׂמְחוּ,    חֲפֵצֵי צִדְקִי: וְיֹאמְרוּ תָמִיד, יִגְדַּל יְהוָה;    הֶחָפֵץ, שְׁלוֹם עַבְדּוֹ. 27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that delight in my righteousness; {N} yea, let them say continually: 'Magnified be the LORD, who delighteth in the peace of His servant.'
35.28 כח  וּלְשׁוֹנִי, תֶּהְגֶּה צִדְקֶךָ;    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, תְּהִלָּתֶךָ. 28 And my tongue shall speak of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day. {P}
36.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לְעֶבֶד-יְהוָה לְדָוִד. נְאֻם-פֶּשַׁע לָרָשָׁע, בְּקֶרֶב לִבִּי;    אֵין-פַּחַד אֱלֹהִים, לְנֶגֶד עֵינָיו. 1 For the Leader. [A Psalm] of David the servant of the LORD. Transgression speaketh to the wicked, methinks--there is no fear of God before his eyes.
36.2 ב כִּי-הֶחֱלִיק אֵלָיו בְּעֵינָיו;    לִמְצֹא עֲוֺנוֹ לִשְׂנֹא.   2  For it flattereth him in his eyes, until his iniquity be found, and he be hated.
36.3 ג דִּבְרֵי-פִיו, אָוֶן וּמִרְמָה;    חָדַל לְהַשְׂכִּיל לְהֵיטִיב.   3  The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit; he hath left off to be wise, to do good.
36.4 ד אָוֶן, יַחְשֹׁב--עַל-מִשְׁכָּבוֹ:    יִתְיַצֵּב, עַל-דֶּרֶךְ לֹא-טוֹב; רָע, לֹא יִמְאָס.   4  He deviseth iniquity upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.
36.5 ה יְהוָה, בְּהַשָּׁמַיִם חַסְדֶּךָ;    אֱמוּנָתְךָ, עַד-שְׁחָקִים.   5  Thy lovingkindness, O LORD, is in the heavens; Thy faithfulness reacheth unto the skies.
36.6 ו צִדְקָתְךָ, כְּהַרְרֵי-אֵל--מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ, תְּהוֹם רַבָּה;    אָדָם וּבְהֵמָה תוֹשִׁיעַ יְהוָה.   6  Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains; Thy judgments are like the great deep; man and beast Thou preservest, O LORD.
36.7 ז מַה-יָּקָר חַסְדְּךָ, אֱלֹהִים:    וּבְנֵי אָדָם--בְּצֵל כְּנָפֶיךָ, יֶחֱסָיוּן.   7  How precious is Thy lovingkindness, O God! and the children of men take refuge in the shadow of Thy wings.
36.8 ח יִרְוְיֻן, מִדֶּשֶׁן בֵּיתֶךָ;    וְנַחַל עֲדָנֶיךָ תַשְׁקֵם.   8  They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Thy house; and Thou makest them drink of the river of Thy pleasures.
36.9 ט   9 כִּי-עִמְּךָ, מְקוֹר חַיִּים;    בְּאוֹרְךָ, נִרְאֶה-אוֹר.  For with Thee is the fountain of life; in Thy light do we see light.
36.10 י   1 מְשֹׁךְ חַסְדְּךָ, לְיֹדְעֶיךָ;    וְצִדְקָתְךָ, לְיִשְׁרֵי-לֵב.0  O continue Thy lovingkindness unto them that know Thee; and Thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
36.11 י אַל-תְּבוֹאֵנִי, רֶגֶל גַּאֲוָה;    וְיַד-רְשָׁעִים, אַל-תְּנִדֵנִי.א   11  Let not the foot of pride overtake me, and let not the hand of the wicked drive me away.
36.12 י שָׁם נָפְלוּ, פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן;    דֹּחוּ, וְלֹא-יָכְלוּ קוּם.ב   12  There are the workers of iniquity fallen; they are thrust down, and are not able to rise. {P}
37.1 א  לְדָוִד:  אַל-תִּתְחַר בַּמְּרֵעִים;    אַל-תְּקַנֵּא, בְּעֹשֵׂי עַוְלָה. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Fret not thyself because of evil-doers, neither be thou envious against them that work unrighteousness.
37.2 ב  כִּי כֶחָצִיר, מְהֵרָה יִמָּלוּ;    וּכְיֶרֶק דֶּשֶׁא, יִבּוֹלוּן. 2 For they shall soon wither like the grass, and fade as the green herb.
37.3 ג  בְּטַח בַּיהוָה, וַעֲשֵׂה-טוֹב;    שְׁכָן-אֶרֶץ, וּרְעֵה אֱמוּנָה. 3 Trust in the LORD, and do good; dwell in the land, and cherish faithfulness.
37.4 ד  וְהִתְעַנַּג עַל-יְהוָה;    וְיִתֶּן-לְךָ, מִשְׁאֲלֹת לִבֶּךָ. 4 So shalt thou delight thyself in the LORD; and He shall give thee the petitions of thy heart.
37.5 ה  גּוֹל עַל-יְהוָה דַּרְכֶּךָ;    וּבְטַח עָלָיו, וְהוּא יַעֲשֶׂה. 5 Commit thy way unto the LORD; trust also in Him, and He will bring it to pass.
37.6 ו  וְהוֹצִיא כָאוֹר צִדְקֶךָ;    וּמִשְׁפָּטֶךָ, כַּצָּהֳרָיִם. 6 And He will make thy righteousness to go forth as the light, and thy right as the noonday.
37.7 ז  דּוֹם, לַיהוָה--    וְהִתְחוֹלֵל-לוֹ: אַל-תִּתְחַר, בְּמַצְלִיחַ דַּרְכּוֹ;    בְּאִישׁ, עֹשֶׂה מְזִמּוֹת. 7 Resign thyself unto the LORD, and wait patiently for Him; {N} fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass.
37.8 ח  הֶרֶף מֵאַף, וַעֲזֹב חֵמָה;    אַל-תִּתְחַר, אַךְ-לְהָרֵעַ. 8 Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thyself, it tendeth only to evil-doing.
37.9 ט  כִּי-מְרֵעִים, יִכָּרֵתוּן;    וְקֹוֵי יְהוָה, הֵמָּה יִירְשׁוּ-אָרֶץ. 9 For evil-doers shall be cut off; but those that wait for the LORD, they shall inherit the land.
37.10 י  וְעוֹד מְעַט, וְאֵין רָשָׁע;    וְהִתְבּוֹנַנְתָּ עַל-מְקוֹמוֹ וְאֵינֶנּוּ. 10 And yet a little while, and the wicked is no more; yea, thou shalt look well at his place, and he is not.
37.11 יא  וַעֲנָוִים יִירְשׁוּ-אָרֶץ;    וְהִתְעַנְּגוּ, עַל-רֹב שָׁלוֹם. 11 But the humble shall inherit the land, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
37.12 יב  זֹמֵם רָשָׁע, לַצַּדִּיק;    וְחֹרֵק עָלָיו שִׁנָּיו. 12 The wicked plotteth against the righteous, and gnasheth at him with his teeth.
37.13 יג  אֲדֹנָי יִשְׂחַק-לוֹ:    כִּי-רָאָה, כִּי-יָבֹא יוֹמוֹ. 13 The Lord doth laugh at him; for He seeth that his day is coming.
37.14 יד  חֶרֶב, פָּתְחוּ רְשָׁעִים--    וְדָרְכוּ קַשְׁתָּם: לְהַפִּיל, עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן;    לִטְבוֹחַ, יִשְׁרֵי-דָרֶךְ. 14 The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow; {N} to cast down the poor and needy, to slay such as are upright in the way;
37.15 טו  חַרְבָּם, תָּבוֹא בְלִבָּם;    וְקַשְּׁתוֹתָם, תִּשָּׁבַרְנָה. 15 Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.
37.16 טז  טוֹב-מְעַט, לַצַּדִּיק--    מֵהֲמוֹן, רְשָׁעִים רַבִּים. 16 Better is a little that the righteous hath than the abundance of many wicked.
37.17 יז  כִּי זְרוֹעוֹת רְשָׁעִים, תִּשָּׁבַרְנָה;    וְסוֹמֵךְ צַדִּיקִים יְהוָה. 17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken; but the LORD upholdeth the righteous.
37.18 יח  יוֹדֵעַ יְהוָה, יְמֵי תְמִימִם;    וְנַחֲלָתָם, לְעוֹלָם תִּהְיֶה. 18 The LORD knoweth the days of them that are wholehearted; and their inheritance shall be for ever.
37.19 יט  לֹא-יֵבֹשׁוּ, בְּעֵת רָעָה;    וּבִימֵי רְעָבוֹן יִשְׂבָּעוּ. 19 They shall not be ashamed in the time of evil; and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.
37.20 כ  כִּי רְשָׁעִים, יֹאבֵדוּ, וְאֹיְבֵי יְהוָה, כִּיקַר כָּרִים;    כָּלוּ בֶעָשָׁן כָּלוּ. 20 For the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the LORD shall be as the fat of lambs--they shall pass away in smoke, they shall pass away.
37.21 כא  לֹוֶה רָשָׁע, וְלֹא יְשַׁלֵּם;    וְצַדִּיק, חוֹנֵן וְנוֹתֵן. 21 The wicked borroweth, and payeth not; but the righteous dealeth graciously, and giveth.
37.22 כב  כִּי מְבֹרָכָיו, יִירְשׁוּ אָרֶץ;    וּמְקֻלָּלָיו, יִכָּרֵתוּ. 22 For such as are blessed of Him shall inherit the land; and they that are cursed of Him shall be cut off.
37.23 כג  מֵיְהוָה, מִצְעֲדֵי-גֶבֶר כּוֹנָנוּ;    וְדַרְכּוֹ יֶחְפָּץ. 23 It is of the LORD that a man's goings are established; and He delighted in his way.
37.24 כד  כִּי-יִפֹּל לֹא-יוּטָל:    כִּי-יְהוָה, סוֹמֵךְ יָדוֹ. 24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the LORD upholdeth his hand.
37.25 כה  נַעַר, הָיִיתִי--    גַּם-זָקַנְתִּי: וְלֹא-רָאִיתִי, צַדִּיק נֶעֱזָב;    וְזַרְעוֹ, מְבַקֶּשׁ-לָחֶם. 25 I have been young, and now am old; {N} yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
37.26 כו  כָּל-הַיּוֹם, חוֹנֵן וּמַלְוֶה;    וְזַרְעוֹ, לִבְרָכָה. 26 All the day long he dealeth graciously, and lendeth; and his seed is blessed.
37.27 כז  סוּר מֵרָע, וַעֲשֵׂה-טוֹב;    וּשְׁכֹן לְעוֹלָם. 27 Depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.
37.28 כח  כִּי יְהוָה, אֹהֵב מִשְׁפָּט,    וְלֹא-יַעֲזֹב אֶת-חֲסִידָיו, לְעוֹלָם נִשְׁמָרוּ; וְזֶרַע רְשָׁעִים    נִכְרָת. 28 For the LORD loveth justice, and forsaketh not His saints; they are preserved for ever; {N} but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
37.29 כט  צַדִּיקִים יִירְשׁוּ-אָרֶץ;    וְיִשְׁכְּנוּ לָעַד עָלֶיהָ. 29 The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.
37.30 ל  פִּי-צַדִּיק, יֶהְגֶּה חָכְמָה;    וּלְשׁוֹנוֹ, תְּדַבֵּר מִשְׁפָּט. 30 The mouth of the righteous uttereth wisdom, and his tongue speaketh justice.
37.31 לא  תּוֹרַת אֱלֹהָיו בְּלִבּוֹ;    לֹא תִמְעַד אֲשֻׁרָיו. 31 The law of his God is in his heart; none of his steps slide.
37.32 לב  צוֹפֶה רָשָׁע, לַצַּדִּיק;    וּמְבַקֵּשׁ, לַהֲמִיתוֹ. 32 The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him.
37.33 לג  יְהוָה, לֹא-יַעַזְבֶנּוּ בְיָדוֹ;    וְלֹא יַרְשִׁיעֶנּוּ, בְּהִשָּׁפְטוֹ. 33 The LORD will not leave him in his hand, nor suffer him to be condemned when he is judged.
37.34 לד  קַוֵּה אֶל-יְהוָה, וּשְׁמֹר דַּרְכּוֹ,    וִירוֹמִמְךָ, לָרֶשֶׁת אָרֶץ; בְּהִכָּרֵת רְשָׁעִים    תִּרְאֶה. 34 Wait for the LORD, and keep His way, and He will exalt thee to inherit the land; {N} when the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it.
37.35 לה  רָאִיתִי, רָשָׁע עָרִיץ;    וּמִתְעָרֶה, כְּאֶזְרָח רַעֲנָן. 35 I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a leafy tree in its native soil.
37.36 לו  וַיַּעֲבֹר, וְהִנֵּה אֵינֶנּוּ;    וָאֲבַקְשֵׁהוּ, וְלֹא נִמְצָא. 36 But one passed by, and, lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.
37.37 לז  שְׁמָר-תָּם, וּרְאֵה יָשָׁר:    כִּי-אַחֲרִית לְאִישׁ שָׁלוֹם. 37 Mark the man of integrity, and behold the upright; for there is a future for the man of peace.
37.38 לח  וּפֹשְׁעִים, נִשְׁמְדוּ יַחְדָּו;    אַחֲרִית רְשָׁעִים נִכְרָתָה. 38 But transgressors shall be destroyed together; the future of the wicked shall be cut off.
37.39 לט  וּתְשׁוּעַת צַדִּיקִים, מֵיְהוָה;    מָעוּזָּם, בְּעֵת צָרָה. 39 But the salvation of the righteous is of the LORD; He is their stronghold in the time of trouble.
37.40 מ  וַיַּעְזְרֵם יְהוָה, וַיְפַלְּטֵם:    יְפַלְּטֵם מֵרְשָׁעִים, וְיוֹשִׁיעֵם--כִּי-חָסוּ בוֹ. 40 And the LORD helpeth them, and delivereth them; He delivereth them from the wicked, and saveth them, because they have taken refuge in Him. {P}
38.1 א  מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד לְהַזְכִּיר. יְהוָה--אַל-בְּקֶצְפְּךָ תוֹכִיחֵנִי;    וּבַחֲמָתְךָ תְיַסְּרֵנִי. 1 A Psalm of David, to make memorial. O LORD, rebuke me not in Thine anger; neither chasten me in Thy wrath.
38.2 ב כִּי-חִצֶּיךָ, נִחֲתוּ בִי;    וַתִּנְחַת עָלַי יָדֶךָ.   2  For Thine arrows are gone deep into me, and Thy hand is come down upon me.
38.3 ג אֵין-מְתֹם בִּבְשָׂרִי, מִפְּנֵי זַעְמֶךָ;    אֵין-שָׁלוֹם בַּעֲצָמַי, מִפְּנֵי חַטָּאתִי.   3  There is no soundness in my flesh because of Thine indignation; neither is there any health in my bones because of my sin.
38.4 ד כִּי עֲוֺנֹתַי, עָבְרוּ רֹאשִׁי;    כְּמַשָּׂא כָבֵד, יִכְבְּדוּ מִמֶּנִּי.   4  For mine iniquities are gone over my head; as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.
38.5 ה הִבְאִישׁוּ נָמַקּוּ, חַבּוּרֹתָי:    מִפְּנֵי, אִוַּלְתִּי.   5  My wounds are noisome, they fester, because of my foolishness.
38.6 ו נַעֲוֵיתִי שַׁחֹתִי עַד-מְאֹד;    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, קֹדֵר הִלָּכְתִּי.   6  I am bent and bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day.
38.7 ז כִּי-כְסָלַי, מָלְאוּ נִקְלֶה;    וְאֵין מְתֹם, בִּבְשָׂרִי.   7  For my loins are filled with burning; and there is no soundness in my flesh.
38.8 ח נְפוּגוֹתִי וְנִדְכֵּיתִי עַד-מְאֹד;    שָׁאַגְתִּי, מִנַּהֲמַת לִבִּי.   8  I am benumbed and sore crushed; I groan by reason of the moaning of my heart.
38.9 ט   9 אֲדֹנָי, נֶגְדְּךָ כָל-תַּאֲוָתִי;    וְאַנְחָתִי, מִמְּךָ לֹא-נִסְתָּרָה.  Lord, all my desire is before Thee; and my sighing is not hid from Thee.
38.10 י   1 לִבִּי סְחַרְחַר, עֲזָבַנִי כֹחִי;    וְאוֹר-עֵינַי גַּם-הֵם, אֵין אִתִּי.0  My heart fluttereth, my strength faileth me; as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me.
38.11 י אֹהֲבַי, וְרֵעַי--מִנֶּגֶד נִגְעִי יַעֲמֹדוּ;    וּקְרוֹבַי, מֵרָחֹק עָמָדוּ.א   11  My friends and my companions stand aloof from my plague; and my kinsmen stand afar off.
38.12 י וַיְנַקְשׁוּ, מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשִׁי, וְדֹרְשֵׁי רָעָתִי, דִּבְּרוּ הַוּוֹת;    וּמִרְמוֹת, כָּל-הַיּוֹם יֶהְגּוּ.ב   12  They also that seek after my life lay snares for me; and they that seek my hurt speak crafty devices, and utter deceits all the day.
38.13 י וַאֲנִי כְחֵרֵשׁ, לֹא אֶשְׁמָע;    וּכְאִלֵּם, לֹא יִפְתַּח-פִּיו.ג   13  But I am as a deaf man, I hear not; and I am as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth.
38.14 י וָאֱהִי--כְּאִישׁ, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-שֹׁמֵעַ;    וְאֵין בְּפִיו, תּוֹכָחוֹת.ד   14  Yea, I am become as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no arguments.
38.15 ט כִּי-לְךָ יְהוָה הוֹחָלְתִּי;    אַתָּה תַעֲנֶה, אֲדֹנָי אֱלֹהָי.ו   15  For in Thee, O LORD, do I hope; Thou wilt answer, O Lord my God.
38.16 ט כִּי-אָמַרְתִּי, פֶּן-יִשְׂמְחוּ-לִי;    בְּמוֹט רַגְלִי, עָלַי הִגְדִּילוּ.ז   16  For I said: 'Lest they rejoice over me; when my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.'
38.17 י כִּי-אֲנִי, לְצֶלַע נָכוֹן;    וּמַכְאוֹבִי נֶגְדִּי תָמִיד.ז   17  For I am ready to halt, and my pain is continually before me.
38.18 י כִּי-עֲוֺנִי אַגִּיד;    אֶדְאַג, מֵחַטָּאתִי.ח   18  For I do declare mine iniquity; I am full of care because of my sin.
38.19 י וְאֹיְבַי, חַיִּים עָצֵמוּ;    וְרַבּוּ שֹׂנְאַי שָׁקֶר.ט   19  But mine enemies are strong in health; and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied.
38.20 כ   2 וּמְשַׁלְּמֵי רָעָה, תַּחַת טוֹבָה--    יִשְׂטְנוּנִי, תַּחַת רדופי- (רָדְפִי-) טוֹב.0  They also that repay evil for good are adversaries unto me, because I follow the thing that is good.
38.21 כ אַל-תַּעַזְבֵנִי יְהוָה:    אֱלֹהַי, אַל-תִּרְחַק מִמֶּנִּי.א   21  Forsake me not, O LORD; O my God, be not far from me.
38.22 כ חוּשָׁה לְעֶזְרָתִי:    אֲדֹנָי, תְּשׁוּעָתִי.ב   22  Make haste to help me, O Lord, my salvation. {P}
39.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לידיתון (לִידוּתוּן),    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. אָמַרְתִּי--    אֶשְׁמְרָה דְרָכַי, מֵחֲטוֹא בִלְשׁוֹנִי: אֶשְׁמְרָה לְפִי מַחְסוֹם--    בְּעֹד רָשָׁע לְנֶגְדִּי. 1 For the Leader, for Jeduthun. A Psalm of David. I said: 'I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; {N} I will keep a curb upon my mouth, while the wicked is before me.'
39.2 ב נֶאֱלַמְתִּי דוּמִיָּה, הֶחֱשֵׁיתִי מִטּוֹב;    וּכְאֵבִי נֶעְכָּר.   2  I was dumb with silence; I held my peace, had no comfort; and my pain was held in check.
39.3 ג חַם-לִבִּי, בְּקִרְבִּי--בַּהֲגִיגִי תִבְעַר-אֵשׁ;    דִּבַּרְתִּי, בִּלְשׁוֹנִי.   3  My heart waxed hot within me; while I was musing, the fire kindled; then spoke I with my tongue:
39.4 ד הוֹדִיעֵנִי יְהוָה, קִצִּי--וּמִדַּת יָמַי מַה-הִיא;    אֵדְעָה, מֶה-חָדֵל אָנִי.   4  'LORD, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; let me know how short-lived I am.
39.5 ה הִנֵּה טְפָחוֹת, נָתַתָּה יָמַי--    וְחֶלְדִּי כְאַיִן נֶגְדֶּךָ; אַךְ כָּל-הֶבֶל כָּל-אָדָם,    נִצָּב סֶלָה.   5  Behold, Thou hast made my days as hand-breadths; and mine age is as nothing before Thee; {N} surely every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Selah
39.6 ו אַךְ-בְּצֶלֶם, יִתְהַלֶּךְ-אִישׁ--    אַךְ-הֶבֶל יֶהֱמָיוּן; יִצְבֹּר,    וְלֹא-יֵדַע מִי-אֹסְפָם.   6  Surely man walketh as a mere semblance; surely for vanity they are in turmoil; {N} he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.
39.7 ז וְעַתָּה מַה-קִּוִּיתִי אֲדֹנָי--    תּוֹחַלְתִּי, לְךָ הִיא.   7  And now, Lord, what wait I for? My hope, it is in Thee.
39.8 ח מִכָּל-פְּשָׁעַי הַצִּילֵנִי;    חֶרְפַּת נָבָל, אַל-תְּשִׂימֵנִי.   8  Deliver me from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the base.
39.9 ט   9 נֶאֱלַמְתִּי, לֹא אֶפְתַּח-פִּי:    כִּי אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ.  I am dumb, I open not my mouth; because Thou hast done it.
39.10 י   1 הָסֵר מֵעָלַי נִגְעֶךָ;    מִתִּגְרַת יָדְךָ, אֲנִי כָלִיתִי.0  Remove Thy stroke from off me; I am consumed by the blow of Thy hand.
39.11 י בְּתוֹכָחוֹת עַל-עָוֺן, יִסַּרְתָּ אִישׁ--    וַתֶּמֶס כָּעָשׁ חֲמוּדוֹ; אַךְ הֶבֶל כָּל-אָדָם    סֶלָה.א   11  With rebukes dost Thou chasten man for iniquity, and like a moth Thou makest his beauty to consume away; {N} surely every man is vanity. Selah
39.12 י שִׁמְעָה תְפִלָּתִי יְהוָה,    וְשַׁוְעָתִי הַאֲזִינָה-- אֶל-דִּמְעָתִי,    אַל-תֶּחֱרַשׁ: כִּי גֵר אָנֹכִי עִמָּךְ;    תּוֹשָׁב, כְּכָל-אֲבוֹתָי.ב   12  Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give ear unto my cry; {N} keep not silence at my tears; {N} for I am a stranger with Thee, a sojourner, as all my fathers were.
39.13 י הָשַׁע מִמֶּנִּי וְאַבְלִיגָה--    בְּטֶרֶם אֵלֵךְ וְאֵינֶנִּי.ג   13  Look away from me, that I may take comfort, before I go hence, and be no more.' {P}
40.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְדָוִד מִזְמוֹר. קַוֺּה קִוִּיתִי יְהוָה;    וַיֵּט אֵלַי, וַיִּשְׁמַע שַׁוְעָתִי. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. I waited patiently for the LORD; and He inclined unto me, and heard my cry.
40.2 ב וַיַּעֲלֵנִי, מִבּוֹר שָׁאוֹן--    מִטִּיט הַיָּוֵן: וַיָּקֶם עַל-סֶלַע רַגְלַי;    כּוֹנֵן אֲשֻׁרָי.   2  He brought me up also out of the tumultuous pit, out of the miry clay; {N} and He set my feet upon a rock, He established my goings.
40.3 ג וַיִּתֵּן בְּפִי, שִׁיר חָדָשׁ--    תְּהִלָּה לֵאלֹהֵינוּ: יִרְאוּ רַבִּים וְיִירָאוּ;    וְיִבְטְחוּ, בַּיהוָה.   3  And He hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God; {N} many shall see, and fear, and shall trust in the LORD.
40.4 ד אַשְׁרֵי הַגֶּבֶר--    אֲשֶׁר-שָׂם יְהוָה, מִבְטַחוֹ; וְלֹא-פָנָה אֶל-רְהָבִים,    וְשָׂטֵי כָזָב.   4  Happy is the man that hath made the LORD his trust, {N} and hath not turned unto the arrogant, nor unto such as fall away treacherously.
40.5 ה רַבּוֹת עָשִׂיתָ,    אַתָּה יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי-- נִפְלְאֹתֶיךָ וּמַחְשְׁבֹתֶיךָ,    אֵלֵינוּ: אֵין, עֲרֹךְ אֵלֶיךָ--אַגִּידָה וַאֲדַבֵּרָה;    עָצְמוּ, מִסַּפֵּר.   5  Many things hast Thou done, O LORD my God, {N} even Thy wonderful works, and Thy thoughts toward us; {N} there is none to be compared unto Thee! If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be told.
40.6 ו זֶבַח וּמִנְחָה, לֹא-חָפַצְתָּ--    אָזְנַיִם, כָּרִיתָ לִּי; עוֹלָה וַחֲטָאָה,    לֹא שָׁאָלְתָּ.   6  Sacrifice and meal-offering Thou hast no delight in; mine ears hast Thou opened; {N} burnt-offering and sin-offering hast Thou not required.
40.7 ז אָז אָמַרְתִּי, הִנֵּה-בָאתִי:    בִּמְגִלַּת-סֵפֶר, כָּתוּב עָלָי.   7  Then said I: 'Lo, I am come with the roll of a book which is prescribed for me;
40.8 ח לַעֲשׂוֹת-רְצוֹנְךָ אֱלֹהַי חָפָצְתִּי;    וְתוֹרָתְךָ, בְּתוֹךְ מֵעָי.   8  I delight to do Thy will, O my God; yea, Thy law is in my inmost parts.'
40.9 ט   9 בִּשַּׂרְתִּי צֶדֶק, בְּקָהָל רָב--    הִנֵּה שְׂפָתַי, לֹא אֶכְלָא: יְהוָה,    אַתָּה יָדָעְתָּ.  I have preached righteousness in the great congregation, lo, I did not refrain my lips; {N} O LORD, Thou knowest.
40.10 י   1 צִדְקָתְךָ לֹא-כִסִּיתִי, בְּתוֹךְ לִבִּי--    אֱמוּנָתְךָ וּתְשׁוּעָתְךָ אָמָרְתִּי; לֹא-כִחַדְתִּי חַסְדְּךָ וַאֲמִתְּךָ,    לְקָהָל רָב.0  I have not hid Thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared Thy faithfulness and Thy salvation; {N} I have not concealed Thy mercy and Thy truth from the great congregation.
40.11 י אַתָּה יְהוָה--    לֹא-תִכְלָא רַחֲמֶיךָ מִמֶּנִּי; חַסְדְּךָ וַאֲמִתְּךָ,    תָּמִיד יִצְּרוּנִי.א   11  Thou, O LORD, wilt not withhold Thy compassions from me; {N} let Thy mercy and Thy truth continually preserve me.
40.12 י כִּי אָפְפוּ-עָלַי רָעוֹת,    עַד-אֵין מִסְפָּר-- הִשִּׂיגוּנִי עֲוֺנֹתַי,    וְלֹא-יָכֹלְתִּי לִרְאוֹת; עָצְמוּ מִשַּׂעֲרוֹת רֹאשִׁי,    וְלִבִּי עֲזָבָנִי.ב   12  For innumerable evils have compassed me about, {N} mine iniquities have overtaken me, so that I am not able to look up; {N} they are more than the hairs of my head, and my heart hath failed me.
40.13 י רְצֵה יְהוָה, לְהַצִּילֵנִי;    יְהוָה, לְעֶזְרָתִי חוּשָׁה.ג   13  Be pleased, O LORD, to deliver me; O LORD, make haste to help me.
40.14 י יֵבֹשׁוּ וְיַחְפְּרוּ, יַחַד--    מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשִׁי, לִסְפּוֹתָהּ: יִסֹּגוּ אָחוֹר, וְיִכָּלְמוּ--    חֲפֵצֵי, רָעָתִי.ד   14  Let them be ashamed and abashed together that seek after my soul to sweep it away; {N} let them be turned backward and brought to confusion that delight in my hurt.
40.15 ט יָשֹׁמּוּ, עַל-עֵקֶב בָּשְׁתָּם--    הָאֹמְרִים לִי, הֶאָח הֶאָח.ו   15  Let them be appalled by reason of their shame that say unto me: 'Aha, aha.'
40.16 ט יָשִׂישׂוּ וְיִשְׂמְחוּ, בְּךָ--    כָּל-מְבַקְשֶׁיךָ: יֹאמְרוּ תָמִיד, יִגְדַּל יְהוָה--    אֹהֲבֵי, תְּשׁוּעָתֶךָ.ז   16  Let all those that seek Thee rejoice and be glad in Thee; {N} let such as love Thy salvation say continually: 'The LORD be magnified.'
40.17 י וַאֲנִי, עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן--    אֲדֹנָי יַחֲשָׁב-לִי: עֶזְרָתִי וּמְפַלְטִי אַתָּה;    אֱלֹהַי, אַל-תְּאַחַר.ז   17  But, as for me, that am poor and needy, the Lord will account it unto me; {N} Thou art my help and my deliverer; O my God, tarry not. {P}
41.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. אַשְׁרֵי, מַשְׂכִּיל אֶל-דָּל;    בְּיוֹם רָעָה, יְמַלְּטֵהוּ יְהוָה. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. Happy is he that considereth the poor; the LORD will deliver him in the day of evil.
41.2 ב יְהוָה, יִשְׁמְרֵהוּ וִיחַיֵּהוּ--יאשר (וְאֻשַּׁר) בָּאָרֶץ;    וְאַל-תִּתְּנֵהוּ, בְּנֶפֶשׁ אֹיְבָיו.   2  The LORD preserve him, and keep him alive, let him be called happy in the land; and deliver not Thou him unto the greed of his enemies.
41.3 ג יְהוָה--יִסְעָדֶנּוּ, עַל-עֶרֶשׂ דְּוָי;    כָּל-מִשְׁכָּבוֹ, הָפַכְתָּ בְחָלְיוֹ.   3  The LORD support him upon the bed of illness; mayest Thou turn all his lying down in his sickness.
41.4 ד אֲנִי-אָמַרְתִּי, יְהוָה חָנֵּנִי;    רְפָאָה נַפְשִׁי, כִּי-חָטָאתִי לָךְ.   4  As for me, I said: 'O LORD, be gracious unto me; heal my soul; for I have sinned against Thee.'
41.5 ה אוֹיְבַי--יֹאמְרוּ רַע לִי;    מָתַי יָמוּת, וְאָבַד שְׁמוֹ.   5  Mine enemies speak evil of me: 'When shall he die, and his name perish?'
41.6 ו וְאִם-בָּא לִרְאוֹת, שָׁוְא יְדַבֵּר--לִבּוֹ, יִקְבָּץ-אָוֶן לוֹ;    יֵצֵא לַחוּץ יְדַבֵּר.   6  And if one come to see me, he speaketh falsehood; his heart gathereth iniquity to itself; when he goeth abroad, he speaketh of it.
41.7 ז יַחַד--עָלַי יִתְלַחֲשׁוּ, כָּל-שֹׂנְאָי;    עָלַי--יַחְשְׁבוּ רָעָה לִי.   7  All that hate me whisper together against me, against me do they devise my hurt:
41.8 ח דְּבַר-בְּלִיַּעַל, יָצוּק בּוֹ;    וַאֲשֶׁר שָׁכַב, לֹא-יוֹסִיף לָקוּם.   8  'An evil thing cleaveth fast unto him; and now that he lieth, he shall rise up no more.'
41.9 ט   9 גַּם-אִישׁ שְׁלוֹמִי, אֲשֶׁר-בָּטַחְתִּי בוֹ--    אוֹכֵל לַחְמִי; הִגְדִּיל עָלַי    עָקֵב.  Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, who did eat of my bread, {N} hath lifted up his heel against me.
41.10 י   1 וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, חָנֵּנִי וַהֲקִימֵנִי;    וַאֲשַׁלְּמָה לָהֶם.0  But Thou, O LORD, be gracious unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite them.
41.11 י בְּזֹאת יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-חָפַצְתָּ בִּי:    כִּי לֹא-יָרִיעַ אֹיְבִי עָלָי.א   11  By this I know that Thou delightest in me, that mine enemy doth not triumph over me.
41.12 י וַאֲנִי--בְּתֻמִּי, תָּמַכְתָּ בִּי;    וַתַּצִּיבֵנִי לְפָנֶיךָ לְעוֹלָם.ב   12  And as for me, Thou upholdest me because of mine integrity, and settest me before Thy face for ever.
41.13 י בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--מֵהָעוֹלָם, וְעַד הָעוֹלָם:    אָמֵן וְאָמֵן.ג   13  Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, from everlasting and to everlasting. Amen, and Amen. {P}
42.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מַשְׂכִּיל לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח. כְּאַיָּל, תַּעֲרֹג עַל-אֲפִיקֵי-מָיִם--    כֵּן נַפְשִׁי תַעֲרֹג אֵלֶיךָ אֱלֹהִים. 1 For the Leader; Maschil of the sons of Korah. As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after Thee, O God.
42.2 ב צָמְאָה נַפְשִׁי, לֵאלֹהִים--    לְאֵל חָי: מָתַי אָבוֹא;    וְאֵרָאֶה, פְּנֵי אֱלֹהִים.   2  My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: {N} 'When shall I come and appear before God?'
42.3 ג הָיְתָה-לִּי דִמְעָתִי לֶחֶם,    יוֹמָם וָלָיְלָה; בֶּאֱמֹר אֵלַי כָּל-הַיּוֹם,    אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ.   3  My tears have been my food day and night, {N} while they say unto me all the day: 'Where is thy God?'
42.4 ד אֵלֶּה אֶזְכְּרָה,    וְאֶשְׁפְּכָה עָלַי נַפְשִׁי-- כִּי אֶעֱבֹר בַּסָּךְ,    אֶדַּדֵּם עַד-בֵּית אֱלֹהִים: בְּקוֹל-רִנָּה וְתוֹדָה;    הָמוֹן חוֹגֵג.   4  These things I remember, and pour out my soul within me, {N} how I passed on with the throng, and led them to the house of God, {N} with the voice of joy and praise, a multitude keeping holyday.
42.5 ה מַה-תִּשְׁתּוֹחֲחִי, נַפְשִׁי--    וַתֶּהֱמִי עָלָי: הוֹחִלִי לֵאלֹהִים, כִּי-עוֹד אוֹדֶנּוּ--    יְשׁוּעוֹת פָּנָיו.   5  Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why moanest thou within me? {N} Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him for the salvation of His countenance.
42.6 ו אֱלֹהַי--    עָלַי, נַפְשִׁי תִשְׁתּוֹחָח: עַל-כֵּן--אֶזְכָּרְךָ, מֵאֶרֶץ יַרְדֵּן;    וְחֶרְמוֹנִים, מֵהַר מִצְעָר.   6  O my God, my soul is cast down within me; {N} therefore do I remember Thee from the land of Jordan, and the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
42.7 ז תְּהוֹם-אֶל-תְּהוֹם קוֹרֵא,    לְקוֹל צִנּוֹרֶיךָ; כָּל-מִשְׁבָּרֶיךָ וְגַלֶּיךָ,    עָלַי עָבָרוּ.   7  Deep calleth unto deep at the voice of Thy cataracts; {N} all Thy waves and Thy billows are gone over me.
42.8 ח יוֹמָם, יְצַוֶּה יְהוָה חַסְדּוֹ,    וּבַלַּיְלָה, שִׁירֹה עִמִּי-- תְּפִלָּה,    לְאֵל חַיָּי.   8  By day the LORD will command His lovingkindness, and in the night His song shall be with me, {N} even a prayer unto the God of my life.
42.9 ט   9 אוֹמְרָה, לְאֵל סַלְעִי--    לָמָה שְׁכַחְתָּנִי: לָמָּה-קֹדֵר אֵלֵךְ--    בְּלַחַץ אוֹיֵב.  I will say unto God my Rock: 'Why hast Thou forgotten me? {N} Why go I mourning under the oppression of the enemy?'
42.10 י   1 בְּרֶצַח, בְּעַצְמוֹתַי--    חֵרְפוּנִי צוֹרְרָי; בְּאָמְרָם אֵלַי כָּל-הַיּוֹם,    אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ.0  As with a crushing in my bones, mine adversaries taunt me; {N} while they say unto me all the day: 'Where is thy God?'
42.11 י מַה-תִּשְׁתּוֹחֲחִי, נַפְשִׁי--    וּמַה-תֶּהֱמִי עָלָי: הוֹחִילִי לֵאלֹהִים, כִּי-עוֹד אוֹדֶנּוּ--    יְשׁוּעֹת פָּנַי, וֵאלֹהָי.א   11  Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why moanest thou within me? {N} Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, the salvation of my countenance, and my God. {P}
43.1 א  שָׁפְטֵנִי אֱלֹהִים, וְרִיבָה רִיבִי--    מִגּוֹי לֹא-חָסִיד; מֵאִישׁ מִרְמָה וְעַוְלָה    תְפַלְּטֵנִי. 1 Be Thou my judge, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation; {N} O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
43.2 ב  כִּי-אַתָּה, אֱלֹהֵי מָעוּזִּי--    לָמָה זְנַחְתָּנִי: לָמָּה-קֹדֵר אֶתְהַלֵּךְ,    בְּלַחַץ אוֹיֵב. 2 For Thou art the God of my strength; why hast Thou cast me off? {N} Why go I mourning under the oppression of the enemy?
43.3 ג  שְׁלַח-אוֹרְךָ וַאֲמִתְּךָ,    הֵמָּה יַנְחוּנִי; יְבִיאוּנִי אֶל-הַר-קָדְשְׁךָ,    וְאֶל-מִשְׁכְּנוֹתֶיךָ. 3 O send out Thy light and Thy truth; let them lead me; {N} let them bring me unto Thy holy mountain, and to Thy dwelling-places.
43.4 ד  וְאָבוֹאָה, אֶל-מִזְבַּח אֱלֹהִים--    אֶל-אֵל, שִׂמְחַת גִּילִי: וְאוֹדְךָ בְכִנּוֹר--    אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהָי. 4 Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God, my exceeding joy; {N} and praise Thee upon the harp, O God, my God.
43.5 ה  מַה-תִּשְׁתּוֹחֲחִי, נַפְשִׁי--    וּמַה-תֶּהֱמִי עָלָי: הוֹחִילִי לֵאלֹהִים, כִּי-עוֹד אוֹדֶנּוּ--    יְשׁוּעֹת פָּנַי, וֵאלֹהָי. 5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why moanest thou within me? {N} Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, the salvation of my countenance, and my God. {P}
44.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח מַשְׂכִּיל. אֱלֹהִים, בְּאָזְנֵינוּ שָׁמַעְנוּ--    אֲבוֹתֵינוּ סִפְּרוּ-לָנוּ: פֹּעַל פָּעַלְתָּ בִימֵיהֶם,    בִּימֵי קֶדֶם. 1 For the Leader; [a Psalm] of the sons of Korah. Maschil. O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us; {N} a work Thou didst in their days, in the days of old.
44.2 ב אַתָּה, יָדְךָ גּוֹיִם הוֹרַשְׁתָּ--    וַתִּטָּעֵם; תָּרַע לְאֻמִּים,    וַתְּשַׁלְּחֵם.   2  Thou with Thy hand didst drive out the nations, and didst plant them in; {N} Thou didst break the peoples, and didst spread them abroad.
44.3 ג כִּי לֹא בְחַרְבָּם, יָרְשׁוּ אָרֶץ,    וּזְרוֹעָם, לֹא-הוֹשִׁיעָה-לָּמוֹ: כִּי-יְמִינְךָ וּזְרוֹעֲךָ, וְאוֹר פָּנֶיךָ--    כִּי רְצִיתָם.   3  For not by their own sword did they get the land in possession, neither did their own arm save them; {N} but Thy right hand, and Thine arm, and the light of Thy countenance, because Thou wast favourable unto them.
44.4 ד אַתָּה-הוּא מַלְכִּי אֱלֹהִים;    צַוֵּה, יְשׁוּעוֹת יַעֲקֹב.   4  Thou art my King, O God; command the salvation of Jacob.
44.5 ה בְּךָ, צָרֵינוּ נְנַגֵּחַ;    בְּשִׁמְךָ, נָבוּס קָמֵינוּ.   5  Through Thee do we push down our adversaries; through Thy name do we tread them under that rise up against us.
44.6 ו כִּי לֹא בְקַשְׁתִּי אֶבְטָח;    וְחַרְבִּי, לֹא תוֹשִׁיעֵנִי.   6  For I trust not in my bow, neither can my sword save me.
44.7 ז כִּי הוֹשַׁעְתָּנוּ, מִצָּרֵינוּ;    וּמְשַׂנְאֵינוּ הֱבִישׁוֹתָ.   7  But Thou hast saved us from our adversaries, and hast put them to shame that hate us.
44.8 ח בֵּאלֹהִים, הִלַּלְנוּ כָל-הַיּוֹם;    וְשִׁמְךָ, לְעוֹלָם נוֹדֶה סֶלָה.   8  In God have we gloried all the day, and we will give thanks unto Thy name for ever. Selah
44.9 ט   9 אַף-זָנַחְתָּ, וַתַּכְלִימֵנוּ;    וְלֹא-תֵצֵא, בְּצִבְאוֹתֵינוּ.  Yet Thou hast cast off, and brought us to confusion; and goest not forth with our hosts.
44.10 י   1 תְּשִׁיבֵנוּ אָחוֹר, מִנִּי-צָר;    וּמְשַׂנְאֵינוּ, שָׁסוּ לָמוֹ.0  Thou makest us to turn back from the adversary; and they that hate us spoil at their will.
44.11 י תִּתְּנֵנוּ, כְּצֹאן מַאֲכָל;    וּבַגּוֹיִם, זֵרִיתָנוּ.א   11  Thou hast given us like sheep to be eaten; and hast scattered us among the nations.
44.12 י תִּמְכֹּר-עַמְּךָ בְלֹא-הוֹן;    וְלֹא-רִבִּיתָ, בִּמְחִירֵיהֶם.ב   12  Thou sellest Thy people for small gain, and hast not set their prices high.
44.13 י תְּשִׂימֵנוּ חֶרְפָּה, לִשְׁכֵנֵינוּ;    לַעַג וָקֶלֶס, לִסְבִיבוֹתֵינוּ.ג   13  Thou makest us a taunt to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us.
44.14 י תְּשִׂימֵנוּ מָשָׁל, בַּגּוֹיִם;    מְנוֹד-רֹאשׁ, בַּלְאֻמִּים.ד   14  Thou makest us a byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples.
44.15 ט כָּל-הַיּוֹם, כְּלִמָּתִי נֶגְדִּי;    וּבֹשֶׁת פָּנַי כִּסָּתְנִי.ו   15  All the day is my confusion before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me,
44.16 ט מִקּוֹל, מְחָרֵף וּמְגַדֵּף;    מִפְּנֵי אוֹיֵב, וּמִתְנַקֵּם.ז   16  For the voice of him that taunteth and blasphemeth; by reason of the enemy and the revengeful.
44.17 י כָּל-זֹאת בָּאַתְנוּ, וְלֹא שְׁכַחֲנוּךָ;    וְלֹא-שִׁקַּרְנוּ, בִּבְרִיתֶךָ.ז   17  All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten Thee, neither have we been false to Thy covenant.
44.18 י לֹא-נָסוֹג אָחוֹר לִבֵּנוּ;    וַתֵּט אֲשֻׁרֵינוּ, מִנִּי אָרְחֶךָ.ח   18  Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from Thy path;
44.19 י כִּי דִכִּיתָנוּ, בִּמְקוֹם תַּנִּים;    וַתְּכַס עָלֵינוּ בְצַלְמָוֶת.ט   19  Though Thou hast crushed us into a place of jackals, and covered us with the shadow of death.
44.20 כ   2 אִם-שָׁכַחְנוּ, שֵׁם אֱלֹהֵינוּ;    וַנִּפְרֹשׂ כַּפֵּינוּ, לְאֵל זָר.0  If we had forgotten the name of our God, or spread forth our hands to a strange god;
44.21 כ הֲלֹא אֱלֹהִים, יַחֲקָר-זֹאת:    כִּי-הוּא יֹדֵעַ, תַּעֲלֻמוֹת לֵב.א   21  Would not God search this out? For He knoweth the secrets of the heart.
44.22 כ כִּי-עָלֶיךָ, הֹרַגְנוּ כָל-הַיּוֹם;    נֶחְשַׁבְנוּ, כְּצֹאן טִבְחָה.ב   22  Nay, but for Thy sake are we killed all the day; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
44.23 כ עוּרָה, לָמָּה תִישַׁן אֲדֹנָי;    הָקִיצָה, אַל-תִּזְנַח לָנֶצַח.ג   23  Awake, why sleepest Thou, O Lord? Arouse Thyself, cast not off for ever.
44.24 כ לָמָּה-פָנֶיךָ תַסְתִּיר;    תִּשְׁכַּח עָנְיֵנוּ וְלַחֲצֵנוּ.ד   24  Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our oppression?
44.25 כ כִּי שָׁחָה לֶעָפָר נַפְשֵׁנוּ;    דָּבְקָה לָאָרֶץ בִּטְנֵנוּ.ה   25  For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our belly cleaveth unto the earth.
44.26 כ קוּמָה, עֶזְרָתָה לָּנוּ;    וּפְדֵנוּ, לְמַעַן חַסְדֶּךָ.ו   26  Arise for our help, and redeem us for Thy mercy's sake. {P}
45.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-שֹׁשַׁנִּים, לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח;    מַשְׂכִּיל, שִׁיר יְדִידֹת. רָחַשׁ לִבִּי, דָּבָר טוֹב--    אֹמֵר אָנִי, מַעֲשַׂי לְמֶלֶךְ; לְשׁוֹנִי,    עֵט סוֹפֵר מָהִיר. 1 For the Leader; upon Shoshannim; [a Psalm] of the sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of loves. My heart overfloweth with a goodly matter; I say: 'My work is concerning a king'; {N} my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
45.2 ב יָפְיָפִיתָ, מִבְּנֵי אָדָם--    הוּצַק חֵן, בְּשִׂפְתוֹתֶיךָ; עַל-כֵּן בֵּרַכְךָ אֱלֹהִים    לְעוֹלָם.   2  Thou art fairer than the children of men; grace is poured upon thy lips; {N} therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.
45.3 ג חֲגוֹר-חַרְבְּךָ עַל-יָרֵךְ גִּבּוֹר--    הוֹדְךָ, וַהֲדָרֶךָ.   3  Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O mighty one, thy glory and thy majesty.
45.4 ד וַהֲדָרְךָ, צְלַח רְכַב--    עַל-דְּבַר-אֱמֶת, וְעַנְוָה-צֶדֶק; וְתוֹרְךָ נוֹרָאוֹת    יְמִינֶךָ.   4  And in thy majesty prosper, ride on, in behalf of truth and meekness and righteousness; {N} and let thy right hand teach thee tremendous things.
45.5 ה חִצֶּיךָ, שְׁנוּנִים:    עַמִּים, תַּחְתֶּיךָ יִפְּלוּ; בְּלֵב, אוֹיְבֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ.   5  Thine arrows are sharp--the peoples fall under thee--[they sink] into the heart of the king's enemies.
45.6 ו כִּסְאֲךָ אֱלֹהִים, עוֹלָם וָעֶד;    שֵׁבֶט מִישֹׁר, שֵׁבֶט מַלְכוּתֶךָ.   6  Thy throne given of God is for ever and ever; a sceptre of equity is the sceptre of thy kingdom.
45.7 ז אָהַבְתָּ צֶּדֶק,    וַתִּשְׂנָא-רֶשַׁע: עַל-כֵּן מְשָׁחֲךָ אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהֶיךָ, שֶׁמֶן שָׂשׂוֹן--    מֵחֲבֵרֶךָ.   7  Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness; {N} therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
45.8 ח מֹר-וַאֲהָלוֹת קְצִיעוֹת, כָּל-בִּגְדֹתֶיךָ;    מִן-הֵיכְלֵי שֵׁן, מִנִּי שִׂמְּחוּךָ.   8  Myrrh, and aloes, and cassia are all thy garments; out of ivory palaces stringed instruments have made thee glad.
45.9 ט   9 בְּנוֹת מְלָכִים, בְּיִקְּרוֹתֶיךָ;    נִצְּבָה שֵׁגַל לִימִינְךָ, בְּכֶתֶם אוֹפִיר.  Kings' daughters are among thy favourites; at thy right hand doth stand the queen in gold of Ophir.
45.10 י   1 שִׁמְעִי-בַת וּרְאִי, וְהַטִּי אָזְנֵךְ;    וְשִׁכְחִי עַמֵּךְ, וּבֵית אָבִיךְ.0  'Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy father's house;
45.11 י וְיִתְאָו הַמֶּלֶךְ יָפְיֵךְ:    כִּי-הוּא אֲדֹנַיִךְ, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲוִי-לוֹ.א   11  So shall the king desire thy beauty; for he is thy lord; and do homage unto him.
45.12 י וּבַת-צֹר:    בְּמִנְחָה, פָּנַיִךְ יְחַלּוּ--עֲשִׁירֵי עָם.ב   12  And, O daughter of Tyre, the richest of the people shall entreat thy favour with a gift.'
45.13 י כָּל-כְּבוּדָּה בַת-מֶלֶךְ פְּנִימָה;    מִמִּשְׁבְּצוֹת זָהָב לְבוּשָׁהּ.ג   13  All glorious is the king's daughter within the palace; her raiment is of chequer work inwrought with gold.
45.14 י לִרְקָמוֹת, תּוּבַל לַמֶּלֶךְ:    בְּתוּלוֹת אַחֲרֶיהָ, רֵעוֹתֶיהָ--מוּבָאוֹת לָךְ.ד   14  She shall be led unto the king on richly woven stuff; the virgins her companions in her train being brought unto thee.
45.15 ט תּוּבַלְנָה, בִּשְׂמָחֹת וָגִיל;    תְּבֹאֶינָה, בְּהֵיכַל מֶלֶךְ.ו   15  They shall be led with gladness and rejoicing; they shall enter into the king's palace.
45.16 ט תַּחַת אֲבֹתֶיךָ, יִהְיוּ בָנֶיךָ;    תְּשִׁיתֵמוֹ לְשָׂרִים, בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ.ז   16  Instead of thy fathers shall be thy sons, whom thou shalt make princes in all the land.
45.17 י אַזְכִּירָה שִׁמְךָ, בְּכָל-דֹּר וָדֹר;    עַל-כֵּן עַמִּים יְהוֹדוּךָ, לְעֹלָם וָעֶד.ז   17  I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations; therefore shall the peoples praise thee for ever and ever. {P}
46.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח--    עַל-עֲלָמוֹת שִׁיר. אֱלֹהִים לָנוּ, מַחֲסֶה וָעֹז;    עֶזְרָה בְצָרוֹת, נִמְצָא מְאֹד. 1 For the Leader; [a Psalm] of the sons of Korah; upon Alamoth. A Song. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
46.2 ב עַל-כֵּן לֹא-נִירָא, בְּהָמִיר אָרֶץ;    וּבְמוֹט הָרִים, בְּלֵב יַמִּים.   2  Therefore will we not fear, though the earth do change, and though the mountains be moved into the heart of the seas;
46.3 ג יֶהֱמוּ יֶחְמְרוּ מֵימָיו;    יִרְעֲשׁוּ הָרִים בְּגַאֲוָתוֹ סֶלָה.   3  Though the waters thereof roar and foam, though the mountains shake at the swelling thereof. Selah
46.4 ד נָהָר--פְּלָגָיו, יְשַׂמְּחוּ עִיר-אֱלֹהִים;    קְדֹשׁ, מִשְׁכְּנֵי עֶלְיוֹן.   4  There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God, the holiest dwelling-place of the Most High.
46.5 ה אֱלֹהִים בְּקִרְבָּהּ, בַּל-תִּמּוֹט;    יַעְזְרֶהָ אֱלֹהִים, לִפְנוֹת בֹּקֶר.   5  God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her, at the approach of morning.
46.6 ו הָמוּ גוֹיִם, מָטוּ מַמְלָכוֹת;    נָתַן בְּקוֹלוֹ, תָּמוּג אָרֶץ.   6  Nations were in tumult, kingdoms were moved; He uttered His voice, the earth melted.
46.7 ז יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת עִמָּנוּ;    מִשְׂגָּב-לָנוּ אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב סֶלָה.   7  The LORD of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. Selah
46.8 ח לְכוּ-חֲזוּ, מִפְעֲלוֹת יְהוָה--    אֲשֶׁר-שָׂם שַׁמּוֹת בָּאָרֶץ.   8  Come, behold the works of the LORD, who hath made desolations in the earth.
46.9 ט   9 מַשְׁבִּית מִלְחָמוֹת,    עַד-קְצֵה הָאָרֶץ: קֶשֶׁת יְשַׁבֵּר, וְקִצֵּץ חֲנִית;    עֲגָלוֹת, יִשְׂרֹף בָּאֵשׁ.  He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; {N} He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth the chariots in the fire.
46.10 י   1 הַרְפּוּ וּדְעוּ, כִּי-אָנֹכִי אֱלֹהִים;    אָרוּם בַּגּוֹיִם, אָרוּם בָּאָרֶץ.0  'Let be, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth.'
46.11 י יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת עִמָּנוּ;    מִשְׂגָּב-לָנוּ אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב סֶלָה.א   11  The LORD of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. Selah {P}
47.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח מִזְמוֹר. כָּל-הָעַמִּים, תִּקְעוּ-כָף;    הָרִיעוּ לֵאלֹהִים, בְּקוֹל רִנָּה. 1 For the Leader; a Psalm for the sons of Korah. O clap your hands, all ye peoples; shout unto God with the voice of triumph.
47.2 ב כִּי-יְהוָה עֶלְיוֹן נוֹרָא;    מֶלֶךְ גָּדוֹל, עַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.   2  For the LORD is most high, awful; a great King over all the earth.
47.3 ג יַדְבֵּר עַמִּים תַּחְתֵּינוּ;    וּלְאֻמִּים, תַּחַת רַגְלֵינוּ.   3  He subdueth peoples under us, and nations under our feet.
47.4 ד יִבְחַר-לָנוּ אֶת-נַחֲלָתֵנוּ;    אֶת גְּאוֹן יַעֲקֹב אֲשֶׁר-אָהֵב סֶלָה.   4  He chooseth our inheritance for us, the pride of Jacob whom He loveth. Selah
47.5 ה עָלָה אֱלֹהִים, בִּתְרוּעָה;    יְהוָה, בְּקוֹל שׁוֹפָר.   5  God is gone up amidst shouting, the LORD amidst the sound of the horn.
47.6 ו זַמְּרוּ אֱלֹהִים זַמֵּרוּ;    זַמְּרוּ לְמַלְכֵּנוּ זַמֵּרוּ.   6  Sing praises to God, sing praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises.
47.7 ז כִּי מֶלֶךְ כָּל-הָאָרֶץ אֱלֹהִים--    זַמְּרוּ מַשְׂכִּיל.   7  For God is the King of all the earth; sing ye praises in a skilful song.
47.8 ח מָלַךְ אֱלֹהִים, עַל-גּוֹיִם;    אֱלֹהִים, יָשַׁב עַל-כִּסֵּא קָדְשׁוֹ.   8  God reigneth over the nations; God sitteth upon His holy throne.
47.9 ט   9 נְדִיבֵי עַמִּים, נֶאֱסָפוּ--    עַם, אֱלֹהֵי אַבְרָהָם: כִּי לֵאלֹהִים, מָגִנֵּי-אֶרֶץ--    מְאֹד נַעֲלָה.  The princes of the peoples are gathered together, the people of the God of Abraham; {N} for unto God belong the shields of the earth; He is greatly exalted. {P}
48.1 א  שִׁיר מִזְמוֹר, לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח. גָּדוֹל יְהוָה וּמְהֻלָּל מְאֹד--    בְּעִיר אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הַר-קָדְשׁוֹ. 1 A Song; a Psalm of the sons of Korah. Great is the LORD, and highly to be praised, in the city of our God, His holy mountain,
48.2 ב יְפֵה נוֹף,    מְשׂוֹשׂ כָּל-הָאָרֶץ: הַר-צִיּוֹן, יַרְכְּתֵי צָפוֹן;    קִרְיַת, מֶלֶךְ רָב.   2  Fair in situation, the joy of the whole earth; {N} even mount Zion, the uttermost parts of the north, the city of the great King.
48.3 ג אֱלֹהִים בְּאַרְמְנוֹתֶיהָ,    נוֹדַע לְמִשְׂגָּב.   3  God in her palaces hath made Himself known for a stronghold.
48.4 ד כִּי-הִנֵּה הַמְּלָכִים, נוֹעֲדוּ;    עָבְרוּ יַחְדָּו.   4  For, lo, the kings assembled themselves, they came onward together.
48.5 ה הֵמָּה רָאוּ, כֵּן תָּמָהוּ;    נִבְהֲלוּ נֶחְפָּזוּ.   5  They saw, straightway they were amazed; they were affrighted, they hasted away.
48.6 ו רְעָדָה, אֲחָזָתַם שָׁם;    חִיל, כַּיּוֹלֵדָה.   6  Trembling took hold of them there, pangs, as of a woman in travail.
48.7 ז בְּרוּחַ קָדִים--    תְּשַׁבֵּר, אֳנִיּוֹת תַּרְשִׁישׁ.   7  With the east wind Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish.
48.8 ח כַּאֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְנוּ,    כֵּן רָאִינוּ-- בְּעִיר-יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת,    בְּעִיר אֱלֹהֵינוּ: אֱלֹהִים יְכוֹנְנֶהָ עַד-עוֹלָם    סֶלָה.   8  As we have heard, so have we seen {N} in the city of the LORD of hosts, in the city of our God-- {N} God establish it for ever. Selah
48.9 ט   9 דִּמִּינוּ אֱלֹהִים חַסְדֶּךָ--    בְּקֶרֶב, הֵיכָלֶךָ.  We have thought on Thy lovingkindness, O God, in the midst of Thy temple.
48.10 י   1 כְּשִׁמְךָ אֱלֹהִים--    כֵּן תְּהִלָּתְךָ, עַל-קַצְוֵי-אֶרֶץ; צֶדֶק,    מָלְאָה יְמִינֶךָ.0  As is Thy name, O God, so is Thy praise unto the ends of the earth; {N} Thy right hand is full of righteousness.
48.11 י יִשְׂמַח, הַר צִיּוֹן--תָּגֵלְנָה, בְּנוֹת יְהוּדָה:    לְמַעַן, מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ.א   11  Let mount Zion be glad, let the daughters of Judah rejoice, because of Thy judgments.
48.12 י סֹבּוּ צִיּוֹן, וְהַקִּיפוּהָ;    סִפְרוּ, מִגְדָּלֶיהָ.ב   12  Walk about Zion, and go round about her; count the towers thereof.
48.13 י שִׁיתוּ לִבְּכֶם, לְחֵילָה--פַּסְּגוּ אַרְמְנוֹתֶיהָ:    לְמַעַן תְּסַפְּרוּ, לְדוֹר אַחֲרוֹן.ג   13  Mark ye well her ramparts, traverse her palaces; that ye may tell it to the generation following.
48.14 י כִּי זֶה, אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהֵינוּ--עוֹלָם וָעֶד;    הוּא יְנַהֲגֵנוּ עַל-מוּת.ד   14  For such is God, our God, for ever and ever; He will guide us eternally. {P}
49.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח מִזְמוֹר. שִׁמְעוּ-זֹאת, כָּל-הָעַמִּים;    הַאֲזִינוּ, כָּל-יֹשְׁבֵי חָלֶד. 1 For the Leader; a Psalm of the sons of Korah. Hear this, all ye peoples; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world,
49.2 ב גַּם-בְּנֵי אָדָם, גַּם-בְּנֵי-אִישׁ--    יַחַד, עָשִׁיר וְאֶבְיוֹן.   2  Both low and high, rich and poor together.
49.3 ג פִּי, יְדַבֵּר חָכְמוֹת;    וְהָגוּת לִבִּי תְבוּנוֹת.   3  My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be understanding.
49.4 ד אַטֶּה לְמָשָׁל אָזְנִי;    אֶפְתַּח בְּכִנּוֹר, חִידָתִי.   4  I will incline mine ear to a parable; I will open my dark saying upon the harp.
49.5 ה לָמָּה אִירָא, בִּימֵי רָע--    עֲוֺן עֲקֵבַי יְסוּבֵּנִי.   5  Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my supplanters compasseth me about,
49.6 ו הַבֹּטְחִים עַל-חֵילָם;    וּבְרֹב עָשְׁרָם יִתְהַלָּלוּ.   6  Of them that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches?
49.7 ז אָח--לֹא פָדֹה יִפְדֶּה אִישׁ;    לֹא-יִתֵּן לֵאלֹהִים כָּפְרוֹ.   7  No man can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him--
49.8 ח וְיֵקַר, פִּדְיוֹן נַפְשָׁם;    וְחָדַל לְעוֹלָם.   8  For too costly is the redemption of their soul, and must be let alone for ever--
49.9 ט   9 וִיחִי-עוֹד לָנֶצַח;    לֹא יִרְאֶה הַשָּׁחַת.  That he should still live alway, that he should not see the pit.
49.10 י   1 כִּי יִרְאֶה, חֲכָמִים יָמוּתוּ--    יַחַד כְּסִיל וָבַעַר יֹאבֵדוּ; וְעָזְבוּ לַאֲחֵרִים    חֵילָם.0  For he seeth that wise men die, the fool and the brutish together perish, {N} and leave their wealth to others.
49.11 י קִרְבָּם בָּתֵּימוֹ, לְעוֹלָם--    מִשְׁכְּנֹתָם, לְדוֹר וָדֹר; קָרְאוּ בִשְׁמוֹתָם,    עֲלֵי אֲדָמוֹת.א   11  Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling-places to all generations; {N} they call their lands after their own names.
49.12 י וְאָדָם בִּיקָר, בַּל-יָלִין;    נִמְשַׁל כַּבְּהֵמוֹת נִדְמוּ.ב   12  But man abideth not in honour; he is like the beasts that perish.
49.13 י זֶה דַרְכָּם, כֵּסֶל לָמוֹ;    וְאַחֲרֵיהֶם, בְּפִיהֶם יִרְצוּ סֶלָה.ג   13  This is the way of them that are foolish, and of those who after them approve their sayings. Selah
49.14 י כַּצֹּאן, לִשְׁאוֹל שַׁתּוּ--    מָוֶת יִרְעֵם: וַיִּרְדּוּ בָם יְשָׁרִים, לַבֹּקֶר--וצירם (וְצוּרָם), לְבַלּוֹת שְׁאוֹל;    מִזְּבֻל לוֹ.ד   14  Like sheep they are appointed for the nether-world; death shall be their shepherd; {N} and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their form shall be for the nether-world to wear away, that there be no habitation for it.
49.15 ט אַךְ-אֱלֹהִים--יִפְדֶּה נַפְשִׁי, מִיַּד-שְׁאוֹל:    כִּי יִקָּחֵנִי סֶלָה.ו   15  But God will redeem my soul from the power of the nether-world; for He shall receive me. Selah
49.16 ט אַל-תִּירָא, כִּי-יַעֲשִׁר אִישׁ:    כִּי-יִרְבֶּה, כְּבוֹד בֵּיתוֹ.ז   16  Be not thou afraid when one waxeth rich, when the wealth of his house is increased;
49.17 י כִּי לֹא בְמוֹתוֹ, יִקַּח הַכֹּל;    לֹא-יֵרֵד אַחֲרָיו כְּבוֹדוֹ.ז   17  For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away; his wealth shall not descend after him.
49.18 י כִּי-נַפְשׁוֹ, בְּחַיָּיו יְבָרֵךְ;    וְיוֹדֻךָ, כִּי-תֵיטִיב לָךְ.ח   18  Though while he lived he blessed his soul: 'Men will praise thee, when thou shalt do well to thyself';
49.19 י תָּבוֹא, עַד-דּוֹר אֲבוֹתָיו;    עַד-נֵצַח, לֹא יִרְאוּ-אוֹר.ט   19  It shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see the light.
49.20 כ   2 אָדָם בִּיקָר, וְלֹא יָבִין;    נִמְשַׁל כַּבְּהֵמוֹת נִדְמוּ.0  Man that is in honour understandeth not; he is like the beasts that perish. {P}
50.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְאָסָף: אֵל, אֱלֹהִים יְהוָה--    דִּבֶּר וַיִּקְרָא-אָרֶץ; מִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ,    עַד-מְבֹאוֹ. 1 A Psalm of Asaph. {N} God, God, the LORD, hath spoken, and called the earth {N} from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.
50.2 ב  מִצִּיּוֹן מִכְלַל-יֹפִי--    אֱלֹהִים הוֹפִיעַ. 2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined forth.
50.3 ג  יָבֹא אֱלֹהֵינוּ,    וְאַל-יֶחֱרַשׁ: אֵשׁ-לְפָנָיו תֹּאכֵל;    וּסְבִיבָיו, נִשְׂעֲרָה מְאֹד. 3 Our God cometh, and doth not keep silence; {N} a fire devoureth before Him, and round about Him it stormeth mightily.
50.4 ד  יִקְרָא אֶל-הַשָּׁמַיִם מֵעָל;    וְאֶל-הָאָרֶץ, לָדִין עַמּוֹ. 4 He calleth to the heavens above, and to the earth, that He may judge His people:
50.5 ה  אִסְפוּ-לִי חֲסִידָי--    כֹּרְתֵי בְרִיתִי עֲלֵי-זָבַח. 5 'Gather My saints together unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice.'
50.6 ו  וַיַּגִּידוּ שָׁמַיִם צִדְקוֹ:    כִּי-אֱלֹהִים, שֹׁפֵט הוּא סֶלָה. 6 And the heavens declare His righteousness; for God, He is judge. Selah
50.7 ז  שִׁמְעָה עַמִּי, וַאֲדַבֵּרָה--    יִשְׂרָאֵל, וְאָעִידָה בָּךְ: אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהֶיךָ    אָנֹכִי. 7 'Hear, O My people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify against thee: {N} God, thy God, am I.
50.8 ח  לֹא עַל-זְבָחֶיךָ, אוֹכִיחֶךָ;    וְעוֹלֹתֶיךָ לְנֶגְדִּי תָמִיד. 8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices; and thy burnt-offerings are continually before Me.
50.9 ט  לֹא-אֶקַּח מִבֵּיתְךָ פָר;    מִמִּכְלְאֹתֶיךָ, עַתּוּדִים. 9 I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds.
50.10 י  כִּי-לִי כָל-חַיְתוֹ-יָעַר;    בְּהֵמוֹת, בְּהַרְרֵי-אָלֶף. 10 For every beast of the forest is Mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.
50.11 יא  יָדַעְתִּי, כָּל-עוֹף הָרִים;    וְזִיז שָׂדַי, עִמָּדִי. 11 I know all the fowls of the mountains; and the wild beasts of the field are Mine.
50.12 יב  אִם-אֶרְעַב, לֹא-אֹמַר לָךְ:    כִּי-לִי תֵבֵל, וּמְלֹאָהּ. 12 If I were hungry, I would not tell thee; for the world is Mine, and the fulness thereof.
50.13 יג  הַאוֹכַל, בְּשַׂר אַבִּירִים;    וְדַם עַתּוּדִים אֶשְׁתֶּה. 13 Do I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
50.14 יד  זְבַח לֵאלֹהִים תּוֹדָה;    וְשַׁלֵּם לְעֶלְיוֹן נְדָרֶיךָ. 14 Offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High;
50.15 טו  וּקְרָאֵנִי, בְּיוֹם צָרָה;    אֲחַלֶּצְךָ, וּתְכַבְּדֵנִי. 15 And call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt honour Me.'
50.16 טז  וְלָרָשָׁע, אָמַר אֱלֹהִים, מַה-לְּךָ, לְסַפֵּר חֻקָּי;    וַתִּשָּׂא בְרִיתִי עֲלֵי-פִיךָ. 16 But unto the wicked God saith: 'What hast thou to do to declare My statutes, and that thou hast taken My covenant in thy mouth?
50.17 יז  וְאַתָּה, שָׂנֵאתָ מוּסָר;    וַתַּשְׁלֵךְ דְּבָרַי אַחֲרֶיךָ. 17 Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest My words behind thee.
50.18 יח  אִם-רָאִיתָ גַנָּב, וַתִּרֶץ עִמּוֹ;    וְעִם מְנָאֲפִים חֶלְקֶךָ. 18 When thou sawest a thief, thou hadst company with him, and with adulterers was thy portion.
50.19 יט  פִּיךָ, שָׁלַחְתָּ בְרָעָה;    וּלְשׁוֹנְךָ, תַּצְמִיד מִרְמָה. 19 Thou hast let loose thy mouth for evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit.
50.20 כ  תֵּשֵׁב, בְּאָחִיךָ תְדַבֵּר;    בְּבֶן-אִמְּךָ, תִּתֶּן-דֹּפִי. 20 Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son.
50.21 כא  אֵלֶּה עָשִׂיתָ, וְהֶחֱרַשְׁתִּי--    דִּמִּיתָ, הֱיוֹת-אֶהְיֶה כָמוֹךָ; אוֹכִיחֲךָ וְאֶעֶרְכָה    לְעֵינֶיךָ. 21 These things hast thou done, and should I have kept silence? Thou hadst thought that I was altogether such a one as thyself; {N} but I will reprove thee, and set the cause before thine eyes.
50.22 כב  בִּינוּ-נָא זֹאת, שֹׁכְחֵי אֱלוֹהַּ:    פֶּן-אֶטְרֹף, וְאֵין מַצִּיל. 22 Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear in pieces, and there be none to deliver.
50.23 כג  זֹבֵחַ תּוֹדָה, יְכַבְּדָנְנִי:    וְשָׂם דֶּרֶךְ--אַרְאֶנּוּ, בְּיֵשַׁע אֱלֹהִים. 23 Whoso offereth the sacrifice of thanksgiving honoureth Me; and to him that ordereth his way aright will I show the salvation of God.' {P}
51.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. בְּבוֹא-אֵלָיו, נָתָן הַנָּבִיא--    כַּאֲשֶׁר-בָּא, אֶל-בַּת-שָׁבַע. חָנֵּנִי אֱלֹהִים כְּחַסְדֶּךָ;    כְּרֹב רַחֲמֶיךָ, מְחֵה פְשָׁעָי. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David; When Nathan the prophet came unto him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba. Be gracious unto me, O God, according to Thy mercy; according to the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgressions.
51.2 ב הרבה (הֶרֶב), כַּבְּסֵנִי מֵעֲוֺנִי;    וּמֵחַטָּאתִי טַהֲרֵנִי.    2   Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
51.3 ג כִּי-פְשָׁעַי, אֲנִי אֵדָע;    וְחַטָּאתִי נֶגְדִּי תָמִיד.    3   For I know my transgressions; and my sin is ever before me.
51.4 ד לְךָ לְבַדְּךָ, חָטָאתִי,    וְהָרַע בְּעֵינֶיךָ, עָשִׂיתִי: לְמַעַן, תִּצְדַּק בְּדָבְרֶךָ--    תִּזְכֶּה בְשָׁפְטֶךָ.    4   Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, and done that which is evil in Thy sight; {N} that Thou mayest be justified when Thou speakest, and be in the right when Thou judgest.
51.5 ה הֵן-בְּעָווֹן חוֹלָלְתִּי;    וּבְחֵטְא, יֶחֱמַתְנִי אִמִּי.    5   Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.
51.6 ו הֵן-אֱמֶת, חָפַצְתָּ בַטֻּחוֹת;    וּבְסָתֻם, חָכְמָה תוֹדִיעֵנִי.    6   Behold, Thou desirest truth in the inward parts; make me, therefore, to know wisdom in mine inmost heart.
51.7 ז תְּחַטְּאֵנִי בְאֵזוֹב וְאֶטְהָר;    תְּכַבְּסֵנִי, וּמִשֶּׁלֶג אַלְבִּין.    7   Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
51.8 ח תַּשְׁמִיעֵנִי, שָׂשׂוֹן וְשִׂמְחָה;    תָּגֵלְנָה, עֲצָמוֹת דִּכִּיתָ.    8   Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which Thou hast crushed may rejoice.
51.9 ט 1 הַסְתֵּר פָּנֶיךָ, מֵחֲטָאָי;    וְכָל-עֲוֺנֹתַי מְחֵה.    9   Hide Thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
51.10 י לֵב טָהוֹר, בְּרָא-לִי אֱלֹהִים;    וְרוּחַ נָכוֹן, חַדֵּשׁ בְּקִרְבִּי.א   10   Create me a clean heart, O God; and renew a stedfast spirit within me.
51.11 י אַל-תַּשְׁלִיכֵנִי מִלְּפָנֶיךָ;    וְרוּחַ קָדְשְׁךָ, אַל-תִּקַּח מִמֶּנִּי.ב    11   Cast me not away from Thy presence; and take not Thy holy spirit from me.
51.12 י הָשִׁיבָה לִּי, שְׂשׂוֹן יִשְׁעֶךָ;    וְרוּחַ נְדִיבָה תִסְמְכֵנִי.ג    12   Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation; and let a willing spirit uphold me.
51.13 י אֲלַמְּדָה פֹשְׁעִים דְּרָכֶיךָ;    וְחַטָּאִים, אֵלֶיךָ יָשׁוּבוּ.ד    13   Then will I teach transgressors Thy ways; and sinners shall return unto Thee.
51.14 י הַצִּילֵנִי מִדָּמִים, אֱלֹהִים--    אֱלֹהֵי תְשׁוּעָתִי: תְּרַנֵּן לְשׁוֹנִי,    צִדְקָתֶךָ.ו    14   Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, Thou God of my salvation; {N} so shall my tongue sing aloud of Thy righteousness.
51.15 ט אֲדֹנָי, שְׂפָתַי תִּפְתָּח;    וּפִי, יַגִּיד תְּהִלָּתֶךָ.ז    15   O Lord, open Thou my lips; and my mouth shall declare Thy praise.
51.16 ט כִּי, לֹא-תַחְפֹּץ זֶבַח וְאֶתֵּנָה;    עוֹלָה, לֹא תִרְצֶה.ז    16   For Thou delightest not in sacrifice, else would I give it; Thou hast no pleasure in burnt-offering.
51.17 י זִבְחֵי אֱלֹהִים,    רוּחַ נִשְׁבָּרָה: לֵב-נִשְׁבָּר וְנִדְכֶּה--    אֱלֹהִים, לֹא תִבְזֶה.ח    17   The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; {N} a broken and a contrite heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise.
51.18 י הֵיטִיבָה בִרְצוֹנְךָ, אֶת-צִיּוֹן;    תִּבְנֶה, חוֹמוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִָם.ט    18   Do good in Thy favour unto Zion; build Thou the walls of Jerusalem.
51.19 י 2 אָז תַּחְפֹּץ זִבְחֵי-צֶדֶק,    עוֹלָה וְכָלִיל; אָז יַעֲלוּ עַל-מִזְבַּחֲךָ    פָרִים.    19   Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; {N} then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar. {P}
52.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מַשְׂכִּיל לְדָוִד. בְּבוֹא, דּוֹאֵג הָאֲדֹמִי--    וַיַּגֵּד לְשָׁאוּל: וַיֹּאמֶר לוֹ--    בָּא דָוִד, אֶל-בֵּית אֲחִימֶלֶךְ. מַה-תִּתְהַלֵּל בְּרָעָה, הַגִּבּוֹר;    חֶסֶד אֵל, כָּל-הַיּוֹם. 1 For the Leader. Maschil of David; when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, {N} and said unto him: 'David is come to the house of Ahimelech.' Why boastest thou thyself of evil, O mighty man? The mercy of God endureth continually.
52.2 ב הַוּוֹת, תַּחְשֹׁב לְשׁוֹנֶךָ;    כְּתַעַר מְלֻטָּשׁ, עֹשֵׂה רְמִיָּה.    2   Thy tongue deviseth destruction; like a sharp razor, working deceitfully.
52.3 ג אָהַבְתָּ רָּע מִטּוֹב;    שֶׁקֶר, מִדַּבֵּר צֶדֶק סֶלָה.    3   Thou lovest evil more than good; falsehood rather than speaking righteousness. Selah
52.4 ד אָהַבְתָּ כָל-דִּבְרֵי-בָלַע;    לְשׁוֹן מִרְמָה.    4   Thou lovest all devouring words, the deceitful tongue.
52.5 ה גַּם-אֵל,    יִתָּצְךָ לָנֶצַח: יַחְתְּךָ וְיִסָּחֲךָ מֵאֹהֶל;    וְשֵׁרֶשְׁךָ מֵאֶרֶץ חַיִּים סֶלָה.    5   God will likewise break thee for ever, {N} He will take thee up, and pluck thee out of thy tent, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah
52.6 ו וְיִרְאוּ צַדִּיקִים וְיִירָאוּ; וְעָלָיו יִשְׂחָקוּ.    6   The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:
52.7 ז הִנֵּה הַגֶּבֶר--    לֹא יָשִׂים אֱלֹהִים, מָעוּזּוֹ: וַיִּבְטַח, בְּרֹב עָשְׁרוֹ;    יָעֹז, בְּהַוָּתוֹ.    7   'Lo, this is the man that made not God his stronghold; {N} but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.'
52.8 ח וַאֲנִי, כְּזַיִת רַעֲנָן--    בְּבֵית אֱלֹהִים; בָּטַחְתִּי בְחֶסֶד-אֱלֹהִים,    עוֹלָם וָעֶד.  But as for me, I am like a leafy olive-tree in the house of God; {N} I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever.
52.9 ט  אוֹדְךָ לְעוֹלָם, כִּי עָשִׂיתָ;    וַאֲקַוֶּה שִׁמְךָ כִי-טוֹב, נֶגֶד חֲסִידֶיךָ.  I will give Thee thanks for ever, because Thou hast done it; and I will wait for Thy name, for it is good, in the presence of Thy saints. {P}
53.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-מָחֲלַת, מַשְׂכִּיל לְדָוִד. אָמַר נָבָל בְּלִבּוֹ,    אֵין אֱלֹהִים; הִשְׁחִיתוּ, וְהִתְעִיבוּ עָוֶל--    אֵין עֹשֵׂה-טוֹב. 1 For the Leader; upon Mahalath. Maschil of David. The fool hath said in his heart: 'There is no God'; {N} they have dealt corruptly, and have done abominable iniquity; there is none that doeth good.
53.2 ב אֱלֹהִים--    מִשָּׁמַיִם, הִשְׁקִיף עַל-בְּנֵי-אָדָם: לִרְאוֹת, הֲיֵשׁ מַשְׂכִּיל--    דֹּרֵשׁ, אֶת-אֱלֹהִים.   2  God looked forth from heaven upon the children of men, {N} to see if there were any man of understanding, that did seek after God.
53.3 ג כֻּלּוֹ סָג, יַחְדָּו נֶאֱלָחוּ:    אֵין עֹשֵׂה-טוֹב; אֵין, גַּם-אֶחָד.   3  Every one of them is unclean, they are together become impure; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
53.4 ד הֲלֹא יָדְעוּ, פֹּעֲלֵי-אָוֶן:    אֹכְלֵי עַמִּי, אָכְלוּ לֶחֶם; אֱלֹהִים, לֹא קָרָאוּ.   4  'Shall not the workers of iniquity know it, who eat up My people as they eat bread, and call not upon God?'
53.5 ה שָׁם, פָּחֲדוּ פַחַד--    לֹא-הָיָה-פָחַד: כִּי-אֱלֹהִים--פִּזַּר, עַצְמוֹת חֹנָךְ;    הֱבִשֹׁתָה, כִּי-אֱלֹהִים מְאָסָם.   5  There are they in great fear, where no fear was; {N} for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee; Thou hast put them to shame, because God hath rejected them.
53.6 ו מִי יִתֵּן מִצִּיּוֹן,    יְשֻׁעוֹת יִשְׂרָאֵל: בְּשׁוּב אֱלֹהִים, שְׁבוּת עַמּוֹ;    יָגֵל יַעֲקֹב, יִשְׂמַח יִשְׂרָאֵל.   6  Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! {N} When God turneth the captivity of His people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad. {P}
54.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ בִּנְגִינֹת, מַשְׂכִּיל לְדָוִד. בְּבֹא הַזִּיפִים, וַיֹּאמְרוּ לְשָׁאוּל:    הֲלֹא דָוִד, מִסְתַּתֵּר עִמָּנוּ. אֱלֹהִים, בְּשִׁמְךָ הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי;    וּבִגְבוּרָתְךָ תְדִינֵנִי. 1 For the Leader; with string-music. Maschil of David: when the Ziphites came and said to Saul: 'Doth not David hide himself with us?' O God, save me by Thy name, and right me by Thy might.
54.2 ב אֱלֹהִים, שְׁמַע תְּפִלָּתִי;    הַאֲזִינָה, לְאִמְרֵי-פִי.    2   O God, hear my prayer; give ear to the words of my mouth.
54.3 ג כִּי זָרִים, קָמוּ עָלַי--    וְעָרִיצִים, בִּקְשׁוּ נַפְשִׁי; לֹא שָׂמוּ אֱלֹהִים לְנֶגְדָּם    סֶלָה.    3   For strangers are risen up against me, and violent men have sought after my soul; {N} they have not set God before them. Selah
54.4 ד הִנֵּה אֱלֹהִים, עֹזֵר לִי;    אֲדֹנָי, בְּסֹמְכֵי נַפְשִׁי.    4   Behold, God is my helper; the Lord is for me as the upholder of my soul.
54.5 ה ישוב (יָשִׁיב) הָרַע, לְשֹׁרְרָי;    בַּאֲמִתְּךָ, הַצְמִיתֵם.    5   He will requite the evil unto them that lie in wait for me; destroy Thou them in Thy truth.
54.6 ו בִּנְדָבָה אֶזְבְּחָה-לָּךְ;    אוֹדֶה שִּׁמְךָ יְהוָה כִּי-טוֹב.    6   With a freewill-offering will I sacrifice unto Thee; I will give thanks unto Thy name, O LORD, for it is good.
54.7 ז כִּי מִכָּל-צָרָה, הִצִּילָנִי;    וּבְאֹיְבַי, רָאֲתָה עֵינִי.    7   For He hath delivered me out of all trouble; and mine eye hath gazed upon mine enemies. {P}
55.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ בִּנְגִינֹת, מַשְׂכִּיל לְדָוִד. הַאֲזִינָה אֱלֹהִים, תְּפִלָּתִי;    וְאַל-תִּתְעַלַּם, מִתְּחִנָּתִי. 1 For the Leader; with string-music. Maschil of David. Give ear, O God, to my prayer; and hide not Thyself from my supplication.
55.2 ב הַקְשִׁיבָה לִּי וַעֲנֵנִי;    אָרִיד בְּשִׂיחִי וְאָהִימָה.   2  Attend unto me, and hear me; I am distraught in my complaint, and will moan;
55.3 ג מִקּוֹל אוֹיֵב--מִפְּנֵי, עָקַת רָשָׁע:    כִּי-יָמִיטוּ עָלַי אָוֶן, וּבְאַף יִשְׂטְמוּנִי.   3  Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked; for they cast mischief upon me, and in anger they persecute me.
55.4 ד לִבִּי, יָחִיל בְּקִרְבִּי;    וְאֵימוֹת מָוֶת, נָפְלוּ עָלָי.   4  My heart doth writhe within me; and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.
55.5 ה יִרְאָה וָרַעַד, יָבֹא בִי;    וַתְּכַסֵּנִי, פַּלָּצוּת.   5  Fear and trembling come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me.
55.6 ו וָאֹמַר--מִי-יִתֶּן-לִי אֵבֶר, כַּיּוֹנָה:    אָעוּפָה וְאֶשְׁכֹּנָה.   6  And I said: 'Oh that I had wings like a dove! then would I fly away, and be at rest.
55.7 ז הִנֵּה, אַרְחִיק נְדֹד;    אָלִין בַּמִּדְבָּר סֶלָה.   7  Lo, then would I wander far off, I would lodge in the wilderness. Selah
55.8 ח אָחִישָׁה מִפְלָט לִי--    מֵרוּחַ סֹעָה מִסָּעַר.   8  I would haste me to a shelter from the stormy wind and tempest.'
55.9 ט   9 בַּלַּע אֲדֹנָי, פַּלַּג לְשׁוֹנָם:    כִּי-רָאִיתִי חָמָס וְרִיב בָּעִיר.  Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongue; for I have seen violence and strife in the city.
55.10 י   1 יוֹמָם וָלַיְלָה--יְסוֹבְבֻהָ עַל-חוֹמֹתֶיהָ;    וְאָוֶן וְעָמָל בְּקִרְבָּהּ.0  Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof; iniquity also and mischief are in the midst of it.
55.11 י הַוּוֹת בְּקִרְבָּהּ;    וְלֹא-יָמִישׁ מֵרְחֹבָהּ, תֹּךְ וּמִרְמָה.א   11  Wickedness is in the midst thereof; oppression and guile depart not from her broad place.
55.12 י כִּי לֹא-אוֹיֵב יְחָרְפֵנִי,    וְאֶשָּׂא: לֹא-מְשַׂנְאִי, עָלַי הִגְדִּיל;    וְאֶסָּתֵר מִמֶּנּוּ.ב   12  For it was not an enemy that taunted me, then I could have borne it; {N} neither was it mine adversary that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid myself from him.
55.13 י וְאַתָּה אֱנוֹשׁ כְּעֶרְכִּי;    אַלּוּפִי, וּמְיֻדָּעִי.ג   13  But it was thou, a man mine equal, my companion, and my familiar friend;
55.14 י אֲשֶׁר יַחְדָּו, נַמְתִּיק סוֹד;    בְּבֵית אֱלֹהִים, נְהַלֵּךְ בְּרָגֶשׁ.ד   14  We took sweet counsel together, in the house of God we walked with the throng.
55.15 ט ישימות (יַשִּׁי מָוֶת), עָלֵימוֹ--יֵרְדוּ שְׁאוֹל חַיִּים:    כִּי-רָעוֹת בִּמְגוּרָם בְּקִרְבָּם.ו   15  May He incite death against them, let them go down alive into the nether-world; for evil is in their dwelling, and within them.
55.16 ט אֲנִי, אֶל-אֱלֹהִים אֶקְרָא;    וַיהוָה, יוֹשִׁיעֵנִי.ז   16  As for me, I will call upon God; and the LORD shall save me.
55.17 י עֶרֶב וָבֹקֶר וְצָהֳרַיִם, אָשִׂיחָה וְאֶהֱמֶה;    וַיִּשְׁמַע קוֹלִי.ז   17  Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I complain, and moan; and He hath heard my voice.
55.18 י פָּדָה בְשָׁלוֹם נַפְשִׁי, מִקְּרָב-לִי:    כִּי-בְרַבִּים, הָיוּ עִמָּדִי.ח   18  He hath redeemed my soul in peace so that none came nigh me; for they were many that strove with me.
55.19 י יִשְׁמַע אֵל, וְיַעֲנֵם--    וְיֹשֵׁב קֶדֶם, סֶלָה: אֲשֶׁר אֵין חֲלִיפוֹת לָמוֹ;    וְלֹא יָרְאוּ אֱלֹהִים.ט   19  God shall hear, and humble them, even He that is enthroned of old, Selah {N} such as have no changes, and fear not God.
55.20 כ   2 שָׁלַח יָדָיו, בִּשְׁלֹמָיו;    חִלֵּל בְּרִיתוֹ.0  He hath put forth his hands against them that were at peace with him; he hath profaned his covenant.
55.21 כ חָלְקוּ, מַחְמָאֹת פִּיו--    וּקְרָב-לִבּוֹ: רַכּוּ דְבָרָיו מִשֶּׁמֶן;    וְהֵמָּה פְתִחוֹת.א   21  Smoother than cream were the speeches of his mouth, but his heart was war; {N} his words were softer than oil, yet were they keen-edged swords.
55.22 כ הַשְׁלֵךְ עַל-יְהוָה, יְהָבְךָ--    וְהוּא יְכַלְכְּלֶךָ: לֹא-יִתֵּן לְעוֹלָם מוֹט--    לַצַּדִּיק.ב   22  Cast thy burden upon the LORD, and He will sustain thee; {N} He will never suffer the righteous to be moved.
55.23 כ וְאַתָּה אֱלֹהִים,    תּוֹרִדֵם לִבְאֵר שַׁחַת-- אַנְשֵׁי דָמִים וּמִרְמָה,    לֹא-יֶחֱצוּ יְמֵיהֶם; וַאֲנִי,    אֶבְטַח-בָּךְ.ג   23  But Thou, O God, wilt bring them down into the nethermost pit; {N} men of blood and deceit shall not live out half their days; {N} but as for me, I will trust in Thee. {P}
56.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, עַל-יוֹנַת אֵלֶם רְחֹקִים--    לְדָוִד מִכְתָּם: בֶּאֱחֹז אוֹתוֹ פְלִשְׁתִּים    בְּגַת. חָנֵּנִי אֱלֹהִים, כִּי-שְׁאָפַנִי אֱנוֹשׁ;    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, לֹחֵם יִלְחָצֵנִי. 1 For the Leader; upon Jonath-elem-rehokim. [A Psalm] of David; Michtam; {N} when the Philistines took him in Gath. Be gracious unto me, O God, for man would swallow me up; all the day he fighting oppresseth me.
56.2 ב שָׁאֲפוּ שׁוֹרְרַי, כָּל-הַיּוֹם:    כִּי-רַבִּים לֹחֲמִים לִי מָרוֹם.   2  They that lie in wait for me would swallow me up all the day; for they are many that fight against me, O Most High,
56.3 ג יוֹם אִירָא--    אֲנִי, אֵלֶיךָ אֶבְטָח.   3  In the day that I am afraid, I will put my trust in Thee.
56.4 ד בֵּאלֹהִים,    אֲהַלֵּל דְּבָרוֹ: בֵּאלֹהִים בָּטַחְתִּי, לֹא אִירָא;    מַה-יַּעֲשֶׂה בָשָׂר לִי.   4  In God--I will praise His word-- {N} in God do I trust, I will not be afraid; what can flesh do unto me?
56.5 ה כָּל-הַיּוֹם, דְּבָרַי יְעַצֵּבוּ;    עָלַי כָּל-מַחְשְׁבֹתָם לָרָע.   5  All the day they trouble mine affairs; all their thoughts are against me for evil.
56.6 ו יָגוּרוּ, יצפינו (יִצְפּוֹנוּ)--הֵמָּה, עֲקֵבַי יִשְׁמֹרוּ:    כַּאֲשֶׁר, קִוּוּ נַפְשִׁי.   6  They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps; according as they have waited for my soul.
56.7 ז עַל-אָוֶן פַּלֶּט-לָמוֹ;    בְּאַף, עַמִּים הוֹרֵד אֱלֹהִים.   7  Because of iniquity cast them out; in anger bring down the peoples, O God.
56.8 ח נֹדִי, סָפַרְתָּה-אָתָּה:    שִׂימָה דִמְעָתִי בְנֹאדֶךָ; הֲלֹא, בְּסִפְרָתֶךָ.   8  Thou has counted my wanderings; put Thou my tears into Thy bottle; are they not in Thy book?
56.9 ט   9 אָז יָשׁוּבוּ אוֹיְבַי אָחוֹר, בְּיוֹם אֶקְרָא;    זֶה-יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-אֱלֹהִים לִי.  Then shall mine enemies turn back in the day that I call; this I know, that God is for me.
56.10 י   1 בֵּאלֹהִים, אֲהַלֵּל דָּבָר;    בַּיהוָה, אֲהַלֵּל דָּבָר.0  In God--I will praise His word--in the LORD--I will praise His word--
56.11 י בֵּאלֹהִים בָּטַחְתִּי, לֹא אִירָא;    מַה-יַּעֲשֶׂה אָדָם לִי.א   11  In God do I trust, I will not be afraid; what can man do unto me?
56.12 י עָלַי אֱלֹהִים נְדָרֶיךָ;    אֲשַׁלֵּם תּוֹדֹת לָךְ.ב   12  Thy vows are upon me, O God; I will render thank-offerings unto Thee.
56.13 י כִּי הִצַּלְתָּ נַפְשִׁי, מִמָּוֶת--    הֲלֹא רַגְלַי, מִדֶּחִי: לְהִתְהַלֵּךְ, לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהִים--    בְּאוֹר, הַחַיִּים.ג   13  For Thou hast delivered my soul from death; hast Thou not delivered my feet from stumbling? {N} that I may walk before God in the light of the living. {P}
57.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ אַל-תַּשְׁחֵת, לְדָוִד מִכְתָּם--    בְּבָרְחוֹ מִפְּנֵי-שָׁאוּל, בַּמְּעָרָה. חָנֵּנִי אֱלֹהִים, חָנֵּנִי--    כִּי בְךָ, חָסָיָה נַפְשִׁי: וּבְצֵל-כְּנָפֶיךָ אֶחְסֶה--    עַד, יַעֲבֹר הַוּוֹת. 1 For the Leader; Al-tashheth. [A Psalm] of David; Michtam; when he fled from Saul, in the cave. Be gracious unto me, O God, be gracious unto me, for in Thee hath my soul taken refuge; {N} yea, in the shadow of Thy wings will I take refuge, until calamities be overpast.
57.2 ב אֶקְרָא, לֵאלֹהִים עֶלְיוֹן;    לָאֵל, גֹּמֵר עָלָי.   2  I will cry unto God Most high; unto God that accomplisheth it for me.
57.3 ג יִשְׁלַח מִשָּׁמַיִם, וְיוֹשִׁיעֵנִי--    חֵרֵף שֹׁאֲפִי סֶלָה; יִשְׁלַח אֱלֹהִים,    חַסְדּוֹ וַאֲמִתּוֹ.   3  He will send from heaven, and save me, when he that would swallow me up taunteth; Selah {N} God shall send forth His mercy and His truth.
57.4 ד נַפְשִׁי, בְּתוֹךְ לְבָאִם--    אֶשְׁכְּבָה לֹהֲטִים: בְּנֵי-אָדָם--שִׁנֵּיהֶם, חֲנִית וְחִצִּים;    וּלְשׁוֹנָם, חֶרֶב חַדָּה.   4  My soul is among lions, I do lie down among them that are aflame; {N} even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
57.5 ה רוּמָה עַל-הַשָּׁמַיִם אֱלֹהִים;    עַל כָּל-הָאָרֶץ כְּבוֹדֶךָ.   5  Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; Thy glory be above all the earth.
57.6 ו רֶשֶׁת, הֵכִינוּ לִפְעָמַי--    כָּפַף נַפְשִׁי: כָּרוּ לְפָנַי שִׁיחָה;    נָפְלוּ בְתוֹכָהּ סֶלָה.   6  They have prepared a net for my steps, my soul is bowed down; {N} they have digged a pit before me, they are fallen into the midst thereof themselves. Selah
57.7 ז נָכוֹן לִבִּי אֱלֹהִים, נָכוֹן לִבִּי;    אָשִׁירָה, וַאֲזַמֵּרָה.   7  My heart is stedfast, O God, my heart is stedfast; I will sing, yea, I will sing praises.
57.8 ח עוּרָה כְבוֹדִי--עוּרָה, הַנֵּבֶל וְכִנּוֹר;    אָעִירָה שָּׁחַר.   8  Awake, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp; I will awake the dawn.
57.9 ט   9 אוֹדְךָ בָעַמִּים אֲדֹנָי;    אֲזַמֶּרְךָ, בַּלְאֻמִּים.  I will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord, among the peoples; I will sing praises unto Thee among the nations.
57.10 י   1 כִּי-גָדֹל עַד-שָׁמַיִם חַסְדֶּךָ;    וְעַד-שְׁחָקִים אֲמִתֶּךָ.0  For Thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and Thy truth unto the skies.
57.11 י רוּמָה עַל-שָׁמַיִם אֱלֹהִים;    עַל כָּל-הָאָרֶץ כְּבוֹדֶךָ.א   11  Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; Thy glory be above all the earth. {P}
58.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ אַל-תַּשְׁחֵת, לְדָוִד מִכְתָּם. הַאֻמְנָם--אֵלֶם צֶדֶק, תְּדַבֵּרוּן;    מֵישָׁרִים תִּשְׁפְּטוּ, בְּנֵי אָדָם. 1 For the Leader; Al-tashheth. [A Psalm] of David; Michtam. Do ye indeed speak as a righteous company? Do ye judge with equity the sons of men?
58.2 ב אַף-בְּלֵב, עוֹלֹת תִּפְעָלוּן:    בָּאָרֶץ--חֲמַס יְדֵיכֶם, תְּפַלֵּסוּן.   2  Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh out in the earth the violence of your hands.
58.3 ג זֹרוּ רְשָׁעִים מֵרָחֶם;    תָּעוּ מִבֶּטֶן, דֹּבְרֵי כָזָב.   3  The wicked are estranged from the womb; the speakers of lies go astray as soon as they are born.
58.4 ד חֲמַת-לָמוֹ, כִּדְמוּת חֲמַת-נָחָשׁ;    כְּמוֹ-פֶתֶן חֵרֵשׁ, יַאְטֵם אָזְנוֹ.   4  Their venom is like the venom of a serpent; they are like the deaf asp that stoppeth her ear;
58.5 ה אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יִשְׁמַע, לְקוֹל מְלַחֲשִׁים;    חוֹבֵר חֲבָרִים מְחֻכָּם.   5  Which hearkeneth not to the voice of charmers, or of the most cunning binder of spells.
58.6 ו אֱלֹהִים--הֲרָס שִׁנֵּימוֹ בְּפִימוֹ;    מַלְתְּעוֹת כְּפִירִים, נְתֹץ יְהוָה.   6  Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth; break out the cheek-teeth of the young lions, O LORD.
58.7 ז יִמָּאֲסוּ כְמוֹ-מַיִם,    יִתְהַלְּכוּ-לָמוֹ; יִדְרֹךְ חִצָּו,    כְּמוֹ יִתְמֹלָלוּ.   7  Let them melt away as water that runneth apace; {N} when he aimeth his arrows, let them be as though they were cut off.
58.8 ח כְּמוֹ שַׁבְּלוּל, תֶּמֶס יַהֲלֹךְ;    נֵפֶל אֵשֶׁת, בַּל-חָזוּ שָׁמֶשׁ.   8  Let them be as a snail which melteth and passeth away; like the untimely births of a woman, that have not seen the sun.
58.9 ט   9 בְּטֶרֶם, יָבִינוּ סִּירֹתֵכֶם אָטָד;    כְּמוֹ-חַי כְּמוֹ-חָרוֹן, יִשְׂעָרֶנּוּ.  Before your pots can feel the thorns, He will sweep it away with a whirlwind, the raw and the burning alike.
58.10 י   1 יִשְׂמַח צַדִּיק, כִּי-חָזָה נָקָם;    פְּעָמָיו יִרְחַץ, בְּדַם הָרָשָׁע.0  The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance; he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
58.11 י וְיֹאמַר אָדָם, אַךְ-פְּרִי לַצַּדִּיק;    אַךְ יֵשׁ-אֱלֹהִים, שֹׁפְטִים בָּאָרֶץ.א   11  And men shall say: 'Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth.' {P}
59.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ אַל-תַּשְׁחֵת, לְדָוִד מִכְתָּם:    בִּשְׁלֹחַ שָׁאוּל; וַיִּשְׁמְרוּ אֶת-הַבַּיִת,    לַהֲמִיתוֹ. הַצִּילֵנִי מֵאֹיְבַי אֱלֹהָי;    מִמִּתְקוֹמְמַי תְּשַׂגְּבֵנִי. 1 For the Leader; Al-tashheth. [A Psalm] of David; Michtam; when Saul sent, {N} and they watched the house to kill him. Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God; set me on high from them that rise up against me.
59.2 ב הַצִּילֵנִי, מִפֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן;    וּמֵאַנְשֵׁי דָמִים, הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי.   2  Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from the men of blood.
59.3 ג כִּי הִנֵּה אָרְבוּ, לְנַפְשִׁי--    יָגוּרוּ עָלַי עַזִּים; לֹא-פִשְׁעִי וְלֹא-חַטָּאתִי    יְהוָה.   3  For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul; the impudent gather themselves together against me; {N} not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O LORD.
59.4 ד בְּלִי-עָוֺן, יְרֻצוּן וְיִכּוֹנָנוּ;    עוּרָה לִקְרָאתִי וּרְאֵה.   4  Without my fault, they run and prepare themselves; awake Thou to help me, and behold.
59.5 ה וְאַתָּה יְהוָה-אֱלֹהִים צְבָאוֹת, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל--    הָקִיצָה, לִפְקֹד כָּל-הַגּוֹיִם; אַל-תָּחֹן כָּל-בֹּגְדֵי אָוֶן    סֶלָה.   5  Thou therefore, O LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel, arouse Thyself to punish all the nations; {N} show no mercy to any iniquitous traitors. Selah
59.6 ו יָשׁוּבוּ לָעֶרֶב, יֶהֱמוּ כַכָּלֶב;    וִיסוֹבְבוּ עִיר.   6  They return at evening, they howl like a dog, and go round about the city.
59.7 ז הִנֵּה, יַבִּיעוּן בְּפִיהֶם--חֲרָבוֹת, בְּשִׂפְתוֹתֵיהֶם:    כִּי-מִי שֹׁמֵעַ.   7  Behold, they belch out with their mouth; swords are in their lips: 'For who doth hear?'
59.8 ח וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, תִּשְׂחַק-לָמוֹ;    תִּלְעַג, לְכָל-גּוֹיִם.   8  But Thou, O LORD, shalt laugh at them; Thou shalt have all the nations in derision.
59.9 ט   9 עֻזּוֹ, אֵלֶיךָ אֶשְׁמֹרָה:    כִּי-אֱלֹהִים, מִשְׂגַּבִּי.  Because of his strength, I will wait for Thee; for God is my high tower.
59.10 י   1 אֱלֹהֵי חסדו (חַסְדִּי) יְקַדְּמֵנִי;    אֱלֹהִים, יַרְאֵנִי בְשֹׁרְרָי.0  The God of my mercy will come to meet me; God will let me gaze upon mine adversaries.
59.11 י אַל-תַּהַרְגֵם, פֶּן יִשְׁכְּחוּ עַמִּי--הֲנִיעֵמוֹ בְחֵילְךָ, וְהוֹרִידֵמוֹ:    מָגִנֵּנוּ אֲדֹנָי.א   11  Slay them not, lest my people forget, make them wander to and fro by Thy power, and bring them down, O Lord our shield.
59.12 י חַטַּאת-פִּימוֹ,    דְּבַר-שְׂפָתֵימוֹ: וְיִלָּכְדוּ בִגְאוֹנָם;    וּמֵאָלָה וּמִכַּחַשׁ יְסַפֵּרוּ.ב   12  For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, {N} let them even be taken in their pride, and for cursing and lying which they speak.
59.13 י כַּלֵּה בְחֵמָה,    כַּלֵּה וְאֵינֵמוֹ: וְיֵדְעוּ--כִּי-אֱלֹהִים, מֹשֵׁל בְּיַעֲקֹב;    לְאַפְסֵי הָאָרֶץ סֶלָה.ג   13  Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they be no more; {N} and let them know that God ruleth in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth. Selah
59.14 י וְיָשֻׁבוּ לָעֶרֶב, יֶהֱמוּ כַכָּלֶב;    וִיסוֹבְבוּ עִיר.ד   14  And they return at evening, they howl like a dog, and go round about the city;
59.15 ט הֵמָּה, ינועון (יְנִיעוּן) לֶאֱכֹל--    אִם-לֹא יִשְׂבְּעוּ, וַיָּלִינוּ.ו   15  They wander up and down to devour, and tarry all night if they have not their fill.
59.16 ט וַאֲנִי, אָשִׁיר עֻזֶּךָ--    וַאֲרַנֵּן לַבֹּקֶר, חַסְדֶּךָ: כִּי-הָיִיתָ מִשְׂגָּב לִי;    וּמָנוֹס, בְּיוֹם צַר-לִי.ז   16  But as for me, I will sing of Thy strength; yea, I will sing aloud of Thy mercy in the morning; {N} for Thou hast been my high tower, and a refuge in the day of my distress.
59.17 י עֻזִּי, אֵלֶיךָ אֲזַמֵּרָה:    כִּי-אֱלֹהִים מִשְׂגַּבִּי, אֱלֹהֵי חַסְדִּי.ז   17  O my strength, unto Thee will I sing praises; for God is my high tower, the God of my mercy. {P}
60.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, עַל-שׁוּשַׁן עֵדוּת;    מִכְתָּם לְדָוִד לְלַמֵּד. בְּהַצּוֹתוֹ, אֶת אֲרַם נַהֲרַיִם--    וְאֶת-אֲרַם צוֹבָה: וַיָּשָׁב יוֹאָב, וַיַּךְ אֶת-אֱדוֹם בְּגֵיא-מֶלַח--    שְׁנֵים עָשָׂר אָלֶף. אֱלֹהִים, זְנַחְתָּנוּ פְרַצְתָּנוּ;    אָנַפְתָּ, תְּשׁוֹבֵב לָנוּ. 1 For the Leader; upon Shushan Eduth; Michtam of David, to teach; when he strove with Aram-naharaim and with Aram-zobah, {N} and Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the Valley of Salt twelve thousand. O God, Thou hast cast us off, Thou hast broken us down; Thou hast been angry; O restore us.
60.2 ב הִרְעַשְׁתָּה אֶרֶץ פְּצַמְתָּהּ;    רְפָה שְׁבָרֶיהָ כִי-מָטָה.    2   Thou hast made the land to shake, Thou hast cleft it; heal the breaches thereof; for it tottereth.
60.3 ג הִרְאִיתָ עַמְּךָ קָשָׁה;    הִשְׁקִיתָנוּ, יַיִן תַּרְעֵלָה.    3   Thou hast made Thy people to see hard things; Thou hast made us to drink the wine of staggering.
60.4 ד נָתַתָּה לִּירֵאֶיךָ נֵּס, לְהִתְנוֹסֵס--    מִפְּנֵי, קֹשֶׁט סֶלָה.    4   Thou hast given a banner to them that fear Thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah
60.5 ה לְמַעַן, יֵחָלְצוּן יְדִידֶיךָ;    הוֹשִׁיעָה יְמִינְךָ ועננו (וַעֲנֵנִי)    5   7 That Thy beloved may be delivered, save with Thy right hand, and answer me.
60.6 ו  . אֱלֹהִים, דִּבֶּר בְּקָדְשׁוֹ--אֶעְלֹזָה:    אֲחַלְּקָה שְׁכֶם; וְעֵמֶק סֻכּוֹת אֲמַדֵּד.  God spoke in His holiness, that I would exult; that I would divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.  
60.7 ז לִי גִלְעָד, וְלִי מְנַשֶּׁה, וְאֶפְרַיִם, מָעוֹז רֹאשִׁי;    יְהוּדָה, מְחֹקְקִי.   8  Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the defence of my head; Judah is my sceptre.
60.8 ח מוֹאָב, סִיר רַחְצִי--עַל-אֱדוֹם, אַשְׁלִיךְ נַעֲלִי;    עָלַי, פְּלֶשֶׁת הִתְרוֹעָעִי.  Moab is my washpot; upon Edom do I cast my shoe; Philistia, cry aloud because of me!
60.9 ט מִי יֹבִלֵנִי, עִיר מָצוֹר;    מִי נָחַנִי עַד-אֱדוֹם.  Who will bring me into the fortified city? Who will lead me unto Edom?
60.10 י הֲלֹא-אַתָּה אֱלֹהִים זְנַחְתָּנוּ;    וְלֹא-תֵצֵא אֱלֹהִים, בְּצִבְאוֹתֵינוּ.א   11  Hast not Thou, O God, cast us off? And Thou goest not forth, O God, with our hosts.
60.11 יא הָבָה-לָּנוּ עֶזְרָת מִצָּר;    וְשָׁוְא, תְּשׁוּעַת אָדָם.ב   12  Give us help against the adversary; for vain is the help of man.
60.12 יב בֵּאלֹהִים נַעֲשֶׂה-חָיִל;    וְהוּא, יָבוּס צָרֵינוּ.ג   13  Through God we shall do valiantly; for He it is that will tread down our adversaries. {P}
61.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-נְגִינַת לְדָוִד. שִׁמְעָה אֱלֹהִים, רִנָּתִי;    הַקְשִׁיבָה, תְּפִלָּתִי. 1 For the Leader; with string-music. [A Psalm] of David. Hear my cry, O God; attend unto my prayer.
61.2 ב מִקְצֵה הָאָרֶץ, אֵלֶיךָ אֶקְרָא--    בַּעֲטֹף לִבִּי; בְּצוּר-יָרוּם מִמֶּנִּי    תַנְחֵנִי.   2  From the end of the earth will I call unto Thee, when my heart fainteth; {N} lead me to a rock that is too high for me.
61.3 ג כִּי-הָיִיתָ מַחְסֶה לִי;    מִגְדַּל-עֹז, מִפְּנֵי אוֹיֵב.   3  For Thou hast been a refuge for me, a tower of strength in the face of the enemy.
61.4 ד אָגוּרָה בְאָהָלְךָ, עוֹלָמִים;    אֶחֱסֶה בְסֵתֶר כְּנָפֶיךָ סֶּלָה.   4  I will dwell in Thy Tent for ever; I will take refuge in the covert of Thy wings. Selah
61.5 ה כִּי-אַתָּה אֱלֹהִים, שָׁמַעְתָּ לִנְדָרָי;    נָתַתָּ יְרֻשַּׁת, יִרְאֵי שְׁמֶךָ.   5  For Thou, O God, hast heard my vows; Thou hast granted the heritage of those that fear Thy name.
61.6 ו יָמִים עַל-יְמֵי-מֶלֶךְ תּוֹסִיף;    שְׁנוֹתָיו, כְּמוֹ-דֹר וָדֹר.   6  Mayest Thou add days unto the king's days! May his years be as many generations!
61.7 ז יֵשֵׁב עוֹלָם, לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהִים;    חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת, מַן יִנְצְרֻהוּ.   7  May he be enthroned before God for ever! Appoint mercy and truth, that they may preserve him.
61.8 ח כֵּן אֲזַמְּרָה שִׁמְךָ לָעַד--    לְשַׁלְּמִי נְדָרַי, יוֹם יוֹם.   8  So will I sing praise unto Thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows. {P}
62.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-יְדוּתוּן--    מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. אַךְ אֶל-אֱלֹהִים, דּוּמִיָּה נַפְשִׁי;    מִמֶּנּוּ, יְשׁוּעָתִי. 1 For the Leader; for Jeduthun. A Psalm of David. Only for God doth my soul wait in stillness; from Him cometh my salvation.
62.2 ב אַךְ-הוּא צוּרִי, וִישׁוּעָתִי;    מִשְׂגַּבִּי, לֹא-אֶמּוֹט רַבָּה.   2  He only is my rock and my salvation, my high tower, I shall not be greatly moved.
62.3 ג עַד-אָנָה, תְּהוֹתְתוּ עַל-אִישׁ--    תְּרָצְּחוּ כֻלְּכֶם: כְּקִיר נָטוּי;    גָּדֵר, הַדְּחוּיָה.   3  How long will ye set upon a man, that ye may slay him, all of you, {N} as a leaning wall, a tottering fence?
62.4 ד אַךְ מִשְּׂאֵתוֹ, יָעֲצוּ לְהַדִּיחַ--    יִרְצוּ כָזָב: בְּפִיו יְבָרֵכוּ;    וּבְקִרְבָּם, יְקַלְלוּ-סֶלָה.   4  They only devise to thrust him down from his height, delighting in lies; {N} they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah
62.5 ה אַךְ לֵאלֹהִים, דּוֹמִּי נַפְשִׁי:    כִּי-מִמֶּנּוּ, תִּקְוָתִי.   5  Only for God wait thou in stillness, my soul; for from Him cometh my hope.
62.6 ו אַךְ-הוּא צוּרִי, וִישׁוּעָתִי;    מִשְׂגַּבִּי, לֹא אֶמּוֹט.   6  He only is my rock and my salvation, my high tower, I shall not be moved.
62.7 ז עַל-אֱלֹהִים, יִשְׁעִי וּכְבוֹדִי;    צוּר-עֻזִּי מַחְסִי, בֵּאלֹהִים.   7  Upon God resteth my salvation and my glory; the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God.
62.8 ח בִּטְחוּ בוֹ בְכָל-עֵת, עָם--    שִׁפְכוּ-לְפָנָיו לְבַבְכֶם; אֱלֹהִים מַחֲסֶה-לָּנוּ    סֶלָה.   8  Trust in Him at all times, ye people; pour out your heart before Him; {N} God is a refuge for us. Selah
62.9 ט   9 אַךְ, הֶבֶל בְּנֵי-אָדָם--    כָּזָב בְּנֵי-אִישׁ: בְּמֹאזְנַיִם לַעֲלוֹת;    הֵמָּה, מֵהֶבֶל יָחַד.  Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; {N} if they be laid in the balances, they are together lighter than vanity.
62.10 י   1 אַל-תִּבְטְחוּ בְעֹשֶׁק,    וּבְגָזֵל אַל-תֶּהְבָּלוּ: חַיִל כִּי-יָנוּב--    אַל-תָּשִׁיתוּ לֵב.0  Trust not in oppression, and put not vain hope in robbery; {N} if riches increase, set not your heart thereon.
62.11 י אַחַת, דִּבֶּר אֱלֹהִים--שְׁתַּיִם-זוּ שָׁמָעְתִּי:    כִּי עֹז, לֵאלֹהִים.א   11  God hath spoken once, twice have I heard this: that strength belongeth unto God;
62.12 י וּלְךָ-אֲדֹנָי חָסֶד:    כִּי-אַתָּה תְשַׁלֵּם לְאִישׁ כְּמַעֲשֵׂהוּ.ב   12  Also unto Thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy; for Thou renderest to every man according to his work. {P}
63.1 א  מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד;    בִּהְיוֹתוֹ, בְּמִדְבַּר יְהוּדָה. אֱלֹהִים, אֵלִי אַתָּה--    אֲשַׁחֲרֶךָּ: צָמְאָה לְךָ, נַפְשִׁי--    כָּמַהּ לְךָ בְשָׂרִי; בְּאֶרֶץ-צִיָּה וְעָיֵף    בְּלִי-מָיִם. 1 A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. O God, Thou art my God, earnestly will I seek Thee; {N} my soul thirsteth for Thee, my flesh longeth for Thee, {N} in a dry and weary land, where no water is.
63.2 ב כֵּן, בַּקֹּדֶשׁ חֲזִיתִךָ--    לִרְאוֹת עֻזְּךָ, וּכְבוֹדֶךָ.   2  So have I looked for Thee in the sanctuary, to see Thy power and Thy glory.
63.3 ג כִּי-טוֹב חַסְדְּךָ, מֵחַיִּים;    שְׂפָתַי יְשַׁבְּחוּנְךָ.   3  For Thy lovingkindness is better than life; my lips shall praise Thee.
63.4 ד כֵּן אֲבָרֶכְךָ בְחַיָּי;    בְּשִׁמְךָ, אֶשָּׂא כַפָּי.   4  So will I bless Thee as long as I live; in Thy name will I lift up my hands.
63.5 ה כְּמוֹ חֵלֶב וָדֶשֶׁן, תִּשְׂבַּע נַפְשִׁי;    וְשִׂפְתֵי רְנָנוֹת, יְהַלֶּל-פִּי.   5  My soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth doth praise Thee with joyful lips;
63.6 ו אִם-זְכַרְתִּיךָ עַל-יְצוּעָי--    בְּאַשְׁמֻרוֹת, אֶהְגֶּה-בָּךְ.   6  When I remember Thee upon my couch, and meditate on Thee in the night-watches.
63.7 ז כִּי-הָיִיתָ עֶזְרָתָה לִּי;    וּבְצֵל כְּנָפֶיךָ אֲרַנֵּן.   7  For Thou hast been my help, and in the shadow of Thy wings do I rejoice.
63.8 ח דָּבְקָה נַפְשִׁי אַחֲרֶיךָ;    בִּי, תָּמְכָה יְמִינֶךָ.   8  My soul cleaveth unto Thee; Thy right hand holdeth me fast.
63.9 ט   9 וְהֵמָּה--לְשׁוֹאָה, יְבַקְשׁוּ נַפְשִׁי;    יָבֹאוּ, בְּתַחְתִּיּוֹת הָאָרֶץ.  But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the nethermost parts of the earth.
63.10 י   1 יַגִּירֻהוּ, עַל-יְדֵי-חָרֶב;    מְנָת שֻׁעָלִים יִהְיוּ.0  They shall be hurled to the power of the sword; they shall be a portion for foxes.
63.11 י וְהַמֶּלֶךְ,    יִשְׂמַח בֵּאלֹהִים: יִתְהַלֵּל, כָּל-הַנִּשְׁבָּע בּוֹ--    כִּי יִסָּכֵר, פִּי דוֹבְרֵי-שָׁקֶר.א   11  But the king shall rejoice in God; {N} every one that sweareth by Him shall glory; for the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped. {P}
64.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. שְׁמַע-אֱלֹהִים קוֹלִי בְשִׂיחִי;    מִפַּחַד אוֹיֵב, תִּצֹּר חַיָּי. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint; preserve my life from the terror of the enemy.
64.2 ב תַּסְתִּירֵנִי, מִסּוֹד מְרֵעִים;    מֵרִגְשַׁת, פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן.   2  Hide me from the council of evil-doers; from the tumult of the workers of iniquity;
64.3 ג אֲשֶׁר שָׁנְנוּ כַחֶרֶב לְשׁוֹנָם;    דָּרְכוּ חִצָּם, דָּבָר מָר.   3  Who have whet their tongue like a sword, and have aimed their arrow, a poisoned word;
64.4 ד לִירֹת בַּמִּסְתָּרִים תָּם;    פִּתְאֹם יֹרֻהוּ, וְלֹא יִירָאוּ.   4  That they may shoot in secret places at the blameless; suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.
64.5 ה יְחַזְּקוּ-לָמוֹ, דָּבָר רָע--    יְסַפְּרוּ, לִטְמוֹן מוֹקְשִׁים; אָמְרוּ,    מִי יִרְאֶה-לָּמוֹ.   5  They encourage one another in an evil matter; they converse of laying snares secretly; {N} they ask, who would see them.
64.6 ו יַחְפְּשׂוּ עוֹלֹת--    תַּמְנוּ, חֵפֶשׂ מְחֻפָּשׂ; וְקֶרֶב אִישׁ,    וְלֵב עָמֹק.   6  They search out iniquities, they have accomplished a diligent search; {N} even in the inward thought of every one, and the deep heart.
64.7 ז וַיֹּרֵם, אֱלֹהִים:    חֵץ פִּתְאוֹם--הָיוּ, מַכּוֹתָם.   7  But God doth shoot at them with an arrow suddenly; thence are their wounds.
64.8 ח וַיַּכְשִׁילוּהוּ עָלֵימוֹ לְשׁוֹנָם;    יִתְנֹדְדוּ, כָּל-רֹאֵה בָם.   8  So they make their own tongue a stumbling unto themselves; all that see them shake the head.
64.9 ט   9 וַיִּירְאוּ, כָּל-אָדָם:    וַיַּגִּידוּ, פֹּעַל אֱלֹהִים; וּמַעֲשֵׂהוּ הִשְׂכִּילוּ.  And all men fear; and they declare the work of God, and understand His doing.
64.10 י   1 יִשְׂמַח צַדִּיק בַּיהוָה, וְחָסָה בוֹ;    וְיִתְהַלְלוּ, כָּל-יִשְׁרֵי-לֵב.0  The righteous shall be glad in the LORD, and shall take refuge in Him; and all the upright in heart shall glory. {P}
65.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ מִזְמוֹר, לְדָוִד שִׁיר. לְךָ דֻמִיָּה תְהִלָּה אֱלֹהִים בְּצִיּוֹן;    וּלְךָ, יְשֻׁלַּם-נֶדֶר. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm. A Song of David. Praise waiteth for Thee, O God, in Zion; and unto Thee the vow is performed.
65.2 ב שֹׁמֵעַ תְּפִלָּה--    עָדֶיךָ, כָּל-בָּשָׂר יָבֹאוּ.   2  O Thou that hearest prayer, unto Thee doth all flesh come.
65.3 ג דִּבְרֵי עֲוֺנֹת, גָּבְרוּ מֶנִּי;    פְּשָׁעֵינוּ, אַתָּה תְכַפְּרֵם.   3  The tale of iniquities is too heavy for me; as for our transgressions, Thou wilt pardon them.
65.4 ד אַשְׁרֵי, תִּבְחַר וּתְקָרֵב--    יִשְׁכֹּן חֲצֵרֶיךָ: נִשְׂבְּעָה, בְּטוּב בֵּיתֶךָ;    קְדֹשׁ, הֵיכָלֶךָ.   4  Happy is the man whom Thou choosest, and bringest near, that he may dwell in Thy courts; {N} may we be satisfied with the goodness of Thy house, the holy place of Thy temple!
65.5 ה נוֹרָאוֹת, בְּצֶדֶק תַּעֲנֵנוּ--    אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעֵנוּ; מִבְטָח כָּל-קַצְוֵי-אֶרֶץ,    וְיָם רְחֹקִים.   5  With wondrous works dost Thou answer us in righteousness, O God of our salvation; {N} Thou the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of the far distant seas;
65.6 ו מֵכִין הָרִים בְּכֹחוֹ;    נֶאְזָר, בִּגְבוּרָה.   6  Who by Thy strength settest fast the mountains, who art girded about with might;
65.7 ז מַשְׁבִּיחַ, שְׁאוֹן יַמִּים--שְׁאוֹן גַּלֵּיהֶם;    וַהֲמוֹן לְאֻמִּים.   7  Who stillest the roaring of the seas, the roaring of their waves, and the tumult of the peoples;
65.8 ח וַיִּירְאוּ, יֹשְׁבֵי קְצָוֺת--מֵאוֹתֹתֶיךָ;    מוֹצָאֵי בֹקֶר וָעֶרֶב תַּרְנִין.   8  So that they that dwell in the uttermost parts stand in awe of Thy signs; Thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
65.9 ט   9 פָּקַדְתָּ הָאָרֶץ וַתְּשֹׁקְקֶהָ, רַבַּת תַּעְשְׁרֶנָּה--    פֶּלֶג אֱלֹהִים, מָלֵא מָיִם; תָּכִין דְּגָנָם,    כִּי-כֵן תְּכִינֶהָ.  Thou hast remembered the earth, and watered her, greatly enriching her, with the river of God that is full of water; {N} Thou preparest them corn, for so preparest Thou her.
65.10 י   1 תְּלָמֶיהָ רַוֵּה, נַחֵת גְּדוּדֶהָ;    בִּרְבִיבִים תְּמֹגְגֶנָּה, צִמְחָהּ תְּבָרֵךְ.0  Watering her ridges abundantly, settling down the furrows thereof, Thou makest her soft with showers; Thou blessest the growth thereof.
65.11 י עִטַּרְתָּ, שְׁנַת טוֹבָתֶךָ;    וּמַעְגָּלֶיךָ, יִרְעֲפוּן דָּשֶׁן.א   11  Thou crownest the year with Thy goodness; and Thy paths drop fatness.
65.12 י יִרְעֲפוּ, נְאוֹת מִדְבָּר;    וְגִיל, גְּבָעוֹת תַּחְגֹּרְנָה.ב   12  The pastures of the wilderness do drop; and the hills are girded with joy.
65.13 י לָבְשׁוּ כָרִים, הַצֹּאן--    וַעֲמָקִים יַעַטְפוּ-בָר; יִתְרוֹעֲעוּ,    אַף-יָשִׁירוּ.ג   13  The meadows are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn; {N} they shout for joy, yea, they sing. {P}
66.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, שִׁיר מִזְמוֹר:    הָרִיעוּ לֵאלֹהִים, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ. 1 For the Leader. A Song, a Psalm. Shout unto God, all the earth;
66.2 ב  זַמְּרוּ כְבוֹד-שְׁמוֹ;    שִׂימוּ כָבוֹד, תְּהִלָּתוֹ. 2 Sing praises unto the glory of His name; make His praise glorious.
66.3 ג  אִמְרוּ לֵאלֹהִים, מַה-נּוֹרָא מַעֲשֶׂיךָ;    בְּרֹב עֻזְּךָ, יְכַחֲשׁוּ לְךָ אֹיְבֶיךָ. 3 Say unto God: 'How tremendous is Thy work! Through the greatness of Thy power shall Thine enemies dwindle away before Thee.
66.4 ד  כָּל-הָאָרֶץ, יִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לְךָ--וִיזַמְּרוּ-לָךְ;    יְזַמְּרוּ שִׁמְךָ סֶלָה. 4 All the earth shall worship Thee, and shall sing praises unto Thee; they shall sing praises to Thy name.' Selah
66.5 ה  לְכוּ וּרְאוּ, מִפְעֲלוֹת אֱלֹהִים;    נוֹרָא עֲלִילָה, עַל-בְּנֵי אָדָם. 5 Come, and see the works of God; He is terrible in His doing toward the children of men.
66.6 ו  הָפַךְ יָם, לְיַבָּשָׁה--בַּנָּהָר, יַעַבְרוּ בְרָגֶל;    שָׁם, נִשְׂמְחָה-בּוֹ. 6 He turned the sea into dry land; they went through the river on foot; there let us rejoice in Him!
66.7 ז  מֹשֵׁל בִּגְבוּרָתוֹ, עוֹלָם--    עֵינָיו, בַּגּוֹיִם תִּצְפֶּינָה; הַסּוֹרְרִים,    אַל-ירימו (יָרוּמוּ) לָמוֹ סֶלָה. 7 Who ruleth by His might for ever; His eyes keep watch upon the nations; {N} let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah
66.8 ח  בָּרְכוּ עַמִּים אֱלֹהֵינוּ;    וְהַשְׁמִיעוּ, קוֹל תְּהִלָּתוֹ. 8 Bless our God, ye peoples, and make the voice of His praise to be heard;
66.9 ט  הַשָּׂם נַפְשֵׁנוּ, בַּחַיִּים;    וְלֹא-נָתַן לַמּוֹט רַגְלֵנוּ. 9 Who hath set our soul in life, and suffered not our foot to be moved,
66.10 י  כִּי-בְחַנְתָּנוּ אֱלֹהִים;    צְרַפְתָּנוּ, כִּצְרָף-כָּסֶף. 10 For Thou, O God, hast tried us; Thou hast refined us, as silver is refined.
66.11 יא  הֲבֵאתָנוּ בַמְּצוּדָה;    שַׂמְתָּ מוּעָקָה בְמָתְנֵינוּ. 11 Thou didst bring us into the hold; Thou didst lay constraint upon our loins.
66.12 יב  הִרְכַּבְתָּ אֱנוֹשׁ, לְרֹאשֵׁנוּ:    בָּאנוּ-בָאֵשׁ וּבַמַּיִם; וַתּוֹצִיאֵנוּ, לָרְוָיָה. 12 Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and through water; but Thou didst bring us out unto abundance.
66.13 יג  אָבוֹא בֵיתְךָ בְעוֹלוֹת;    אֲשַׁלֵּם לְךָ נְדָרָי. 13 I will come into Thy house with burnt-offerings, I will perform unto Thee my vows,
66.14 יד  אֲשֶׁר-פָּצוּ שְׂפָתָי;    וְדִבֶּר-פִּי, בַּצַּר-לִי. 14 Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in distress.
66.15 טו  עֹלוֹת מֵיחִים אַעֲלֶה-לָּךְ,    עִם-קְטֹרֶת אֵילִים; אֶעֱשֶׂה בָקָר עִם-עַתּוּדִים    סֶלָה. 15 I will offer unto Thee burnt-offerings of fatlings, with the sweet smoke of rams; {N} I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah
66.16 טז  לְכוּ-שִׁמְעוּ וַאֲסַפְּרָה, כָּל-יִרְאֵי אֱלֹהִים:    אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לְנַפְשִׁי. 16 Come, and hearken, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what He hath done for my soul.
66.17 יז  אֵלָיו פִּי-קָרָאתִי;    וְרוֹמַם, תַּחַת לְשׁוֹנִי. 17 I cried unto Him with my mouth, and He was extolled with my tongue.
66.18 יח  אָוֶן, אִם-רָאִיתִי בְלִבִּי--    לֹא יִשְׁמַע אֲדֹנָי. 18 If I had regarded iniquity in my heart, the Lord would not hear;
66.19 יט  אָכֵן, שָׁמַע אֱלֹהִים;    הִקְשִׁיב, בְּקוֹל תְּפִלָּתִי. 19 But verily God hath heard; He hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
66.20 כ  בָּרוּךְ אֱלֹהִים--    אֲשֶׁר לֹא-הֵסִיר תְּפִלָּתִי וְחַסְדּוֹ, מֵאִתִּי. 20 Blessed be God, who hath not turned away my prayer, nor His mercy from me. {P}
67.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ בִּנְגִינֹת, מִזְמוֹר שִׁיר. אֱלֹהִים, יְחָנֵּנוּ וִיבָרְכֵנוּ;    יָאֵר פָּנָיו אִתָּנוּ סֶלָה. 1 For the Leader; with string-music. A Psalm, a Song. God be gracious unto us, and bless us; may He cause His face to shine toward us; Selah
67.2 ב לָדַעַת בָּאָרֶץ דַּרְכֶּךָ;    בְּכָל-גּוֹיִם, יְשׁוּעָתֶךָ.   2  That Thy way may be known upon earth, Thy salvation among all nations.
67.3 ג יוֹדוּךָ עַמִּים אֱלֹהִים:    יוֹדוּךָ, עַמִּים כֻּלָּם.   3  Let the peoples give thanks unto Thee, O God; let the peoples give thanks unto Thee, all of them.
67.4 ד יִשְׂמְחוּ וִירַנְּנוּ,    לְאֻמִּים: כִּי-תִשְׁפֹּט עַמִּים מִישֹׁר;    וּלְאֻמִּים, בָּאָרֶץ תַּנְחֵם סֶלָה.   4  O let the nations be glad and sing for joy; {N} for Thou wilt judge the peoples with equity, and lead the nations upon earth. Selah
67.5 ה יוֹדוּךָ עַמִּים אֱלֹהִים:    יוֹדוּךָ, עַמִּים כֻּלָּם.   5  Let the peoples give thanks unto Thee, O God; let the peoples give thanks unto Thee, all of them.
67.6 ו אֶרֶץ, נָתְנָה יְבוּלָהּ;    יְבָרְכֵנוּ, אֱלֹהִים אֱלֹהֵינוּ.   6  The earth hath yielded her increase; may God, our own God, bless us.
67.7 ז יְבָרְכֵנוּ אֱלֹהִים;    וְיִירְאוּ אוֹתוֹ, כָּל-אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ.   7  May God bless us; and let all the ends of the earth fear Him. {P}
68.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לְדָוִד, מִזְמוֹר שִׁיר. יָקוּם אֱלֹהִים, יָפוּצוּ אוֹיְבָיו;    וְיָנוּסוּ מְשַׂנְאָיו, מִפָּנָיו. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David, a Song. Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered; and let them that hate Him flee before Him.
68.2 ב כְּהִנְדֹּף עָשָׁן,    תִּנְדֹּף: כְּהִמֵּס דּוֹנַג, מִפְּנֵי-אֵשׁ--    יֹאבְדוּ רְשָׁעִים, מִפְּנֵי אֱלֹהִים.   2  As smoke is driven away, so drive them away; {N} as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
68.3 ג וְצַדִּיקִים--יִשְׂמְחוּ יַעַלְצוּ, לִפְנֵי אֱלֹהִים;    וְיָשִׂישׂוּ בְשִׂמְחָה.   3  But let the righteous be glad, let them exult before God; yea, let them rejoice with gladness.
68.4 ד שִׁירוּ, לֵאלֹהִים--    זַמְּרוּ שְׁמוֹ: סֹלּוּ, לָרֹכֵב בָּעֲרָבוֹת--בְּיָהּ שְׁמוֹ;    וְעִלְזוּ לְפָנָיו.   4  Sing unto God, sing praises to His name; {N} extol Him that rideth upon the skies, whose name is the LORD; and exult ye before Him.
68.5 ה אֲבִי יְתוֹמִים, וְדַיַּן אַלְמָנוֹת--    אֱלֹהִים, בִּמְעוֹן קָדְשׁוֹ.   5  A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in His holy habitation.
68.6 ו אֱלֹהִים, מוֹשִׁיב יְחִידִים בַּיְתָה--    מוֹצִיא אֲסִירִים, בַּכּוֹשָׁרוֹת; אַךְ סוֹרְרִים,    שָׁכְנוּ צְחִיחָה.   6  God maketh the solitary to dwell in a house; He bringeth out the prisoners into prosperity; {N} the rebellious dwell but in a parched land.
68.7 ז אֱלֹהִים--בְּצֵאתְךָ, לִפְנֵי עַמֶּךָ;    בְּצַעְדְּךָ בִישִׁימוֹן סֶלָה.   7  O God, when Thou wentest forth before Thy people, when Thou didst march through the wilderness; Selah
68.8 ח אֶרֶץ רָעָשָׁה, אַף-שָׁמַיִם נָטְפוּ--    מִפְּנֵי אֱלֹהִים: זֶה סִינַי--    מִפְּנֵי אֱלֹהִים, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל.   8  The earth trembled, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God; {N} even yon Sinai trembled at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
68.9 ט   9 גֶּשֶׁם נְדָבוֹת, תָּנִיף אֱלֹהִים;    נַחֲלָתְךָ וְנִלְאָה, אַתָּה כוֹנַנְתָּהּ.  A bounteous rain didst Thou pour down, O God; when Thine inheritance was weary, Thou didst confirm it.
68.10 י   1 חַיָּתְךָ יָשְׁבוּ-בָהּ;    תָּכִין בְּטוֹבָתְךָ לֶעָנִי אֱלֹהִים.0  Thy flock settled therein; Thou didst prepare in Thy goodness for the poor, O God.
68.11 י אֲדֹנָי יִתֶּן-אֹמֶר;    הַמְבַשְּׂרוֹת, צָבָא רָב.א   11  The Lord giveth the word; the women that proclaim the tidings are a great host.
68.12 י מַלְכֵי צְבָאוֹת, יִדֹּדוּן יִדֹּדוּן;    וּנְוַת-בַּיִת, תְּחַלֵּק שָׁלָל.ב   12  Kings of armies flee, they flee; and she that tarrieth at home divideth the spoil.
68.13 י אִם-תִּשְׁכְּבוּן,    בֵּין שְׁפַתָּיִם: כַּנְפֵי יוֹנָה, נֶחְפָּה בַכֶּסֶף;    וְאֶבְרוֹתֶיהָ, בִּירַקְרַק חָרוּץ.ג   13  When ye lie among the sheepfolds, {N} the wings of the dove are covered with silver, and her pinions with the shimmer of gold.
68.14 י בְּפָרֵשׂ שַׁדַּי מְלָכִים בָּהּ--    תַּשְׁלֵג בְּצַלְמוֹן.ד   14  When the Almighty scattereth kings therein, it snoweth in Zalmon.
68.15 ט הַר-אֱלֹהִים הַר-בָּשָׁן:    הַר גַּבְנֻנִּים, הַר-בָּשָׁן.ו   15  A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan; a mountain of peaks is the mountain of Bashan.
68.16 ט לָמָּה, תְּרַצְּדוּן--    הָרִים גַּבְנֻנִּים: הָהָר--חָמַד אֱלֹהִים לְשִׁבְתּוֹ;    אַף-יְהוָה, יִשְׁכֹּן לָנֶצַח.ז   16  Why look ye askance, ye mountains of peaks, {N} at the mountain which God hath desired for His abode? Yea, the LORD will dwell therein for ever.
68.17 י רֶכֶב אֱלֹהִים, רִבֹּתַיִם אַלְפֵי שִׁנְאָן;    אֲדֹנָי בָם, סִינַי בַּקֹּדֶשׁ.ז   17  The chariots of God are myriads, even thousands upon thousands; the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in holiness.
68.18 י עָלִיתָ לַמָּרוֹם, שָׁבִיתָ שֶּׁבִי--    לָקַחְתָּ מַתָּנוֹת, בָּאָדָם; וְאַף סוֹרְרִים,    לִשְׁכֹּן יָהּ אֱלֹהִים.ח   18  Thou hast ascended on high, Thou hast led captivity captive; Thou hast received gifts among men, {N} yea, among the rebellious also, that the LORD God might dwell there.
68.19 י בָּרוּךְ אֲדֹנָי, יוֹם יוֹם:    יַעֲמָס-לָנוּ--הָאֵל יְשׁוּעָתֵנוּ סֶלָה.ט   19  Blessed be the Lord, day by day He beareth our burden, even the God who is our salvation. Selah
68.20 כ   2 הָאֵל לָנוּ, אֵל לְמוֹשָׁעוֹת:    וְלֵיהוִה אֲדֹנָי--לַמָּוֶת, תֹּצָאוֹת.0  God is unto us a God of deliverances; and unto GOD the Lord belong the issues of death.
68.21 כ אַךְ-אֱלֹהִים--יִמְחַץ, רֹאשׁ אֹיְבָיו:    קָדְקֹד שֵׂעָר--מִתְהַלֵּךְ, בַּאֲשָׁמָיו.א   21  Surely God will smite through the head of His enemies, the hairy scalp of him that goeth about in his guiltiness.
68.22 כ אָמַר אֲדֹנָי, מִבָּשָׁן אָשִׁיב;    אָשִׁיב, מִמְּצֻלוֹת יָם.ב   22  The Lord said: 'I will bring back from Bashan, I will bring them back from the depths of the sea;
68.23 כ לְמַעַן, תִּמְחַץ רַגְלְךָ--בְּדָם:    לְשׁוֹן כְּלָבֶיךָ--מֵאֹיְבִים מִנֵּהוּ.ג   23  That thy foot may wade through blood, that the tongue of thy dogs may have its portion from thine enemies.'
68.24 כ רָאוּ הֲלִיכוֹתֶיךָ אֱלֹהִים;    הֲלִיכוֹת אֵלִי מַלְכִּי בַקֹּדֶשׁ.ד   24  They see Thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King, in holiness.
68.25 כ קִדְּמוּ שָׁרִים, אַחַר נֹגְנִים;    בְּתוֹךְ עֲלָמוֹת, תּוֹפֵפוֹת.ה   25  The singers go before, the minstrels follow after, in the midst of damsels playing upon timbrels.
68.26 כ בְּמַקְהֵלוֹת, בָּרְכוּ אֱלֹהִים;    אֲדֹנָי, מִמְּקוֹר יִשְׂרָאֵל.ו   26  'Bless ye God in full assemblies, even the Lord, ye that are from the fountain of Israel.'
68.27 כ שָׁם בִּנְיָמִן, צָעִיר רֹדֵם--שָׂרֵי יְהוּדָה, רִגְמָתָם;    שָׂרֵי זְבֻלוּן, שָׂרֵי נַפְתָּלִי.ז   27  There is Benjamin, the youngest, ruling them, the princes of Judah their council, the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.
68.28 כ צִוָּה אֱלֹהֶיךָ, עֻזֶּךָ:    עוּזָּה אֱלֹהִים--זוּ, פָּעַלְתָּ לָּנוּ.ח   28  Thy God hath commanded thy strength; be strong, O God, Thou that hast wrought for us
68.29 כ מֵהֵיכָלֶךָ, עַל-יְרוּשָׁלִָם--    לְךָ יוֹבִילוּ מְלָכִים שָׁי.ט   29  Out of Thy temple at Jerusalem, whither kings shall bring presents unto Thee.
68.30 ל   3 גְּעַר חַיַּת קָנֶה, עֲדַת אַבִּירִים בְּעֶגְלֵי עַמִּים--    מִתְרַפֵּס בְּרַצֵּי-כָסֶף; בִּזַּר עַמִּים,    קְרָבוֹת יֶחְפָּצוּ.0  Rebuke the wild beast of the reeds, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the peoples, every one submitting himself with pieces of silver; {N} He hath scattered the peoples that delight in war!
68.31 ל יֶאֱתָיוּ חַשְׁמַנִּים, מִנִּי מִצְרָיִם;    כּוּשׁ תָּרִיץ יָדָיו, לֵאלֹהִים.א   31  Nobles shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall hasten to stretch out her hands unto God.
68.32 ל מַמְלְכוֹת הָאָרֶץ, שִׁירוּ לֵאלֹהִים;    זַמְּרוּ אֲדֹנָי סֶלָה.ב   32  Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto the Lord; Selah
68.33 ל לָרֹכֵב, בִּשְׁמֵי שְׁמֵי-קֶדֶם--    הֵן יִתֵּן בְּקוֹלוֹ, קוֹל עֹז.ג   33  To Him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which are of old; lo, He uttereth His voice, a mighty voice.
68.34 ל תְּנוּ עֹז, לֵאלֹהִים:    עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל גַּאֲוָתוֹ; וְעֻזּוֹ, בַּשְּׁחָקִים.ד   34  Ascribe ye strength unto God; His majesty is over Israel, and His strength is in the skies.
68.35 ל נוֹרָא אֱלֹהִים,    מִמִּקְדָּשֶׁיךָ: אֵל יִשְׂרָאֵל--    הוּא נֹתֵן עֹז וְתַעֲצֻמוֹת לָעָם; בָּרוּךְ אֱלֹהִים.ה   35  Awful is God out of thy holy places; {N} the God of Israel, He giveth strength and power unto the people; {N} blessed be God. {P}
69.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-שׁוֹשַׁנִּים לְדָוִד. הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי אֱלֹהִים--    כִּי בָאוּ מַיִם עַד-נָפֶשׁ. 1 For the Leader; upon Shoshannim. [A Psalm] of David. Save me, O God; for the waters are come in even unto the soul.
69.2 ב טָבַעְתִּי, בִּיוֵן מְצוּלָה--    וְאֵין מָעֳמָד; בָּאתִי בְמַעֲמַקֵּי-מַיִם,    וְשִׁבֹּלֶת שְׁטָפָתְנִי.   2  I am sunk in deep mire, where there is no standing; {N} I am come into deep waters, and the flood overwhelmeth me.
69.3 ג יָגַעְתִּי בְקָרְאִי, נִחַר גְּרוֹנִי:    כָּלוּ עֵינַי--מְיַחֵל, לֵאלֹהָי.   3  I am weary of my crying; my throat is dried; mine eyes fail while I wait for my God.
69.4 ד רַבּוּ, מִשַּׂעֲרוֹת רֹאשִׁי--    שֹׂנְאַי חִנָּם: עָצְמוּ מַצְמִיתַי, אֹיְבַי שֶׁקֶר--    אֲשֶׁר לֹא-גָזַלְתִּי, אָז אָשִׁיב.   4  They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head; {N} they that would cut me off, being mine enemies wrongfully, are many; should I restore that which I took not away?
69.5 ה אֱלֹהִים--אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ, לְאִוַּלְתִּי;    וְאַשְׁמוֹתַי, מִמְּךָ לֹא-נִכְחָדוּ.   5  O God, Thou knowest my folly; and my trespasses are not hid from Thee.
69.6 ו אַל-יֵבֹשׁוּ בִי, קֹוֶיךָ--    אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, צְבָאוֹת: אַל-יִכָּלְמוּ בִי מְבַקְשֶׁיךָ--    אֱלֹהֵי, יִשְׂרָאֵל.   6  Let not them that wait for Thee be ashamed through me, O Lord GOD of hosts; {N} let not those that seek Thee be brought to confusion through me, O God of Israel.
69.7 ז כִּי-עָלֶיךָ, נָשָׂאתִי חֶרְפָּה;    כִּסְּתָה כְלִמָּה פָנָי.   7  Because for Thy sake I have borne reproach; confusion hath covered my face.
69.8 ח מוּזָר, הָיִיתִי לְאֶחָי;    וְנָכְרִי, לִבְנֵי אִמִּי.   8  I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children.
69.9 ט   9 כִּי-קִנְאַת בֵּיתְךָ אֲכָלָתְנִי;    וְחֶרְפּוֹת חוֹרְפֶיךָ, נָפְלוּ עָלָי.  Because zeal for Thy house hath eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that reproach Thee are fallen upon me.
69.10 י   1 וָאֶבְכֶּה בַצּוֹם נַפְשִׁי;    וַתְּהִי לַחֲרָפוֹת לִי.0  And I wept with my soul fasting, and that became unto me a reproach.
69.11 י וָאֶתְּנָה לְבוּשִׁי שָׂק;    וָאֱהִי לָהֶם לְמָשָׁל.א   11  I made sackcloth also my garment, and I became a byword unto them.
69.12 י יָשִׂיחוּ בִי, יֹשְׁבֵי שָׁעַר;    וּנְגִינוֹת, שׁוֹתֵי שֵׁכָר.ב   12  They that sit in the gate talk of me; and I am the song of the drunkards.
69.13 י וַאֲנִי תְפִלָּתִי-לְךָ יְהוָה, עֵת רָצוֹן--    אֱלֹהִים בְּרָב-חַסְדֶּךָ; עֲנֵנִי,    בֶּאֱמֶת יִשְׁעֶךָ.ג   13  But as for me, let my prayer be unto Thee, O LORD, in an acceptable time; O God, in the abundance of Thy mercy, {N} answer me with the truth of Thy salvation.
69.14 י הַצִּילֵנִי מִטִּיט, וְאַל-אֶטְבָּעָה;    אִנָּצְלָה מִשֹּׂנְאַי, וּמִמַּעֲמַקֵּי מָיִם.ד   14  Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink; let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.
69.15 ט אַל-תִּשְׁטְפֵנִי, שִׁבֹּלֶת מַיִם--    וְאַל-תִּבְלָעֵנִי מְצוּלָה; וְאַל-תֶּאְטַר-עָלַי בְּאֵר    פִּיהָ.ו   15  Let not the waterflood overwhelm me, neither let the deep swallow me up; {N} and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
69.16 ט עֲנֵנִי יְהוָה, כִּי-טוֹב חַסְדֶּךָ;    כְּרֹב רַחֲמֶיךָ, פְּנֵה אֵלָי.ז   16  Answer me, O LORD, for Thy mercy is good; according to the multitude of Thy compassions turn Thou unto me.
69.17 י וְאַל-תַּסְתֵּר פָּנֶיךָ, מֵעַבְדֶּךָ:    כִּי-צַר-לִי, מַהֵר עֲנֵנִי.ז   17  And hide not Thy face from Thy servant; for I am in distress; answer me speedily.
69.18 י קָרְבָה אֶל-נַפְשִׁי גְאָלָהּ;    לְמַעַן אֹיְבַי פְּדֵנִי.ח   18  Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it; ransom me because of mine enemies.
69.19 י אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ--חֶרְפָּתִי וּבָשְׁתִּי, וּכְלִמָּתִי;    נֶגְדְּךָ, כָּל-צוֹרְרָי.ט   19  Thou knowest my reproach, and my shame, and my confusion; mine adversaries are all before Thee.
69.20 כ   2 חֶרְפָּה, שָׁבְרָה לִבִּי--    וָאָנוּשָׁה: וָאֲקַוֶּה לָנוּד וָאַיִן;    וְלַמְנַחֲמִים, וְלֹא מָצָאתִי.0  Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am sore sick; {N} and I looked for some to show compassion, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.
69.21 כ וַיִּתְּנוּ בְּבָרוּתִי רֹאשׁ;    וְלִצְמָאִי, יַשְׁקוּנִי חֹמֶץ.א   21  Yea, they put poison into my food; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
69.22 כ יְהִי-שֻׁלְחָנָם לִפְנֵיהֶם לְפָח;    וְלִשְׁלוֹמִים לְמוֹקֵשׁ.ב   22  Let their table before them become a snare; and when they are in peace, let it become a trap.
69.23 כ תֶּחְשַׁכְנָה עֵינֵיהֶם, מֵרְאוֹת;    וּמָתְנֵיהֶם, תָּמִיד הַמְעַד.ג   23  Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make their loins continually to totter.
69.24 כ שְׁפָךְ-עֲלֵיהֶם זַעְמֶךָ;    וַחֲרוֹן אַפְּךָ, יַשִּׂיגֵם.ד   24  Pour out Thine indignation upon them, and let the fierceness of Thine anger overtake them.
69.25 כ תְּהִי-טִירָתָם נְשַׁמָּה;    בְּאָהֳלֵיהֶם, אַל-יְהִי יֹשֵׁב.ה   25  Let their encampment be desolate; let none dwell in their tents.
69.26 כ כִּי-אַתָּה אֲשֶׁר-הִכִּיתָ רָדָפוּ;    וְאֶל-מַכְאוֹב חֲלָלֶיךָ יְסַפֵּרוּ.ו   26  For they persecute him whom Thou hast smitten; and they tell of the pain of those whom Thou hast wounded.
69.27 כ תְּנָה-עָוֺן, עַל-עֲוֺנָם;    וְאַל-יָבֹאוּ, בְּצִדְקָתֶךָ.ז   27  Add iniquity unto their iniquity; and let them not come into Thy righteousness.
69.28 כ יִמָּחוּ, מִסֵּפֶר חַיִּים;    וְעִם צַדִּיקִים, אַל-יִכָּתֵבוּ.ח   28  Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous.
69.29 כ וַאֲנִי, עָנִי וְכוֹאֵב;    יְשׁוּעָתְךָ אֱלֹהִים תְּשַׂגְּבֵנִי.ט   29  But I am afflicted and in pain; let Thy salvation, O God, set me up on high.
69.30 ל   3 אֲהַלְלָה שֵׁם-אֱלֹהִים בְּשִׁיר;    וַאֲגַדְּלֶנּוּ בְתוֹדָה.0  I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify Him with thanksgiving.
69.31 ל וְתִיטַב לַיהוָה, מִשּׁוֹר פָּר;    מַקְרִן מַפְרִיס.א   31  And it shall please the LORD better than a bullock that hath horns and hoofs.
69.32 ל רָאוּ עֲנָוִים יִשְׂמָחוּ;    דֹּרְשֵׁי אֱלֹהִים, וִיחִי לְבַבְכֶם.ב   32  The humble shall see it, and be glad; ye that seek after God, let your heart revive.
69.33 ל כִּי-שֹׁמֵעַ אֶל-אֶבְיוֹנִים יְהוָה;    וְאֶת-אֲסִירָיו, לֹא בָזָה.ג   33  For the LORD hearkeneth unto the needy, and despiseth not His prisoners.
69.34 ל יְהַלְלוּהוּ, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ;    יַמִּים, וְכָל-רֹמֵשׂ בָּם.ד   34  Let heaven and earth praise Him, the seas, and every thing that moveth therein.
69.35 ל כִּי אֱלֹהִים, יוֹשִׁיעַ צִיּוֹן, וְיִבְנֶה, עָרֵי יְהוּדָה;    וְיָשְׁבוּ שָׁם, וִירֵשׁוּהָ.ה   35  For God will save Zion, and build the cities of Judah; and they shall abide there, and have it in possession.
69.36 ל וְזֶרַע עֲבָדָיו, יִנְחָלוּהָ;    וְאֹהֲבֵי שְׁמוֹ, יִשְׁכְּנוּ-בָהּ.ו   36  The seed also of His servants shall inherit it; and they that love His name shall dwell therein. {P}
70.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְדָוִד לְהַזְכִּיר.    אֱלֹהִים לְהַצִּילֵנִי; יְהוָה, לְעֶזְרָתִי חוּשָׁה. 1 For the Leader. [A Psalm] of David; to make memorial.  2 O God, to deliver me, O LORD, to help me, make haste.
70.2 ב  יֵבֹשׁוּ וְיַחְפְּרוּ, מְבַקְשֵׁי נַפְשִׁי:    יִסֹּגוּ אָחוֹר, וְיִכָּלְמוּ; חֲפֵצֵי, רָעָתִי. 3 Let them be ashamed and abashed that seek after my soul; let them be turned backward and brought to confusion that delight in my hurt.
70.3 ג  יָשׁוּבוּ, עַל-עֵקֶב בָּשְׁתָּם--    הָאֹמְרִים, הֶאָח הֶאָח. 4 Let them be turned back by reason of their shame that say: 'Aha, aha.'
70.4 ד  יָשִׂישׂוּ וְיִשְׂמְחוּ, בְּךָ--    כָּל-מְבַקְשֶׁיךָ: וְיֹאמְרוּ תָמִיד, יִגְדַּל אֱלֹהִים--    אֹהֲבֵי, יְשׁוּעָתֶךָ. 5 Let all those that seek Thee rejoice and be glad in Thee; {N} and let such as love Thy salvation say continually: 'Let God be magnified.'
70.5 ה  וַאֲנִי, עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן--    אֱלֹהִים חוּשָׁה-לִּי: עֶזְרִי וּמְפַלְטִי אַתָּה;    יְהוָה, אַל-תְּאַחַר. 6 But I am poor and needy; O God, make haste unto me; {N} Thou art my help and my deliverer; O LORD, tarry not. {P}
71.1 א  בְּךָ-יְהוָה חָסִיתִי;    אַל-אֵבוֹשָׁה לְעוֹלָם. 1 In Thee, O LORD, have I taken refuge; let me never be ashamed.
71.2 ב  בְּצִדְקָתְךָ, תַּצִּילֵנִי וּתְפַלְּטֵנִי;    הַטֵּה-אֵלַי אָזְנְךָ, וְהוֹשִׁיעֵנִי. 2 Deliver me in Thy righteousness, and rescue me; incline Thine ear unto me, and save me.
71.3 ג  הֱיֵה לִי, לְצוּר מָעוֹן לָבוֹא--    תָּמִיד, צִוִּיתָ לְהוֹשִׁיעֵנִי: כִּי-סַלְעִי וּמְצוּדָתִי    אָתָּה. 3 Be Thou to me a sheltering rock, whereunto I may continually resort, which Thou hast appointed to save me; {N} for Thou art my rock and my fortress.
71.4 ד  אֱלֹהַי--פַּלְּטֵנִי, מִיַּד רָשָׁע;    מִכַּף מְעַוֵּל וְחוֹמֵץ. 4 O my God, rescue me out of the hand of the wicked, out of the grasp of the unrighteous and ruthless man.
71.5 ה  כִּי-אַתָּה תִקְוָתִי;    אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה, מִבְטַחִי מִנְּעוּרָי. 5 For Thou art my hope; O Lord GOD, my trust from my youth.
71.6 ו  עָלֶיךָ, נִסְמַכְתִּי מִבֶּטֶן--מִמְּעֵי אִמִּי, אַתָּה גוֹזִי;    בְּךָ תְהִלָּתִי תָמִיד. 6 Upon Thee have I stayed myself from birth; Thou art He that took me out of my mother's womb; my praise is continually of Thee.
71.7 ז  כְּמוֹפֵת, הָיִיתִי לְרַבִּים;    וְאַתָּה, מַחֲסִי-עֹז. 7 I am as a wonder unto many; but Thou art my strong refuge.
71.8 ח  יִמָּלֵא פִי, תְּהִלָּתֶךָ;    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, תִּפְאַרְתֶּךָ. 8 My mouth shall be filled with Thy praise, and with Thy glory all the day.
71.9 ט  אַל-תַּשְׁלִיכֵנִי, לְעֵת זִקְנָה;    כִּכְלוֹת כֹּחִי, אַל-תַּעַזְבֵנִי. 9 Cast me not off in the time of old age; when my strength faileth, forsake me not.
71.10 י  כִּי-אָמְרוּ אוֹיְבַי לִי;    וְשֹׁמְרֵי נַפְשִׁי, נוֹעֲצוּ יַחְדָּו. 10 For mine enemies speak concerning me, and they that watch for my soul take counsel together,
71.11 יא  לֵאמֹר, אֱלֹהִים עֲזָבוֹ;    רִדְפוּ וְתִפְשׂוּהוּ, כִּי-אֵין מַצִּיל. 11 Saying: 'God hath forsaken him; pursue and take him; for there is none to deliver.'
71.12 יב  אֱלֹהִים, אַל-תִּרְחַק מִמֶּנִּי;    אֱלֹהַי, לְעֶזְרָתִי חישה (חוּשָׁה). 12 O God, be not far from me; O my God, make haste to help me.
71.13 יג  יֵבֹשׁוּ יִכְלוּ, שֹׂטְנֵי נַפְשִׁי:    יַעֲטוּ חֶרְפָּה, וּכְלִמָּה--מְבַקְשֵׁי, רָעָתִי. 13 Let them be ashamed and consumed that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered with reproach and confusion that seek my hurt.
71.14 יד  וַאֲנִי, תָּמִיד אֲיַחֵל;    וְהוֹסַפְתִּי, עַל-כָּל-תְּהִלָּתֶךָ. 14 But as for me, I will hope continually, and will praise Thee yet more and more.
71.15 טו  פִּי, יְסַפֵּר צִדְקָתֶךָ--כָּל-הַיּוֹם תְּשׁוּעָתֶךָ:    כִּי לֹא יָדַעְתִּי סְפֹרוֹת. 15 My mouth shall tell of Thy righteousness, and of Thy salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers thereof.
71.16 טז  אָבוֹא--בִּגְבֻרוֹת, אֲדֹנָי יְהוִה;    אַזְכִּיר צִדְקָתְךָ לְבַדֶּךָ. 16 I will come with Thy mighty acts, O Lord GOD; I will make mention of Thy righteousness, even of Thine only.
71.17 יז  אֱלֹהִים, לִמַּדְתַּנִי מִנְּעוּרָי;    וְעַד-הֵנָּה, אַגִּיד נִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ. 17 O God, Thou hast taught me from my youth; and until now do I declare Thy wondrous works.
71.18 יח  וְגַם עַד-זִקְנָה, וְשֵׂיבָה--    אֱלֹהִים אַל-תַּעַזְבֵנִי: עַד-אַגִּיד זְרוֹעֲךָ לְדוֹר;    לְכָל-יָבוֹא, גְּבוּרָתֶךָ. 18 And even unto old age and hoary hairs, O God, forsake me not; {N} until I have declared Thy strength unto the next generation, Thy might to every one that is to come.
71.19 יט  וְצִדְקָתְךָ אֱלֹהִים,    עַד-מָרוֹם: אֲשֶׁר-עָשִׂיתָ גְדֹלוֹת;    אֱלֹהִים, מִי כָמוֹךָ. 19 Thy righteousness also, O God, which reacheth unto high heaven; {N} Thou who hast done great things, O God, who is like unto Thee?
71.20 כ  אֲשֶׁר הראיתנו (הִרְאִיתַנִי), צָרוֹת רַבּוֹת--    וְרָעוֹת: תָּשׁוּב תחינו (תְּחַיֵּנִי);    וּמִתְּהֹמוֹת הָאָרֶץ, תָּשׁוּב תַּעֲלֵנִי. 20 Thou, who hast made me to see many and sore troubles, {N} wilt quicken me again, and bring me up again from the depths of the earth.
71.21 כא  תֶּרֶב גְּדֻלָּתִי;    וְתִסֹּב תְּנַחֲמֵנִי. 21 Thou wilt increase my greatness, and turn and comfort me.
71.22 כב  גַּם-אֲנִי, אוֹדְךָ בִכְלִי-נֶבֶל--    אֲמִתְּךָ אֱלֹהָי: אֲזַמְּרָה לְךָ בְכִנּוֹר--    קְדוֹשׁ, יִשְׂרָאֵל. 22 I also will give thanks unto Thee with the psaltery, even unto Thy truth, O my God; {N} I will sing praises unto Thee with the harp, O Thou Holy One of Israel.
71.23 כג  תְּרַנֵּנָּה שְׂפָתַי, כִּי אֲזַמְּרָה-לָּךְ;    וְנַפְשִׁי, אֲשֶׁר פָּדִיתָ. 23 My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing praises unto Thee; and my soul, which Thou hast redeemed.
71.24 כד  גַּם-לְשׁוֹנִי--    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, תֶּהְגֶּה צִדְקָתֶךָ: כִּי-בֹשׁוּ כִי-חָפְרוּ,    מְבַקְשֵׁי רָעָתִי. 24 My tongue also shall tell of Thy righteousness all the day; {N} for they are ashamed, for they are abashed, that seek my hurt. {P}
72.1 א  לִשְׁלֹמֹה:    אֱלֹהִים--מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ, לְמֶלֶךְ תֵּן; וְצִדְקָתְךָ לְבֶן-מֶלֶךְ. 1 [A Psalm] of Solomon. Give the king Thy judgments, O God, and Thy righteousness unto the king's son;
72.2 ב  יָדִין עַמְּךָ בְצֶדֶק;    וַעֲנִיֶּיךָ בְמִשְׁפָּט. 2 That he may judge Thy people with righteousness, and Thy poor with justice.
72.3 ג  יִשְׂאוּ הָרִים שָׁלוֹם לָעָם;    וּגְבָעוֹת, בִּצְדָקָה. 3 Let the mountains bear peace to the people, and the hills, through righteousness.
72.4 ד  יִשְׁפֹּט, עֲנִיֵּי-עָם--יוֹשִׁיעַ, לִבְנֵי אֶבְיוֹן;    וִידַכֵּא עוֹשֵׁק. 4 May he judge the poor of the people, and save the children of the needy, and crush the oppressor.
72.5 ה  יִירָאוּךָ עִם-שָׁמֶשׁ;    וְלִפְנֵי יָרֵחַ, דּוֹר דּוֹרִים. 5 They shall fear Thee while the sun endureth, and so long as the moon, throughout all generations.
72.6 ו  יֵרֵד, כְּמָטָר עַל-גֵּז;    כִּרְבִיבִים, זַרְזִיף אָרֶץ. 6 May he come down like rain upon the mown grass, as showers that water the earth.
72.7 ז  יִפְרַח-בְּיָמָיו צַדִּיק;    וְרֹב שָׁלוֹם, עַד-בְּלִי יָרֵחַ. 7 In his days let the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, till the moon be no more.
72.8 ח  וְיֵרְדְּ, מִיָּם עַד-יָם;    וּמִנָּהָר, עַד-אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ. 8 May he have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the River unto the ends of the earth.
72.9 ט  לְפָנָיו, יִכְרְעוּ צִיִּים;    וְאֹיְבָיו, עָפָר יְלַחֵכוּ. 9 Let them that dwell in the wilderness bow before him; and his enemies lick the dust.
72.10 י  מַלְכֵי תַרְשִׁישׁ וְאִיִּים,    מִנְחָה יָשִׁיבוּ; מַלְכֵי שְׁבָא וּסְבָא,    אֶשְׁכָּר יַקְרִיבוּ. 10 The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall render tribute; {N} the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
72.11 יא  וְיִשְׁתַּחֲווּ-לוֹ כָל-מְלָכִים;    כָּל-גּוֹיִם יַעַבְדוּהוּ. 11 Yea, all kings shall prostrate themselves before him; all nations shall serve him.
72.12 יב  כִּי-יַצִּיל, אֶבְיוֹן מְשַׁוֵּעַ;    וְעָנִי, וְאֵין-עֹזֵר לוֹ. 12 For he will deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no helper.
72.13 יג  יָחֹס, עַל-דַּל וְאֶבְיוֹן;    וְנַפְשׁוֹת אֶבְיוֹנִים יוֹשִׁיעַ. 13 He will have pity on the poor and needy, and the souls of the needy he will save.
72.14 יד  מִתּוֹךְ וּמֵחָמָס, יִגְאַל נַפְשָׁם;    וְיֵיקַר דָּמָם בְּעֵינָיו. 14 He will redeem their soul from oppression and violence, and precious will their blood be in his sight;
72.15 טו  וִיחִי--    וְיִתֶּן-לוֹ, מִזְּהַב שְׁבָא: וְיִתְפַּלֵּל בַּעֲדוֹ תָמִיד;    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, יְבָרְכֶנְהוּ. 15 That they may live, and that he may give them of the gold of Sheba, {N} that they may pray for him continually, yea, bless him all the day.
72.16 טז  יְהִי פִסַּת-בַּר, בָּאָרֶץ--    בְּרֹאשׁ הָרִים: יִרְעַשׁ כַּלְּבָנוֹן פִּרְיוֹ;    וְיָצִיצוּ מֵעִיר, כְּעֵשֶׂב הָאָרֶץ. 16 May he be as a rich cornfield in the land upon the top of the mountains; {N} may his fruit rustle like Lebanon; and may they blossom out of the city like grass of the earth.
72.17 יז  יְהִי שְׁמוֹ, לְעוֹלָם--    לִפְנֵי-שֶׁמֶשׁ, ינין (יִנּוֹן) שְׁמוֹ: וְיִתְבָּרְכוּ בוֹ;    כָּל-גּוֹיִם יְאַשְּׁרוּהוּ. 17 May his name endure for ever; may his name be continued as long as the sun; {N} may men also bless themselves by him; may all nations call him happy.
72.18 יח  בָּרוּךְ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים--אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל:    עֹשֵׂה נִפְלָאוֹת לְבַדּוֹ. 18 Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things;
72.19 יט  וּבָרוּךְ, שֵׁם כְּבוֹדוֹ--    לְעוֹלָם: וְיִמָּלֵא כְבוֹדוֹ, אֶת-כֹּל הָאָרֶץ--    אָמֵן וְאָמֵן. 19 And blessed be His glorious name for ever; {N} and let the whole earth be filled with His glory. Amen, and Amen.
72.20 כ  כָּלּוּ תְפִלּוֹת--    דָּוִד, בֶּן-יִשָׁי. 20 The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended. {P}
73.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְאָסָף: אַךְ טוֹב לְיִשְׂרָאֵל אֱלֹהִים,    לְבָרֵי לֵבָב. 1 A Psalm of Asaph. {N} Surely God is good to Israel, even to such as are pure in heart.
73.2 ב  וַאֲנִי--כִּמְעַט, נטוי (נָטָיוּ) רַגְלָי;    כְּאַיִן, שפכה (שֻׁפְּכוּ) אֲשֻׁרָי. 2 But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped.
73.3 ג  כִּי-קִנֵּאתִי, בַּהוֹלְלִים;    שְׁלוֹם רְשָׁעִים אֶרְאֶה. 3 For I was envious at the arrogant, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
73.4 ד  כִּי אֵין חַרְצֻבּוֹת לְמוֹתָם;    וּבָרִיא אוּלָם. 4 For there are no pangs at their death, and their body is sound.
73.5 ה  בַּעֲמַל אֱנוֹשׁ אֵינֵמוֹ;    וְעִם-אָדָם, לֹא יְנֻגָּעוּ. 5 In the trouble of man they are not; neither are they plagued like men.
73.6 ו  לָכֵן, עֲנָקַתְמוֹ גַאֲוָה;    יַעֲטָף-שִׁית, חָמָס לָמוֹ. 6 Therefore pride is as a chain about their neck; violence covereth them as a garment.
73.7 ז  יָצָא, מֵחֵלֶב עֵינֵמוֹ;    עָבְרוּ, מַשְׂכִּיּוֹת לֵבָב. 7 Their eyes stand forth from fatness; they are gone beyond the imaginations of their heart.
73.8 ח  יָמִיקוּ, וִידַבְּרוּ בְרָע עֹשֶׁק;    מִמָּרוֹם יְדַבֵּרוּ. 8 They scoff, and in wickedness utter oppression; they speak as if there were none on high.
73.9 ט  שַׁתּוּ בַשָּׁמַיִם פִּיהֶם;    וּלְשׁוֹנָם, תִּהֲלַךְ בָּאָרֶץ. 9 They have set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.
73.10 י  לָכֵן, ישיב (יָשׁוּב) עַמּוֹ הֲלֹם;    וּמֵי מָלֵא, יִמָּצוּ לָמוֹ. 10 Therefore His people return hither; and waters of fullness are drained out by them.
73.11 יא  וְאָמְרוּ, אֵיכָה יָדַע-אֵל;    וְיֵשׁ דֵּעָה בְעֶלְיוֹן. 11 And they say: 'How doth God know? And is there knowledge in the Most High?'
73.12 יב  הִנֵּה-אֵלֶּה רְשָׁעִים;    וְשַׁלְוֵי עוֹלָם, הִשְׂגּוּ-חָיִל. 12 Behold, such are the wicked; and they that are always at ease increase riches.
73.13 יג  אַךְ-רִיק, זִכִּיתִי לְבָבִי;    וָאֶרְחַץ בְּנִקָּיוֹן כַּפָּי. 13 Surely in vain have I cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in innocency;
73.14 יד  וָאֱהִי נָגוּעַ, כָּל-הַיּוֹם;    וְתוֹכַחְתִּי, לַבְּקָרִים. 14 For all the day have I been plagued, and my chastisement came every morning.
73.15 טו  אִם-אָמַרְתִּי, אֲסַפְּרָה כְמוֹ;    הִנֵּה דוֹר בָּנֶיךָ בָגָדְתִּי. 15 If I had said: 'I will speak thus', behold, I had been faithless to the generation of Thy children.
73.16 טז  וָאֲחַשְּׁבָה, לָדַעַת זֹאת;    עָמָל היא (הוּא) בְעֵינָי. 16 And when I pondered how I might know this, it was wearisome in mine eyes;
73.17 יז  עַד-אָבוֹא, אֶל-מִקְדְּשֵׁי-אֵל;    אָבִינָה, לְאַחֲרִיתָם. 17 Until I entered into the sanctuary of God, and considered their end.
73.18 יח  אַךְ בַּחֲלָקוֹת, תָּשִׁית לָמוֹ;    הִפַּלְתָּם, לְמַשּׁוּאוֹת. 18 Surely Thou settest them in slippery places; Thou hurlest them down to utter ruin.
73.19 יט  אֵיךְ הָיוּ לְשַׁמָּה כְרָגַע;    סָפוּ תַמּוּ, מִן-בַּלָּהוֹת. 19 How are they become a desolation in a moment! They are wholly consumed by terrors.
73.20 כ  כַּחֲלוֹם מֵהָקִיץ--    אֲדֹנָי, בָּעִיר צַלְמָם תִּבְזֶה. 20 As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when Thou arousest Thyself, Thou wilt despise their semblance.
73.21 כא  כִּי, יִתְחַמֵּץ לְבָבִי;    וְכִלְיוֹתַי, אֶשְׁתּוֹנָן. 21 For my heart was in a ferment, and I was pricked in my reins.
73.22 כב  וַאֲנִי-בַעַר, וְלֹא אֵדָע;    בְּהֵמוֹת, הָיִיתִי עִמָּךְ. 22 But I was brutish, and ignorant; I was as a beast before Thee.
73.23 כג  וַאֲנִי תָמִיד עִמָּךְ;    אָחַזְתָּ, בְּיַד-יְמִינִי. 23 Nevertheless I am continually with Thee; Thou holdest my right hand.
73.24 כד  בַּעֲצָתְךָ תַנְחֵנִי;    וְאַחַר, כָּבוֹד תִּקָּחֵנִי. 24 Thou wilt guide me with Thy counsel, and afterward receive me with glory.
73.25 כה  מִי-לִי בַשָּׁמָיִם;    וְעִמְּךָ, לֹא-חָפַצְתִּי בָאָרֶץ. 25 Whom have I in heaven but Thee? And beside Thee I desire none upon earth.
73.26 כו  כָּלָה שְׁאֵרִי, וּלְבָבִי:    צוּר-לְבָבִי וְחֶלְקִי--אֱלֹהִים לְעוֹלָם. 26 My flesh and my heart faileth; but God is the rock of my heart and my portion for ever.
73.27 כז  כִּי-הִנֵּה רְחֵקֶיךָ יֹאבֵדוּ;    הִצְמַתָּה, כָּל-זוֹנֶה מִמֶּךָּ. 27 For, lo, they that go far from Thee shall perish; Thou dost destroy all them that go astray from Thee.
73.28 כח  וַאֲנִי, קִרְבַת אֱלֹהִים--    לִי-טוֹב: שַׁתִּי, בַּאדֹנָי יְהוִה מַחְסִי;    לְסַפֵּר, כָּל-מַלְאֲכוֹתֶיךָ. 28 But as for me, the nearness of God is my good; {N} I have made the Lord GOD my refuge, that I may tell of all Thy works. {P}
74.1 א  מַשְׂכִּיל, לְאָסָף: לָמָה אֱלֹהִים, זָנַחְתָּ לָנֶצַח;    יֶעְשַׁן אַפְּךָ, בְּצֹאן מַרְעִיתֶךָ. 1 Maschil of Asaph. {N} Why, O God, hast Thou cast us off for ever? Why doth Thine anger smoke against the flock of Thy pasture?
74.2 ב  זְכֹר עֲדָתְךָ, קָנִיתָ קֶּדֶם--    גָּאַלְתָּ, שֵׁבֶט נַחֲלָתֶךָ; הַר-צִיּוֹן,    זֶה שָׁכַנְתָּ בּוֹ. 2 Remember Thy congregation, which Thou hast gotten of old, which Thou hast redeemed to be the tribe of Thine inheritance; {N} and mount Zion, wherein Thou hast dwelt.
74.3 ג  הָרִימָה פְעָמֶיךָ, לְמַשֻּׁאוֹת נֶצַח;    כָּל-הֵרַע אוֹיֵב בַּקֹּדֶשׁ. 3 Lift up Thy steps because of the perpetual ruins, even all the evil that the enemy hath done in the sanctuary.
74.4 ד  שָׁאֲגוּ צֹרְרֶיךָ, בְּקֶרֶב מוֹעֲדֶךָ;    שָׂמוּ אוֹתֹתָם אֹתוֹת. 4 Thine adversaries have roared in the midst of Thy meeting-place; they have set up their own signs for signs.
74.5 ה  יִוָּדַע, כְּמֵבִיא לְמָעְלָה;    בִּסְבָךְ-עֵץ, קַרְדֻּמּוֹת. 5 It seemed as when men wield upwards axes in a thicket of trees.
74.6 ו  ועת (וְעַתָּה), פִּתּוּחֶיהָ יָּחַד--    בְּכַשִּׁיל וְכֵילַפּוֹת, יַהֲלֹמוּן. 6 And now all the carved work thereof together they strike down with hatchet and hammers.
74.7 ז  שִׁלְחוּ בָאֵשׁ, מִקְדָּשֶׁךָ;    לָאָרֶץ, חִלְּלוּ מִשְׁכַּן-שְׁמֶךָ. 7 They have set Thy sanctuary on fire; they have profaned the dwelling-place of Thy name even to the ground.
74.8 ח  אָמְרוּ בְלִבָּם, נִינָם יָחַד;    שָׂרְפוּ כָל-מוֹעֲדֵי-אֵל בָּאָרֶץ. 8 They said in their heart: 'Let us make havoc of them altogether'; they have burned up all the meeting-places of God in the land.
74.9 ט  אוֹתֹתֵינוּ, לֹא רָאִינוּ:    אֵין-עוֹד נָבִיא; וְלֹא-אִתָּנוּ, יֹדֵעַ עַד-מָה. 9 We see not our signs; there is no more any prophet; neither is there among us any that knoweth how long.
74.10 י  עַד-מָתַי אֱלֹהִים, יְחָרֶף צָר;    יְנָאֵץ אוֹיֵב שִׁמְךָ לָנֶצַח. 10 How long, O God, shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme Thy name for ever?
74.11 יא  לָמָּה תָשִׁיב יָדְךָ, וִימִינֶךָ;    מִקֶּרֶב חוקך (חֵיקְךָ) כַלֵּה. 11 Why withdrawest Thou Thy hand, even Thy right hand? Draw it out of Thy bosom and consume them.
74.12 יב  וֵאלֹהִים, מַלְכִּי מִקֶּדֶם;    פֹּעֵל יְשׁוּעוֹת, בְּקֶרֶב הָאָרֶץ. 12 Yet God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
74.13 יג  אַתָּה פוֹרַרְתָּ בְעָזְּךָ יָם;    שִׁבַּרְתָּ רָאשֵׁי תַנִּינִים, עַל-הַמָּיִם. 13 Thou didst break the sea in pieces by Thy strength; Thou didst shatter the heads of the sea-monsters in the waters.
74.14 יד  אַתָּה רִצַּצְתָּ, רָאשֵׁי לִוְיָתָן;    תִּתְּנֶנּוּ מַאֲכָל, לְעָם לְצִיִּים. 14 Thou didst crush the heads of leviathan, Thou gavest him to be food to the folk inhabiting the wilderness.
74.15 טו  אַתָּה בָקַעְתָּ, מַעְיָן וָנָחַל;    אַתָּה הוֹבַשְׁתָּ, נַהֲרוֹת אֵיתָן. 15 Thou didst cleave fountain and brook; Thou driedst up ever-flowing rivers.
74.16 טז  לְךָ יוֹם, אַף-לְךָ לָיְלָה;    אַתָּה הֲכִינוֹתָ, מָאוֹר וָשָׁמֶשׁ. 16 Thine is the day, Thine also the night; Thou hast established luminary and sun.
74.17 יז  אַתָּה הִצַּבְתָּ, כָּל-גְּבוּלוֹת אָרֶץ;    קַיִץ וָחֹרֶף, אַתָּה יְצַרְתָּם. 17 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth; Thou hast made summer and winter.
74.18 יח  זְכָר-זֹאת--אוֹיֵב, חֵרֵף יְהוָה;    וְעַם נָבָל, נִאֲצוּ שְׁמֶךָ. 18 Remember this, how the enemy hath reproached the LORD, and how a base people have blasphemed Thy name.
74.19 יט  אַל-תִּתֵּן לְחַיַּת, נֶפֶשׁ תּוֹרֶךָ;    חַיַּת עֲנִיֶּיךָ, אַל-תִּשְׁכַּח לָנֶצַח. 19 O deliver not the soul of Thy turtle-dove unto the wild beast; forget not the life of Thy poor for ever.
74.20 כ  הַבֵּט לַבְּרִית:    כִּי מָלְאוּ מַחֲשַׁכֵּי-אֶרֶץ, נְאוֹת חָמָס. 20 Look upon the covenant; for the dark places of the land are full of the habitations of violence.
74.21 כא  אַל-יָשֹׁב דַּךְ נִכְלָם;    עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן, יְהַלְלוּ שְׁמֶךָ. 21 O let not the oppressed turn back in confusion; let the poor and needy praise Thy name.
74.22 כב  קוּמָה אֱלֹהִים, רִיבָה רִיבֶךָ;    זְכֹר חֶרְפָּתְךָ מִנִּי-נָבָל, כָּל-הַיּוֹם. 22 Arise, O God, plead Thine own cause; remember Thy reproach all the day at the hand of the base man.
74.23 כג  אַל-תִּשְׁכַּח, קוֹל צֹרְרֶיךָ;    שְׁאוֹן קָמֶיךָ, עֹלֶה תָמִיד. 23 Forget not the voice of Thine adversaries, the tumult of those that rise up against Thee which ascendeth continually. {P}
75.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ אַל-תַּשְׁחֵת; מִזְמוֹר לְאָסָף שִׁיר. הוֹדִינוּ לְּךָ, אֱלֹהִים--הוֹדִינוּ, וְקָרוֹב שְׁמֶךָ;    סִפְּרוּ, נִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ. 1 For the Leader; Al-tashheth. A Psalm of Asaph, a Song. We give thanks unto Thee, O God, we give thanks, and Thy name is near; men tell of Thy wondrous works.
75.2 ב כִּי, אֶקַּח מוֹעֵד;    אֲנִי, מֵישָׁרִים אֶשְׁפֹּט.   2  'When I take the appointed time, I Myself will judge with equity.
75.3 ג נְמֹגִים, אֶרֶץ וְכָל-יֹשְׁבֶיהָ;    אָנֹכִי תִכַּנְתִּי עַמּוּדֶיהָ סֶּלָה.   3  When the earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I Myself establish the pillars of it.' Selah
75.4 ד אָמַרְתִּי לַהוֹלְלִים, אַל-תָּהֹלּוּ;    וְלָרְשָׁעִים, אַל-תָּרִימוּ קָרֶן.   4  I say unto the arrogant: 'Deal not arrogantly'; and to the wicked: 'Lift not up the horn.'
75.5 ה אַל-תָּרִימוּ לַמָּרוֹם קַרְנְכֶם;    תְּדַבְּרוּ בְצַוָּאר עָתָק.   5  Lift not up your horn on high; speak not insolence with a haughty neck.
75.6 ו כִּי לֹא מִמּוֹצָא, וּמִמַּעֲרָב;    וְלֹא, מִמִּדְבַּר הָרִים.   6  For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor yet from the wilderness, cometh lifting up.
75.7 ז כִּי-אֱלֹהִים שֹׁפֵט;    זֶה יַשְׁפִּיל, וְזֶה יָרִים.   7  For God is judge; He putteth down one, and lifteth up another.
75.8 ח כִּי כוֹס בְּיַד-יְהוָה, וְיַיִן חָמַר מָלֵא מֶסֶךְ--    וַיַּגֵּר מִזֶּה: אַךְ-שְׁמָרֶיהָ, יִמְצוּ יִשְׁתּוּ;    כֹּל, רִשְׁעֵי-אָרֶץ.   8  For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup, with foaming wine, full of mixture, and He poureth out of the same; {N} surely the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall drain them, and drink them.
75.9 ט   9 וַאֲנִי, אַגִּיד לְעֹלָם;    אֲזַמְּרָה, לֵאלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב.  But as for me, I will declare for ever, I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
75.10 י   1 וְכָל-קַרְנֵי רְשָׁעִים אֲגַדֵּעַ;    תְּרוֹמַמְנָה, קַרְנוֹת צַדִּיק.0  All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the righteous shall be lifted up. {P}
76.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ בִּנְגִינֹת; מִזְמוֹר לְאָסָף שִׁיר. נוֹדָע בִּיהוּדָה אֱלֹהִים;    בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל, גָּדוֹל שְׁמוֹ. 1 For the Leader; with string-music. A Psalm of Asaph, a Song. In Judah is God known; His name is great in Israel.
76.2 ב וַיְהִי בְשָׁלֵם סוּכּוֹ;    וּמְעוֹנָתוֹ בְצִיּוֹן.   2  In Salem also is set His tabernacle, and His dwelling-place in Zion.
76.3 ג שָׁמָּה, שִׁבַּר רִשְׁפֵי-קָשֶׁת;    מָגֵן וְחֶרֶב וּמִלְחָמָה סֶלָה.   3  There He broke the fiery shafts of the bow; the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah
76.4 ד נָאוֹר, אַתָּה אַדִּיר--    מֵהַרְרֵי-טָרֶף.   4  Glorious art Thou and excellent, coming down from the mountains of prey.
76.5 ה אֶשְׁתּוֹלְלוּ, אַבִּירֵי לֵב--    נָמוּ שְׁנָתָם; וְלֹא-מָצְאוּ כָל-אַנְשֵׁי-חַיִל    יְדֵיהֶם.   5  The stout-hearted are bereft of sense, they sleep their sleep; {N} and none of the men of might have found their hands.
76.6 ו מִגַּעֲרָתְךָ, אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב;    נִרְדָּם, וְרֶכֶב וָסוּס.   6  At Thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, they are cast into a dead sleep, the riders also and the horses.
76.7 ז אַתָּה, נוֹרָא אַתָּה--וּמִי-יַעֲמֹד לְפָנֶיךָ;    מֵאָז אַפֶּךָ.   7  Thou, even Thou, art terrible; and who may stand in Thy sight when once Thou art angry?
76.8 ח מִשָּׁמַיִם, הִשְׁמַעְתָּ דִּין;    אֶרֶץ יָרְאָה וְשָׁקָטָה.   8  Thou didst cause sentence to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still,
76.9 ט   9 בְּקוּם-לַמִּשְׁפָּט אֱלֹהִים--    לְהוֹשִׁיעַ כָּל-עַנְוֵי-אֶרֶץ סֶלָה.  When God arose to judgment, to save all the humble of the earth. Selah
76.10 י   1 כִּי-חֲמַת אָדָם תּוֹדֶךָּ;    שְׁאֵרִית חֵמֹת תַּחְגֹּר.0  Surely the wrath of man shall praise Thee; the residue of wrath shalt Thou gird upon Thee.
76.11 י נִדְרוּ וְשַׁלְּמוּ, לַיהוָה אֱלֹהֵיכֶם:    כָּל-סְבִיבָיו--יֹבִילוּ שַׁי, לַמּוֹרָא.א   11  Vow, and pay unto the LORD your God; let all that are round about Him bring presents unto Him that is to be feared;
76.12 י יִבְצֹר, רוּחַ נְגִידִים;    נוֹרָא, לְמַלְכֵי-אָרֶץ.ב   12  He minisheth the spirit of princes; He is terrible to the kings of the earth. {P}
77.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-ידיתון (יְדוּתוּן); לְאָסָף מִזְמוֹר. קוֹלִי אֶל-אֱלֹהִים וְאֶצְעָקָה;    קוֹלִי אֶל-אֱלֹהִים, וְהַאֲזִין אֵלָי. 1 For the Leader; for Jeduthun. A Psalm of Asaph. I will lift up my voice unto God, and cry; I will lift up my voice unto God, that He may give ear unto me.
77.2 ב בְּיוֹם צָרָתִי,    אֲדֹנָי דָּרָשְׁתִּי: יָדִי, לַיְלָה נִגְּרָה--וְלֹא תָפוּג;    מֵאֲנָה הִנָּחֵם נַפְשִׁי.   2  In the day of my trouble I seek the Lord; {N} with my hand uplifted, [mine eye] streameth in the night without ceasing; my soul refuseth to be comforted.
77.3 ג אֶזְכְּרָה אֱלֹהִים וְאֶהֱמָיָה;    אָשִׂיחָה, וְתִתְעַטֵּף רוּחִי סֶלָה.   3  When I think thereon, O God, I must moan; when I muse thereon, my spirit fainteth. Selah
77.4 ד אָחַזְתָּ, שְׁמֻרוֹת עֵינָי;    נִפְעַמְתִּי, וְלֹא אֲדַבֵּר.   4  Thou holdest fast the lids of mine eyes; I am troubled, and cannot speak.
77.5 ה חִשַּׁבְתִּי יָמִים מִקֶּדֶם--    שְׁנוֹת, עוֹלָמִים.   5  I have pondered the days of old, the years of ancient times.
77.6 ו אֶזְכְּרָה נְגִינָתִי, בַּלָּיְלָה:    עִם-לְבָבִי אָשִׂיחָה; וַיְחַפֵּשׂ רוּחִי.   6  In the night I will call to remembrance my song; I will commune with mine own heart; and my spirit maketh diligent search:
77.7 ז הַלְעוֹלָמִים, יִזְנַח אֲדֹנָי;    וְלֹא-יֹסִיף לִרְצוֹת עוֹד.   7  'Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will He be favourable no more?
77.8 ח הֶאָפֵס לָנֶצַח חַסְדּוֹ;    גָּמַר אֹמֶר, לְדֹר וָדֹר.   8  Is His mercy clean gone for ever? Is His promise come to an end for evermore?
77.9 ט   9 הֲשָׁכַח חַנּוֹת אֵל;    אִם-קָפַץ בְּאַף, רַחֲמָיו סֶלָה.  Hath God forgotten to be gracious? Hath He in anger shut up his compassions?' Selah
77.10 י   1 וָאֹמַר, חַלּוֹתִי הִיא--    שְׁנוֹת, יְמִין עֶלְיוֹן.0  And I say: 'This is my weakness, that the right hand of the Most High could change.
77.11 י אזכיר (אֶזְכּוֹר) מַעַלְלֵי-יָהּ:    כִּי-אֶזְכְּרָה מִקֶּדֶם פִּלְאֶךָ.א   11  I will make mention of the deeds of the LORD; yea, I will remember Thy wonders of old.
77.12 י וְהָגִיתִי בְכָל-פָּעֳלֶךָ;    וּבַעֲלִילוֹתֶיךָ אָשִׂיחָה.ב   12  I will meditate also upon all Thy work, and muse on Thy doings.'
77.13 י אֱלֹהִים, בַּקֹּדֶשׁ דַּרְכֶּךָ;    מִי-אֵל גָּדוֹל, כֵּאלֹהִים.ג   13  O God, Thy way is in holiness; who is a great god like unto God?
77.14 י אַתָּה הָאֵל, עֹשֵׂה פֶלֶא;    הוֹדַעְתָּ בָעַמִּים עֻזֶּךָ.ד   14  Thou art the God that doest wonders; Thou hast made known Thy strength among the peoples.
77.15 ט גָּאַלְתָּ בִּזְרוֹעַ עַמֶּךָ;    בְּנֵי-יַעֲקֹב וְיוֹסֵף סֶלָה.ו   15  Thou hast with Thine arm redeemed Thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah
77.16 ט רָאוּךָ מַּיִם, אֱלֹהִים--רָאוּךָ מַּיִם יָחִילוּ;    אַף, יִרְגְּזוּ תְהֹמוֹת.ז   16  The waters saw Thee, O God; the waters saw Thee, they were in pain; the depths also trembled.
77.17 י זֹרְמוּ מַיִם, עָבוֹת--קוֹל, נָתְנוּ שְׁחָקִים;    אַף-חֲצָצֶיךָ, יִתְהַלָּכוּ.ז   17  The clouds flooded forth waters; the skies sent out a sound; Thine arrows also went abroad.
77.18 י קוֹל רַעַמְךָ, בַּגַּלְגַּל--הֵאִירוּ בְרָקִים תֵּבֵל;    רָגְזָה וַתִּרְעַשׁ הָאָרֶץ.ח   18  The voice of Thy thunder was in the whirlwind; the lightnings lighted up the world; the earth trembled and shook.
77.19 י בַּיָּם דַּרְכֶּךָ--ושביליך (וּשְׁבִילְךָ), בְּמַיִם רַבִּים;    וְעִקְּבוֹתֶיךָ, לֹא נֹדָעוּ.ט   19  Thy way was in the sea, and Thy path in the great waters, and Thy footsteps were not known.
77.20 כ   2 נָחִיתָ כַצֹּאן עַמֶּךָ--    בְּיַד-מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן.0  Thou didst lead Thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. {P}
78.1 א  מַשְׂכִּיל, לְאָסָף: הַאֲזִינָה עַמִּי, תּוֹרָתִי;    הַטּוּ אָזְנְכֶם, לְאִמְרֵי-פִי. 1 Maschil of Asaph. {N} Give ear, O my people, to my teaching; incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
78.2 ב  אֶפְתְּחָה בְמָשָׁל פִּי;    אַבִּיעָה חִידוֹת, מִנִּי-קֶדֶם. 2 I will open my mouth with a parable; I will utter dark sayings concerning days of old;
78.3 ג  אֲשֶׁר שָׁמַעְנוּ, וַנֵּדָעֵם;    וַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ, סִפְּרוּ-לָנוּ. 3 That which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us,
78.4 ד  לֹא נְכַחֵד, מִבְּנֵיהֶם--    לְדוֹר אַחֲרוֹן, מְסַפְּרִים תְּהִלּוֹת יְהוָה; וֶעֱזוּזוֹ וְנִפְלְאֹתָיו,    אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה. 4 We will not hide from their children, telling to the generation to come the praises of the LORD, {N} and His strength, and His wondrous works that He hath done.
78.5 ה  וַיָּקֶם עֵדוּת, בְּיַעֲקֹב,    וְתוֹרָה, שָׂם בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל: אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה, אֶת-אֲבוֹתֵינוּ--    לְהוֹדִיעָם, לִבְנֵיהֶם. 5 For He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, {N} which He commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children;
78.6 ו  לְמַעַן יֵדְעוּ, דּוֹר אַחֲרוֹן--בָּנִים יִוָּלֵדוּ;    יָקֻמוּ, וִיסַפְּרוּ לִבְנֵיהֶם. 6 That the generation to come might know them, even the children that should be born; who should arise and tell them to their children,
78.7 ז  וְיָשִׂימוּ בֵאלֹהִים, כִּסְלָם:    וְלֹא יִשְׁכְּחוּ, מַעַלְלֵי-אֵל; וּמִצְוֺתָיו יִנְצֹרוּ. 7 That they might put their confidence in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep His commandments;
78.8 ח  וְלֹא יִהְיוּ, כַּאֲבוֹתָם--    דּוֹר, סוֹרֵר וּמֹרֶה: דּוֹר, לֹא-הֵכִין לִבּוֹ;    וְלֹא-נֶאֶמְנָה אֶת-אֵל רוּחוֹ. 8 And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; {N} a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.
78.9 ט  בְּנֵי-אֶפְרַיִם, נוֹשְׁקֵי רוֹמֵי-קָשֶׁת;    הָפְכוּ, בְּיוֹם קְרָב. 9 The children of Ephraim were as archers handling the bow, that turned back in the day of battle.
78.10 י  לֹא שָׁמְרוּ, בְּרִית אֱלֹהִים;    וּבְתוֹרָתוֹ, מֵאֲנוּ לָלֶכֶת. 10 They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in His law;
78.11 יא  וַיִּשְׁכְּחוּ עֲלִילוֹתָיו;    וְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו, אֲשֶׁר הֶרְאָם. 11 And they forgot His doings, and His wondrous works that He had shown them.
78.12 יב  נֶגֶד אֲבוֹתָם, עָשָׂה פֶלֶא;    בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם שְׂדֵה-צֹעַן. 12 Marvellous things did He in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.
78.13 יג  בָּקַע יָם, וַיַּעֲבִירֵם;    וַיַּצֶּב-מַיִם כְּמוֹ-נֵד. 13 He cleaved the sea, and caused them to pass through; and He made the waters to stand as a heap.
78.14 יד  וַיַּנְחֵם בֶּעָנָן יוֹמָם;    וְכָל-הַלַּיְלָה, בְּאוֹר אֵשׁ. 14 By day also He led them with a cloud, and all the night with a light of fire.
78.15 טו  יְבַקַּע צֻרִים, בַּמִּדְבָּר;    וַיַּשְׁקְ, כִּתְהֹמוֹת רַבָּה. 15 He cleaved rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink abundantly as out of the great deep.
78.16 טז  וַיּוֹצִא נוֹזְלִים מִסָּלַע;    וַיּוֹרֶד כַּנְּהָרוֹת מָיִם. 16 He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.
78.17 יז  וַיּוֹסִיפוּ עוֹד, לַחֲטֹא-לוֹ--    לַמְרוֹת עֶלְיוֹן, בַּצִּיָּה. 17 Yet went they on still to sin against Him, to rebel against the Most High in the desert.
78.18 יח  וַיְנַסּוּ-אֵל בִּלְבָבָם--    לִשְׁאָל-אֹכֶל לְנַפְשָׁם. 18 And they tried God in their heart by asking food for their craving.
78.19 יט  וַיְדַבְּרוּ, בֵּאלֹהִים:    אָמְרוּ, הֲיוּכַל אֵל--לַעֲרֹךְ שֻׁלְחָן, בַּמִּדְבָּר. 19 Yea, they spoke against God; they said: 'Can God prepare a table in the wilderness?
78.20 כ  הֵן הִכָּה-צוּר, וַיָּזוּבוּ מַיִם--    וּנְחָלִים יִשְׁטֹפוּ: הֲגַם-לֶחֶם, יוּכַל תֵּת;    אִם-יָכִין שְׁאֵר לְעַמּוֹ. 20 Behold, He smote the rock, that waters gushed out, and streams overflowed; {N} can He give bread also? or will He provide flesh for His people?'
78.21 כא  לָכֵן, שָׁמַע יְהוָה--    וַיִּתְעַבָּר: וְאֵשׁ, נִשְּׂקָה בְיַעֲקֹב;    וְגַם-אַף, עָלָה בְיִשְׂרָאֵל. 21 Therefore the LORD heard, and was wroth; {N} and a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also went up against Israel;
78.22 כב  כִּי לֹא הֶאֱמִינוּ, בֵּאלֹהִים;    וְלֹא בָטְחוּ, בִּישׁוּעָתוֹ. 22 Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in His salvation.
78.23 כג  וַיְצַו שְׁחָקִים מִמָּעַל;    וְדַלְתֵי שָׁמַיִם פָּתָח. 23 And He commanded the skies above, and opened the doors of heaven;
78.24 כד  וַיַּמְטֵר עֲלֵיהֶם מָן לֶאֱכֹל;    וּדְגַן-שָׁמַיִם, נָתַן לָמוֹ. 24 And He caused manna to rain upon them for food, and gave them of the corn of heaven.
78.25 כה  לֶחֶם אַבִּירִים, אָכַל אִישׁ;    צֵידָה שָׁלַח לָהֶם לָשֹׂבַע. 25 Man did eat the bread of the mighty; He sent them provisions to the full.
78.26 כו  יַסַּע קָדִים, בַּשָּׁמָיִם;    וַיְנַהֵג בְּעֻזּוֹ תֵימָן. 26 He caused the east wind to set forth in heaven; and by His power He brought on the south wind.
78.27 כז  וַיַּמְטֵר עֲלֵיהֶם כֶּעָפָר שְׁאֵר;    וּכְחוֹל יַמִּים, עוֹף כָּנָף. 27 He caused flesh also to rain upon them as the dust, and winged fowl as the sand of the seas;
78.28 כח  וַיַּפֵּל, בְּקֶרֶב מַחֲנֵהוּ;    סָבִיב, לְמִשְׁכְּנֹתָיו. 28 And He let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their dwellings.
78.29 כט  וַיֹּאכְלוּ וַיִּשְׂבְּעוּ מְאֹד;    וְתַאֲוָתָם, יָבִא לָהֶם. 29 So they did eat, and were well filled; and He gave them that which they craved.
78.30 ל  לֹא-זָרוּ מִתַּאֲוָתָם;    עוֹד, אָכְלָם בְּפִיהֶם. 30 They were not estranged from their craving, their food was yet in their mouths,
78.31 לא  וְאַף אֱלֹהִים, עָלָה בָהֶם,    וַיַּהֲרֹג, בְּמִשְׁמַנֵּיהֶם; וּבַחוּרֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל    הִכְרִיעַ. 31 When the anger of God went up against them, and slew of the lustieth among them, {N} and smote down the young men of Israel.
78.32 לב  בְּכָל-זֹאת חָטְאוּ-עוֹד;    וְלֹא-הֶאֱמִינוּ, בְּנִפְלְאוֹתָיו. 32 For all this they sinned still, and believed not in His wondrous works.
78.33 לג  וַיְכַל-בַּהֶבֶל יְמֵיהֶם;    וּשְׁנוֹתָם, בַּבֶּהָלָה. 33 Therefore He ended their days as a breath, and their years in terror.
78.34 לד  אִם-הֲרָגָם וּדְרָשׁוּהוּ;    וְשָׁבוּ, וְשִׁחֲרוּ-אֵל. 34 When He slew them, then they would inquire after Him, and turn back and seek God earnestly.
78.35 לה  וַיִּזְכְּרוּ, כִּי-אֱלֹהִים צוּרָם;    וְאֵל עֶלְיוֹן, גֹּאֲלָם. 35 And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the Most High God their redeemer.
78.36 לו  וַיְפַתּוּהוּ בְּפִיהֶם;    וּבִלְשׁוֹנָם, יְכַזְּבוּ-לוֹ. 36 But they beguiled Him with their mouth, and lied unto Him with their tongue.
78.37 לז  וְלִבָּם, לֹא-נָכוֹן עִמּוֹ;    וְלֹא נֶאֶמְנוּ, בִּבְרִיתוֹ. 37 For their heart was not stedfast with Him, neither were they faithful in His covenant.
78.38 לח  וְהוּא רַחוּם, יְכַפֵּר עָוֺן--    וְלֹא-יַשְׁחִית: וְהִרְבָּה, לְהָשִׁיב אַפּוֹ;    וְלֹא-יָעִיר, כָּל-חֲמָתוֹ. 38 But He, being full of compassion, forgiveth iniquity, and destroyeth not; {N} yea, many a time doth He turn His anger away, and doth not stir up all His wrath.
78.39 לט  וַיִּזְכֹּר, כִּי-בָשָׂר הֵמָּה;    רוּחַ הוֹלֵךְ, וְלֹא יָשׁוּב. 39 So He remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again.
78.40 מ  כַּמָּה, יַמְרוּהוּ בַמִּדְבָּר;    יַעֲצִיבוּהוּ, בִּישִׁימוֹן. 40 How oft did they rebel against Him in the wilderness, and grieve Him in the desert!
78.41 מא  וַיָּשׁוּבוּ וַיְנַסּוּ אֵל;    וּקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל הִתְווּ. 41 And still again they tried God, and set bounds to the Holy One of Israel.
78.42 מב  לֹא-זָכְרוּ אֶת-יָדוֹ;    יוֹם, אֲשֶׁר-פָּדָם מִנִּי-צָר. 42 They remembered not His hand, nor the day when He redeemed them from the adversary.
78.43 מג  אֲשֶׁר-שָׂם בְּמִצְרַיִם, אֹתוֹתָיו;    וּמוֹפְתָיו, בִּשְׂדֵה-צֹעַן. 43 How He set His signs in Egypt, and His wonders in the field of Zoan;
78.44 מד  וַיַּהֲפֹךְ לְדָם, יְאֹרֵיהֶם;    וְנֹזְלֵיהֶם, בַּל-יִשְׁתָּיוּן. 44 And turned their rivers into blood, so that they could not drink their streams.
78.45 מה  יְשַׁלַּח בָּהֶם עָרֹב, וַיֹּאכְלֵם;    וּצְפַרְדֵּעַ, וַתַּשְׁחִיתֵם. 45 He sent among them swarms of flies, which devoured them; and frogs, which destroyed them.
78.46 מו  וַיִּתֵּן לֶחָסִיל יְבוּלָם;    וִיגִיעָם, לָאַרְבֶּה. 46 He gave also their increase unto the caterpillar, and their labour unto the locust.
78.47 מז  יַהֲרֹג בַּבָּרָד גַּפְנָם;    וְשִׁקְמוֹתָם, בַּחֲנָמַל. 47 He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycamore-trees with frost.
78.48 מח  וַיַּסְגֵּר לַבָּרָד בְּעִירָם;    וּמִקְנֵיהֶם, לָרְשָׁפִים. 48 He gave over their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to fiery bolts.
78.49 מט  יְשַׁלַּח-בָּם, חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ--עֶבְרָה וָזַעַם וְצָרָה;    מִשְׁלַחַת, מַלְאֲכֵי רָעִים. 49 He sent forth upon them the fierceness of His anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, a sending of messengers of evil.
78.50 נ  יְפַלֵּס נָתִיב, לְאַפּוֹ:    לֹא-חָשַׂךְ מִמָּוֶת נַפְשָׁם; וְחַיָּתָם, לַדֶּבֶר הִסְגִּיר. 50 He levelled a path for His anger; He spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence;
78.51 נא  וַיַּךְ כָּל-בְּכוֹר בְּמִצְרָיִם;    רֵאשִׁית אוֹנִים, בְּאָהֳלֵי-חָם. 51 And smote all the first-born in Egypt, the first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham;
78.52 נב  וַיַּסַּע כַּצֹּאן עַמּוֹ;    וַיְנַהֲגֵם כַּעֵדֶר, בַּמִּדְבָּר. 52 But He made His own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
78.53 נג  וַיַּנְחֵם לָבֶטַח, וְלֹא פָחָדוּ;    וְאֶת-אוֹיְבֵיהֶם, כִּסָּה הַיָּם. 53 And He led them safely, and they feared not; but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
78.54 נד  וַיְבִיאֵם, אֶל-גְּבוּל קָדְשׁוֹ;    הַר-זֶה, קָנְתָה יְמִינוֹ. 54 And He brought them to His holy border, to the mountain, which His right hand had gotten.
78.55 נה  וַיְגָרֶשׁ מִפְּנֵיהֶם, גּוֹיִם--    וַיַּפִּילֵם, בְּחֶבֶל נַחֲלָה; וַיַּשְׁכֵּן בְּאָהֳלֵיהֶם,    שִׁבְטֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל. 55 He drove out the nations also before them, and allotted them for an inheritance by line, {N} and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
78.56 נו  וַיְנַסּוּ וַיַּמְרוּ, אֶת-אֱלֹהִים עֶלְיוֹן;    וְעֵדוֹתָיו, לֹא שָׁמָרוּ. 56 Yet they tried and provoked God, the Most High, and kept not His testimonies;
78.57 נז  וַיִּסֹּגוּ וַיִּבְגְּדוּ, כַּאֲבוֹתָם;    נֶהְפְּכוּ, כְּקֶשֶׁת רְמִיָּה. 57 But turned back, and dealt treacherously like their fathers; they were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
78.58 נח  וַיַּכְעִיסוּהוּ בְּבָמוֹתָם;    וּבִפְסִילֵיהֶם, יַקְנִיאוּהוּ. 58 For they provoked Him with their high places, and moved Him to jealousy with their graven images.
78.59 נט  שָׁמַע אֱלֹהִים, וַיִּתְעַבָּר;    וַיִּמְאַס מְאֹד, בְּיִשְׂרָאֵל. 59 God heard, and was wroth, and He greatly abhorred Israel;
78.60 ס  וַיִּטֹּשׁ, מִשְׁכַּן שִׁלוֹ;    אֹהֶל, שִׁכֵּן בָּאָדָם. 60 And He forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which He had made to dwell among men;
78.61 סא  וַיִּתֵּן לַשְּׁבִי עֻזּוֹ;    וְתִפְאַרְתּוֹ בְיַד-צָר. 61 And delivered His strength into captivity, and His glory into the adversary's hand.
78.62 סב  וַיַּסְגֵּר לַחֶרֶב עַמּוֹ;    וּבְנַחֲלָתוֹ, הִתְעַבָּר. 62 He gave His people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with His inheritance.
78.63 סג  בַּחוּרָיו אָכְלָה-אֵשׁ;    וּבְתוּלֹתָיו, לֹא הוּלָּלוּ. 63 Fire devoured their young men; and their virgins had no marriage-song.
78.64 סד  כֹּהֲנָיו, בַּחֶרֶב נָפָלוּ;    וְאַלְמְנֹתָיו, לֹא תִבְכֶּינָה. 64 Their priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no lamentation.
78.65 סה  וַיִּקַץ כְּיָשֵׁן אֲדֹנָי;    כְּגִבּוֹר, מִתְרוֹנֵן מִיָּיִן. 65 Then the Lord awaked as one asleep, like a mighty man recovering from wine.
78.66 סו  וַיַּךְ-צָרָיו אָחוֹר;    חֶרְפַּת עוֹלָם, נָתַן לָמוֹ. 66 And He smote His adversaries backward; He put upon them a perpetual reproach.
78.67 סז  וַיִּמְאַס, בְּאֹהֶל יוֹסֵף;    וּבְשֵׁבֶט אֶפְרַיִם, לֹא בָחָר. 67 Moreover He abhorred the tent of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim;
78.68 סח  וַיִּבְחַר, אֶת-שֵׁבֶט יְהוּדָה;    אֶת-הַר צִיּוֹן, אֲשֶׁר אָהֵב. 68 But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which He loved.
78.69 סט  וַיִּבֶן כְּמוֹ-רָמִים, מִקְדָּשׁוֹ;    כְּאֶרֶץ, יְסָדָהּ לְעוֹלָם. 69 And He built His sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which He hath founded for ever.
78.70 ע  וַיִּבְחַר, בְּדָוִד עַבְדּוֹ;    וַיִּקָּחֵהוּ, מִמִּכְלְאֹת צֹאן. 70 He chose David also His servant, and took him from the sheepfolds;
78.71 עא  מֵאַחַר עָלוֹת, הֱבִיאוֹ:    לִרְעוֹת, בְּיַעֲקֹב עַמּוֹ; וּבְיִשְׂרָאֵל, נַחֲלָתוֹ. 71 From following the ewes that give suck He brought him, to be shepherd over Jacob His people, and Israel His inheritance.
78.72 עב  וַיִּרְעֵם, כְּתֹם לְבָבוֹ;    וּבִתְבוּנוֹת כַּפָּיו יַנְחֵם. 72 So he shepherded them according to the integrity of his heart; and lead them by the skilfulness of his hands. {P}
79.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְאָסָף: אֱלֹהִים, בָּאוּ גוֹיִם בְּנַחֲלָתֶךָ--    טִמְּאוּ, אֶת הֵיכַל קָדְשֶׁךָ; שָׂמוּ אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם    לְעִיִּים. 1 A Psalm of Asaph. {N} O God, the heathen are come into Thine inheritance; they have defiled Thy holy temple; {N} they have made Jerusalem into heaps.
79.2 ב  נָתְנוּ, אֶת-נִבְלַת עֲבָדֶיךָ--    מַאֲכָל, לְעוֹף הַשָּׁמָיִם; בְּשַׂר חֲסִידֶיךָ,    לְחַיְתוֹ-אָרֶץ. 2 They have given the dead bodies of Thy servants to be food unto the fowls of the heaven, {N} the flesh of Thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.
79.3 ג  שָׁפְכוּ דָמָם, כַּמַּיִם--סְבִיבוֹת יְרוּשָׁלִָם;    וְאֵין קוֹבֵר. 3 They have shed their blood like water round about Jerusalem, with none to bury them.
79.4 ד  הָיִינוּ חֶרְפָּה, לִשְׁכֵנֵינוּ;    לַעַג וָקֶלֶס, לִסְבִיבוֹתֵינוּ. 4 We are become a taunt to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.
79.5 ה  עַד-מָה יְהוָה, תֶּאֱנַף לָנֶצַח;    תִּבְעַר כְּמוֹ-אֵשׁ, קִנְאָתֶךָ. 5 How long, O LORD, wilt Thou be angry for ever? How long will Thy jealousy burn like fire?
79.6 ו  שְׁפֹךְ חֲמָתְךָ--    אֶל הַגּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר לֹא-יְדָעוּךָ: וְעַל מַמְלָכוֹת--    אֲשֶׁר בְּשִׁמְךָ, לֹא קָרָאוּ. 6 Pour out Thy wrath upon the nations that know Thee not, {N} and upon the kingdoms that call not upon Thy name.
79.7 ז  כִּי, אָכַל אֶת-יַעֲקֹב;    וְאֶת-נָוֵהוּ הֵשַׁמּוּ. 7 For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his habitation.
79.8 ח  אַל-תִּזְכָּר-לָנוּ,    עֲוֺנֹת רִאשֹׁנִים: מַהֵר, יְקַדְּמוּנוּ רַחֲמֶיךָ--    כִּי דַלּוֹנוּ מְאֹד. 8 Remember not against us the iniquities of our forefathers; {N} let Thy compassions speedily come to meet us; for we are brought very low.
79.9 ט  עָזְרֵנוּ, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעֵנוּ--    עַל-דְּבַר כְּבוֹד-שְׁמֶךָ; וְהַצִּילֵנוּ וְכַפֵּר עַל-חַטֹּאתֵינוּ,    לְמַעַן שְׁמֶךָ. 9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the sake of the glory of Thy name; {N} and deliver us, and forgive our sins, for Thy name's sake.
79.10 י  לָמָּה, יֹאמְרוּ הַגּוֹיִם--    אַיֵּה אֱלֹהֵיהֶם: יִוָּדַע בַּגֹּיִים לְעֵינֵינוּ;    נִקְמַת, דַּם-עֲבָדֶיךָ הַשָּׁפוּךְ. 10 Wherefore should the nations say: 'Where is their God?' {N} Let the avenging of Thy servants' blood that is shed be made known among the nations in our sight.
79.11 יא  תָּבוֹא לְפָנֶיךָ, אֶנְקַת אָסִיר:    כְּגֹדֶל זְרוֹעֲךָ--הוֹתֵר, בְּנֵי תְמוּתָה. 11 Let the groaning of the prisoner come before Thee; according to the greatness of Thy power set free those that are appointed to death;
79.12 יב  וְהָשֵׁב לִשְׁכֵנֵינוּ שִׁבְעָתַיִם,    אֶל-חֵיקָם; חֶרְפָּתָם אֲשֶׁר חֵרְפוּךָ    אֲדֹנָי. 12 And render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach, {N} wherewith they have reproached Thee, O Lord.
79.13 יג  וַאֲנַחְנוּ עַמְּךָ, וְצֹאן מַרְעִיתֶךָ--    נוֹדֶה לְּךָ, לְעוֹלָם: לְדוֹר וָדֹר--    נְסַפֵּר, תְּהִלָּתֶךָ. 13 So we that are Thy people and the flock of Thy pasture will give Thee thanks for ever; {N} we will tell of Thy praise to all generations. {P}
80.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ אֶל-שֹׁשַׁנִּים;    עֵדוּת לְאָסָף מִזְמוֹר. רֹעֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל, הַאֲזִינָה--    נֹהֵג כַּצֹּאן יוֹסֵף; יֹשֵׁב הַכְּרוּבִים    הוֹפִיעָה. 1 For the Leader; upon Shoshannim. A testimony. A Psalm of Asaph. Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, Thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; {N} Thou that art enthroned upon the cherubim, shine forth.
80.2 ב לִפְנֵי אֶפְרַיִם, וּבִנְיָמִן וּמְנַשֶּׁה--    עוֹרְרָה אֶת-גְּבוּרָתֶךָ; וּלְכָה לִישֻׁעָתָה    לָּנוּ.   2  Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up Thy might, {N} and come to save us.
80.3 ג אֱלֹהִים הֲשִׁיבֵנוּ;    וְהָאֵר פָּנֶיךָ, וְנִוָּשֵׁעָה.   3  O God, restore us; and cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
80.4 ד יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים צְבָאוֹת--    עַד-מָתַי עָשַׁנְתָּ, בִּתְפִלַּת עַמֶּךָ.   4  O LORD God of hosts, how long wilt Thou be angry against the prayer of Thy people?
80.5 ה הֶאֱכַלְתָּם, לֶחֶם דִּמְעָה;    וַתַּשְׁקֵמוֹ, בִּדְמָעוֹת שָׁלִישׁ.   5  Thou hast fed them with the bread of tears, and given them tears to drink in large measure.
80.6 ו תְּשִׂימֵנוּ מָדוֹן, לִשְׁכֵנֵינוּ;    וְאֹיְבֵינוּ, יִלְעֲגוּ-לָמוֹ.   6  Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours; and our enemies mock as they please.
80.7 ז אֱלֹהִים צְבָאוֹת הֲשִׁיבֵנוּ;    וְהָאֵר פָּנֶיךָ, וְנִוָּשֵׁעָה.   7  O God of hosts, restore us; and cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
80.8 ח גֶּפֶן, מִמִּצְרַיִם תַּסִּיעַ;    תְּגָרֵשׁ גּוֹיִם, וַתִּטָּעֶהָ.   8  Thou didst pluck up a vine out of Egypt; Thou didst drive out the nations, and didst plant it.
80.9 ט   9 פִּנִּיתָ לְפָנֶיהָ;    וַתַּשְׁרֵשׁ שָׁרָשֶׁיהָ, וַתְּמַלֵּא-אָרֶץ.  Thou didst clear a place before it, and it took deep root, and filled the land.
80.10 י   1 כָּסּוּ הָרִים צִלָּהּ;    וַעֲנָפֶיהָ, אַרְזֵי-אֵל.0  The mountains were covered with the shadow of it, and the mighty cedars with the boughs thereof.
80.11 י תְּשַׁלַּח קְצִירֶהָ עַד-יָם;    וְאֶל-נָהָר, יוֹנְקוֹתֶיהָ.א   11  She sent out her branches unto the sea, and her shoots unto the River.
80.12 י לָמָּה, פָּרַצְתָּ גְדֵרֶיהָ;    וְאָרוּהָ, כָּל-עֹבְרֵי דָרֶךְ.ב   12  Why hast Thou broken down her fences, so that all they that pass by the way do pluck her?
80.13 י יְכַרְסְמֶנָּה חֲזִיר מִיָּעַר;    וְזִיז שָׂדַי יִרְעֶנָּה.ג   13  The boar out of the wood doth ravage it, that which moveth in the field feedeth on it.
80.14 י אֱלֹהִים צְבָאוֹת,    שׁוּב-נָא: הַבֵּט מִשָּׁמַיִם וּרְאֵה;    וּפְקֹד, גֶּפֶן זֹאת.ד   14  O God of hosts, return, we beseech Thee; {N} look from heaven, and behold, and be mindful of this vine,
80.15 ט וְכַנָּה, אֲשֶׁר-נָטְעָה יְמִינֶךָ;    וְעַל-בֵּן, אִמַּצְתָּה לָּךְ.ו   15  And of the stock which Thy right hand hath planted, and the branch that Thou madest strong for Thyself.
80.16 ט שְׂרֻפָה בָאֵשׁ כְּסוּחָה;    מִגַּעֲרַת פָּנֶיךָ יֹאבֵדוּ.ז   16  It is burned with fire, it is cut down; they perish at the rebuke of Thy countenance.
80.17 י תְּהִי-יָדְךָ, עַל-אִישׁ יְמִינֶךָ;    עַל-בֶּן-אָדָם, אִמַּצְתָּ לָּךְ.ז   17  Let Thy hand be upon the man of Thy right hand, upon the son of man whom Thou madest strong for Thyself.
80.18 י וְלֹא-נָסוֹג מִמֶּךָּ;    תְּחַיֵּנוּ, וּבְשִׁמְךָ נִקְרָא.ח   18  So shall we not turn back from Thee; quicken Thou us, and we will call upon Thy name.
80.19 י יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים צְבָאוֹת הֲשִׁיבֵנוּ;    הָאֵר פָּנֶיךָ, וְנִוָּשֵׁעָה.ט   19  O LORD God of hosts, restore us; cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. {P}
81.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-הַגִּתִּית לְאָסָף. הַרְנִינוּ, לֵאלֹהִים עוּזֵּנוּ;    הָרִיעוּ, לֵאלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב. 1 For the Leader; upon the Gittith. [A Psalm] of Asaph. Sing aloud unto God our strength; shout unto the God of Jacob.
81.2 ב שְׂאוּ-זִמְרָה, וּתְנוּ-תֹף;    כִּנּוֹר נָעִים עִם-נָבֶל.   2  Take up the melody, and sound the timbrel, the sweet harp with the psaltery.
81.3 ג תִּקְעוּ בַחֹדֶשׁ שׁוֹפָר;    בַּכֵּסֶה, לְיוֹם חַגֵּנוּ.   3  Blow the horn at the new moon, at the full moon for our feast-day.
81.4 ד כִּי חֹק לְיִשְׂרָאֵל הוּא;    מִשְׁפָּט, לֵאלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב.   4  For it is a statute for Israel, an ordinance of the God of Jacob.
81.5 ה עֵדוּת, בִּיהוֹסֵף שָׂמוֹ--    בְּצֵאתוֹ, עַל-אֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; שְׂפַת לֹא-יָדַעְתִּי    אֶשְׁמָע.   5  He appointed it in Joseph for a testimony, when He went forth against the land of Egypt. {N} The speech of one that I knew not did I hear:
81.6 ו הֲסִירוֹתִי מִסֵּבֶל שִׁכְמוֹ;    כַּפָּיו, מִדּוּד תַּעֲבֹרְנָה.   6  'I removed his shoulder from the burden; his hands were freed from the basket.
81.7 ז בַּצָּרָה קָרָאתָ,    וָאֲחַלְּצֶךָּ: אֶעֶנְךָ, בְּסֵתֶר רַעַם;    אֶבְחָנְךָ עַל-מֵי מְרִיבָה סֶלָה.   7  Thou didst call in trouble, and I rescued thee; {N} I answered thee in the secret place of thunder; I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah
81.8 ח שְׁמַע עַמִּי, וְאָעִידָה בָּךְ;    יִשְׂרָאֵל, אִם-תִּשְׁמַע-לִי.   8  Hear, O My people, and I will admonish thee: O Israel, if thou wouldest hearken unto Me!
81.9 ט   9 לֹא-יִהְיֶה בְךָ, אֵל זָר;    וְלֹא תִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה, לְאֵל נֵכָר.  There shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship any foreign god.
81.10 י   1 אָנֹכִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֶיךָ--    הַמַּעַלְךָ, מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרָיִם; הַרְחֶב-פִּיךָ,    וַאֲמַלְאֵהוּ.0  I am the LORD thy God, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt; {N} open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
81.11 י וְלֹא-שָׁמַע עַמִּי לְקוֹלִי;    וְיִשְׂרָאֵל, לֹא-אָבָה לִי.א   11  But My people hearkened not to My voice; and Israel would none of Me.
81.12 י וָאֲשַׁלְּחֵהוּ, בִּשְׁרִירוּת לִבָּם;    יֵלְכוּ, בְּמוֹעֲצוֹתֵיהֶם.ב   12  So I let them go after the stubbornness of their heart, that they might walk in their own counsels.
81.13 י לוּ--עַמִּי, שֹׁמֵעַ לִי;    יִשְׂרָאֵל, בִּדְרָכַי יְהַלֵּכוּ.ג   13  Oh that My people would hearken unto Me, that Israel would walk in My ways!
81.14 י כִּמְעַט, אוֹיְבֵיהֶם אַכְנִיעַ;    וְעַל צָרֵיהֶם, אָשִׁיב יָדִי.ד   14  I would soon subdue their enemies, and turn My hand against their adversaries.
81.15 ט מְשַׂנְאֵי יְהוָה, יְכַחֲשׁוּ-לוֹ;    וִיהִי עִתָּם לְעוֹלָם.ו   15  The haters of the LORD should dwindle away before Him; and their punishment should endure for ever.
81.16 ט וַיַּאֲכִילֵהוּ, מֵחֵלֶב חִטָּה;    וּמִצּוּר, דְּבַשׁ אַשְׂבִּיעֶךָ.ז   16  They should also be fed with the fat of wheat; and with honey out of the rock would I satisfy thee.' {P}
82.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְאָסָף: אֱלֹהִים, נִצָּב בַּעֲדַת-אֵל;    בְּקֶרֶב אֱלֹהִים יִשְׁפֹּט. 1 A Psalm of Asaph. {N} God standeth in the congregation of God; in the midst of the judges He judgeth:
82.2 ב  עַד-מָתַי תִּשְׁפְּטוּ-עָוֶל;    וּפְנֵי רְשָׁעִים, תִּשְׂאוּ-סֶלָה. 2 'How long will ye judge unjustly, and respect the persons of the wicked? Selah
82.3 ג  שִׁפְטוּ-דַל וְיָתוֹם;    עָנִי וָרָשׁ הַצְדִּיקוּ. 3 Judge the poor and fatherless; do justice to the afflicted and destitute.
82.4 ד  פַּלְּטוּ-דַל וְאֶבְיוֹן;    מִיַּד רְשָׁעִים הַצִּילוּ. 4 Rescue the poor and needy; deliver them out of the hand of the wicked.
82.5 ה  לֹא יָדְעוּ, וְלֹא יָבִינוּ--    בַּחֲשֵׁכָה יִתְהַלָּכוּ; יִמּוֹטוּ,    כָּל-מוֹסְדֵי אָרֶץ. 5 They know not, neither do they understand; they go about in darkness; {N} all the foundations of the earth are moved.
82.6 ו  אֲנִי-אָמַרְתִּי, אֱלֹהִים אַתֶּם;    וּבְנֵי עֶלְיוֹן כֻּלְּכֶם. 6 I said: Ye are godlike beings, and all of you sons of the Most High.
82.7 ז  אָכֵן, כְּאָדָם תְּמוּתוּן;    וּכְאַחַד הַשָּׂרִים תִּפֹּלוּ. 7 Nevertheless ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.'
82.8 ח  קוּמָה אֱלֹהִים, שָׁפְטָה הָאָרֶץ:    כִּי-אַתָּה תִנְחַל, בְּכָל-הַגּוֹיִם. 8 Arise, O God, judge the earth; for Thou shalt possess all the nations. {P}
83.1 א  שִׁיר מִזְמוֹר לְאָסָף. אֱלֹהִים אַל-דֳּמִי-לָךְ;    אַל-תֶּחֱרַשׁ וְאַל-תִּשְׁקֹט אֵל. 1 A Song, a Psalm of Asaph. O God, keep not Thou silence; hold not Thy peace, and be not still, O God.
83.2 ב כִּי-הִנֵּה אוֹיְבֶיךָ, יֶהֱמָיוּן;    וּמְשַׂנְאֶיךָ, נָשְׂאוּ רֹאשׁ.   2  For, lo, Thine enemies are in an uproar; and they that hate Thee have lifted up the head.
83.3 ג עַל-עַמְּךָ, יַעֲרִימוּ סוֹד;    וְיִתְיָעֲצוּ, עַל-צְפוּנֶיךָ.   3  They hold crafty converse against Thy people, and take counsel against Thy treasured ones.
83.4 ד אָמְרוּ--לְכוּ, וְנַכְחִידֵם מִגּוֹי;    וְלֹא-יִזָּכֵר שֵׁם-יִשְׂרָאֵל עוֹד.   4  They have said: 'Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.'
83.5 ה כִּי נוֹעֲצוּ לֵב יַחְדָּו;    עָלֶיךָ, בְּרִית יִכְרֹתוּ.   5  For they have consulted together with one consent; against Thee do they make a covenant;
83.6 ו אָהֳלֵי אֱדוֹם, וְיִשְׁמְעֵאלִים;    מוֹאָב וְהַגְרִים.   6  The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab, and the Hagrites;
83.7 ז גְּבָל וְעַמּוֹן, וַעֲמָלֵק;    פְּלֶשֶׁת, עִם-יֹשְׁבֵי צוֹר.   7  Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre;
83.8 ח גַּם-אַשּׁוּר, נִלְוָה עִמָּם;    הָיוּ זְרוֹעַ לִבְנֵי-לוֹט סֶלָה.   8  Assyria also is joined with them; they have been an arm to the children of Lot. Selah
83.9 ט   9 עֲשֵׂה-לָהֶם כְּמִדְיָן;    כְּסִיסְרָא כְיָבִין, בְּנַחַל קִישׁוֹן.  Do Thou unto them as unto Midian; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook Kishon;
83.10 י   1 נִשְׁמְדוּ בְעֵין-דֹּאר;    הָיוּ דֹּמֶן, לָאֲדָמָה.0  Who were destroyed at En-dor; they became as dung for the earth.
83.11 י שִׁיתֵמוֹ נְדִיבֵימוֹ, כְּעֹרֵב וְכִזְאֵב;    וּכְזֶבַח וּכְצַלְמֻנָּע, כָּל-נְסִיכֵימוֹ.א   11  Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, and like Zebah and Zalmunna all their princes;
83.12 י אֲשֶׁר אָמְרוּ, נִירְשָׁה לָּנוּ--    אֵת, נְאוֹת אֱלֹהִים.ב   12  Who said: 'Let us take to ourselves in possession the habitations of God.'
83.13 י אֱלֹהַי, שִׁיתֵמוֹ כַגַּלְגַּל;    כְּקַשׁ, לִפְנֵי-רוּחַ.ג   13  O my God, make them like the whirling dust; as stubble before the wind.
83.14 י כְּאֵשׁ תִּבְעַר-יָעַר;    וּכְלֶהָבָה, תְּלַהֵט הָרִים.ד   14  As the fire that burneth the forest, and as the flame that setteth the mountains ablaze;
83.15 ט כֵּן, תִּרְדְּפֵם בְּסַעֲרֶךָ;    וּבְסוּפָתְךָ תְבַהֲלֵם.ו   15  So pursue them with Thy tempest, and affright them with Thy storm.
83.16 ט מַלֵּא פְנֵיהֶם קָלוֹן;    וִיבַקְשׁוּ שִׁמְךָ יְהוָה.ז   16  Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek Thy name, O LORD.
83.17 י יֵבֹשׁוּ וְיִבָּהֲלוּ עֲדֵי-עַד;    וְיַחְפְּרוּ וְיֹאבֵדוּ.ז   17  Let them be ashamed and affrighted for ever; yea, let them be abashed and perish;
83.18 י וְיֵדְעוּ--    כִּי-אַתָּה שִׁמְךָ יְהוָה לְבַדֶּךָ: עֶלְיוֹן,    עַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ.ח   18  That they may know that it is Thou alone whose name is the LORD, {N} the Most High over all the earth. {P}
84.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-הַגִּתִּית; לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח מִזְמוֹר. מַה-יְּדִידוֹת מִשְׁכְּנוֹתֶיךָ--    יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת. 1 For the Leader; upon the Gittith. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. How lovely are Thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!
84.2 ב נִכְסְפָה וְגַם-כָּלְתָה, נַפְשִׁי--    לְחַצְרוֹת יְהוָה: לִבִּי וּבְשָׂרִי--    יְרַנְּנוּ, אֶל אֵל-חָי.   2  My soul yearneth, yea, even pineth for the courts of the LORD; {N} my heart and my flesh sing for joy unto the living God.
84.3 ג גַּם-צִפּוֹר מָצְאָה בַיִת, וּדְרוֹר קֵן לָהּ--    אֲשֶׁר-שָׁתָה אֶפְרֹחֶיהָ: אֶת-מִזְבְּחוֹתֶיךָ, יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--    מַלְכִּי, וֵאלֹהָי.   3  Yea, the sparrow hath found a house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young; {N} Thine altars, O LORD of hosts, my King, and my God--.
84.4 ד אַשְׁרֵי, יוֹשְׁבֵי בֵיתֶךָ--    עוֹד, יְהַלְלוּךָ סֶּלָה.   4  Happy are they that dwell in Thy house, they are ever praising Thee. Selah
84.5 ה אַשְׁרֵי אָדָם, עוֹז-לוֹ בָךְ;    מְסִלּוֹת, בִּלְבָבָם.   5  Happy is the man whose strength is in Thee; in whose heart are the highways.
84.6 ו עֹבְרֵי, בְּעֵמֶק הַבָּכָא--    מַעְיָן יְשִׁיתוּהוּ; גַּם-בְּרָכוֹת,    יַעְטֶה מוֹרֶה.   6  Passing through the valley of Baca they make it a place of springs; {N} yea, the early rain clotheth it with blessings.
84.7 ז יֵלְכוּ, מֵחַיִל אֶל-חָיִל;    יֵרָאֶה אֶל-אֱלֹהִים בְּצִיּוֹן.   7  They go from strength to strength, every one of them appeareth before God in Zion.
84.8 ח יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים צְבָאוֹת,    שִׁמְעָה תְפִלָּתִי; הַאֲזִינָה אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב    סֶלָה.   8  O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer; {N} give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah
84.9 ט   9 מָגִנֵּנוּ, רְאֵה אֱלֹהִים;    וְהַבֵּט, פְּנֵי מְשִׁיחֶךָ.  Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of Thine anointed.
84.10 י   1 כִּי טוֹב-יוֹם בַּחֲצֵרֶיךָ,    מֵאָלֶף: בָּחַרְתִּי--הִסְתּוֹפֵף, בְּבֵית אֱלֹהַי;    מִדּוּר, בְּאָהֳלֵי-רֶשַׁע.0  For a day in Thy courts is better than a thousand; {N} I had rather stand at the threshold of the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
84.11 י כִּי שֶׁמֶשׁ, וּמָגֵן--    יְהוָה אֱלֹהִים: חֵן וְכָבוֹד,    יִתֵּן יְהוָה; לֹא יִמְנַע-טוֹב,    לַהֹלְכִים בְּתָמִים.א   11  For the LORD God is a sun and a shield; {N} the LORD giveth grace and glory; {N} no good thing will He withhold from them that walk uprightly.
84.12 י יְהוָה צְבָאוֹת--    אַשְׁרֵי אָדָם, בֹּטֵחַ בָּךְ.ב   12  O LORD of hosts, happy is the man that trusteth in Thee. {P}
85.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח מִזְמוֹר. רָצִיתָ יְהוָה אַרְצֶךָ;    שַׁבְתָּ, שבות (שְׁבִית) יַעֲקֹב. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. LORD, Thou hast been favourable unto Thy land, Thou hast turned the captivity of Jacob.
85.2 ב נָשָׂאתָ, עֲוֺן עַמֶּךָ;    כִּסִּיתָ כָל-חַטָּאתָם סֶלָה.   2  Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of Thy people, Thou hast pardoned all their sin. Selah
85.3 ג אָסַפְתָּ כָל-עֶבְרָתֶךָ;    הֱשִׁיבוֹתָ, מֵחֲרוֹן אַפֶּךָ.   3  Thou hast withdrawn all Thy wrath; Thou hast turned from the fierceness of Thine anger.
85.4 ד שׁוּבֵנוּ, אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעֵנוּ;    וְהָפֵר כַּעַסְךָ עִמָּנוּ.   4  Restore us, O God of our salvation, and cause Thine indignation toward us to cease.
85.5 ה הַלְעוֹלָם תֶּאֱנַף-בָּנוּ;    תִּמְשֹׁךְ אַפְּךָ, לְדֹר וָדֹר.   5  Wilt Thou be angry with us for ever? Wilt Thou draw out Thine anger to all generations?
85.6 ו הֲלֹא-אַתָּה, תָּשׁוּב תְּחַיֵּנוּ;    וְעַמְּךָ, יִשְׂמְחוּ-בָךְ.   6  Wilt Thou not quicken us again, that Thy people may rejoice in Thee?
85.7 ז הַרְאֵנוּ יְהוָה חַסְדֶּךָ;    וְיֶשְׁעֲךָ, תִּתֶּן-לָנוּ.   7  Show us Thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us Thy salvation.
85.8 ח אֶשְׁמְעָה--    מַה-יְדַבֵּר, הָאֵל יְהוָה: כִּי, יְדַבֵּר שָׁלוֹם--אֶל-עַמּוֹ וְאֶל-חֲסִידָיו;    וְאַל-יָשׁוּבוּ לְכִסְלָה.   8  I will hear what God the LORD will speak; {N} for He will speak peace unto His people, and to His saints; but let them not turn back to folly.
85.9 ט   9 אַךְ קָרוֹב לִירֵאָיו יִשְׁעוֹ;    לִשְׁכֹּן כָּבוֹד בְּאַרְצֵנוּ.  Surely His salvation is nigh them that fear Him; that glory may dwell in our land.
85.10 י   1 חֶסֶד-וֶאֱמֶת נִפְגָּשׁוּ;    צֶדֶק וְשָׁלוֹם נָשָׁקוּ.0  Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
85.11 י אֱמֶת, מֵאֶרֶץ תִּצְמָח;    וְצֶדֶק, מִשָּׁמַיִם נִשְׁקָף.א   11  Truth springeth out of the earth; and righteousness hath looked down from heaven.
85.12 י גַּם-יְהוָה, יִתֵּן הַטּוֹב;    וְאַרְצֵנוּ, תִּתֵּן יְבוּלָהּ.ב   12  Yea, the LORD will give that which is good; and our land shall yield her produce.
85.13 י צֶדֶק, לְפָנָיו יְהַלֵּךְ;    וְיָשֵׂם לְדֶרֶךְ פְּעָמָיו.ג   13  Righteousness shall go before Him, and shall make His footsteps a way. {P}
86.1 א  תְּפִלָּה, לְדָוִד: הַטֵּה-יְהוָה אָזְנְךָ עֲנֵנִי--    כִּי-עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן אָנִי. 1 A Prayer of David. {N} Incline Thine ear, O LORD, and answer me; for I am poor and needy.
86.2 ב  שָׁמְרָה נַפְשִׁי,    כִּי-חָסִיד אָנִי: הוֹשַׁע עַבְדְּךָ, אַתָּה אֱלֹהַי--    הַבּוֹטֵחַ אֵלֶיךָ. 2 Keep my soul, for I am godly; {N} O Thou my God, save Thy servant that trusteth in Thee.
86.3 ג  חָנֵּנִי אֲדֹנָי:    כִּי אֵלֶיךָ אֶקְרָא, כָּל-הַיּוֹם. 3 Be gracious unto me, O Lord; for unto Thee do I cry all the day.
86.4 ד  שַׂמֵּחַ, נֶפֶשׁ עַבְדֶּךָ:    כִּי אֵלֶיךָ אֲדֹנָי, נַפְשִׁי אֶשָּׂא. 4 Rejoice the soul of Thy servant; for unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
86.5 ה  כִּי-אַתָּה אֲדֹנָי, טוֹב וְסַלָּח;    וְרַב-חֶסֶד, לְכָל-קֹרְאֶיךָ. 5 For Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to pardon, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon Thee.
86.6 ו  הַאֲזִינָה יְהוָה, תְּפִלָּתִי;    וְהַקְשִׁיבָה, בְּקוֹל תַּחֲנוּנוֹתָי. 6 Give ear, O LORD, unto my prayer; and attend unto the voice of my supplications.
86.7 ז  בְּיוֹם צָרָתִי, אֶקְרָאֶךָּ:    כִּי תַעֲנֵנִי. 7 In the day of my trouble I call upon Thee; for Thou wilt answer me.
86.8 ח  אֵין-כָּמוֹךָ בָאֱלֹהִים אֲדֹנָי;    וְאֵין כְּמַעֲשֶׂיךָ. 8 There is none like unto Thee among the gods, O Lord, and there are no works like Thine.
86.9 ט  כָּל-גּוֹיִם, אֲשֶׁר עָשִׂיתָ--יָבוֹאוּ וְיִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לְפָנֶיךָ אֲדֹנָי;    וִיכַבְּדוּ לִשְׁמֶךָ. 9 All nations whom Thou hast made shall come and prostrate themselves before Thee, O Lord; and they shall glorify Thy name.
86.10 י  כִּי-גָדוֹל אַתָּה, וְעֹשֵׂה נִפְלָאוֹת;    אַתָּה אֱלֹהִים לְבַדֶּךָ. 10 For Thou art great, and doest wondrous things; Thou art God alone.
86.11 יא  הוֹרֵנִי יְהוָה, דַּרְכֶּךָ--    אֲהַלֵּךְ בַּאֲמִתֶּךָ; יַחֵד לְבָבִי,    לְיִרְאָה שְׁמֶךָ. 11 Teach me, O LORD, Thy way, that I may walk in Thy truth; {N} make one my heart to fear Thy name.
86.12 יב  אוֹדְךָ, אֲדֹנָי אֱלֹהַי--בְּכָל-לְבָבִי;    וַאֲכַבְּדָה שִׁמְךָ לְעוֹלָם. 12 I will thank Thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart; and I will glorify Thy name for evermore.
86.13 יג  כִּי-חַסְדְּךָ, גָּדוֹל עָלָי;    וְהִצַּלְתָּ נַפְשִׁי, מִשְּׁאוֹל תַּחְתִּיָּה. 13 For great is Thy mercy toward me; and Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest nether-world.
86.14 יד  אֱלֹהִים, זֵדִים קָמוּ-עָלַי,    וַעֲדַת עָרִיצִים, בִּקְשׁוּ נַפְשִׁי; וְלֹא שָׂמוּךָ    לְנֶגְדָּם. 14 O God, the proud are risen up against me, and the company of violent men have sought after my soul, {N} and have not set Thee before them.
86.15 טו  וְאַתָּה אֲדֹנָי, אֵל-רַחוּם וְחַנּוּן;    אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם, וְרַב-חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת. 15 But Thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
86.16 טז  פְּנֵה אֵלַי, וְחָנֵּנִי:    תְּנָה-עֻזְּךָ לְעַבְדֶּךָ; וְהוֹשִׁיעָה, לְבֶן-אֲמָתֶךָ. 16 O turn unto me, and be gracious unto me; give Thy strength unto Thy servant, and save the son of Thy handmaid.
86.17 יז  עֲשֵׂה-עִמִּי אוֹת,    לְטוֹבָה: וְיִרְאוּ שֹׂנְאַי וְיֵבֹשׁוּ--    כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה, עֲזַרְתַּנִי וְנִחַמְתָּנִי. 17 Work in my behalf a sign for good; {N} that they that hate me may see it, and be put to shame, because Thou, LORD, hast helped me, and comforted me. {P}
87.1 א  לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח, מִזְמוֹר שִׁיר:    יְסוּדָתוֹ, בְּהַרְרֵי-קֹדֶשׁ. 1 A Psalm of the sons of Korah; a Song. His foundation is in the holy mountains.
87.2 ב  אֹהֵב יְהוָה, שַׁעֲרֵי צִיּוֹן--    מִכֹּל, מִשְׁכְּנוֹת יַעֲקֹב. 2 The LORD loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
87.3 ג  נִכְבָּדוֹת, מְדֻבָּר בָּךְ--    עִיר הָאֱלֹהִים סֶלָה. 3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah
87.4 ד  אַזְכִּיר, רַהַב וּבָבֶל--    לְיֹדְעָי: הִנֵּה פְלֶשֶׁת וְצֹר עִם-כּוּשׁ;    זֶה, יֻלַּד-שָׁם. 4 'I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon as among them that know Me; {N} behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this one was born there.'
87.5 ה  וּלְצִיּוֹן, יֵאָמַר--    אִישׁ וְאִישׁ, יֻלַּד-בָּהּ; וְהוּא יְכוֹנְנֶהָ    עֶלְיוֹן. 5 But of Zion it shall be said: 'This man and that was born in her; {N} and the Most High Himself doth establish her.'
87.6 ו  יְהוָה--יִסְפֹּר, בִּכְתוֹב עַמִּים:    זֶה יֻלַּד-שָׁם סֶלָה. 6 The LORD shall count in the register of the peoples: 'This one was born there.' Selah
87.7 ז  וְשָׁרִים כְּחֹלְלִים--    כָּל-מַעְיָנַי בָּךְ. 7 And whether they sing or dance, all my thoughts are in thee. {P}
88.1 א  שִׁיר מִזְמוֹר, לִבְנֵי-קֹרַח: לַמְנַצֵּחַ עַל-מָחֲלַת לְעַנּוֹת;    מַשְׂכִּיל, לְהֵימָן הָאֶזְרָחִי. יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי יְשׁוּעָתִי--    יוֹם-צָעַקְתִּי בַלַּיְלָה נֶגְדֶּךָ. 1 A Song, a Psalm of the sons of Korah; {N} for the Leader; upon Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite. O LORD, God of my salvation, what time I cry in the night before Thee,
88.2 ב תָּבוֹא לְפָנֶיךָ, תְּפִלָּתִי;    הַטֵּה אָזְנְךָ, לְרִנָּתִי.   2  Let my prayer come before Thee, incline Thine ear unto my cry.
88.3 ג כִּי-שָׂבְעָה בְרָעוֹת נַפְשִׁי;    וְחַיַּי, לִשְׁאוֹל הִגִּיעוּ.   3  For my soul is sated with troubles, and my life draweth nigh unto the grave.
88.4 ד נֶחְשַׁבְתִּי, עִם-יוֹרְדֵי בוֹר;    הָיִיתִי, כְּגֶבֶר אֵין-אֱיָל.   4  I am counted with them that go down into the pit; I am become as a man that hath no help;
88.5 ה בַּמֵּתִים,    חָפְשִׁי: כְּמוֹ חֲלָלִים, שֹׁכְבֵי קֶבֶר--    אֲשֶׁר לֹא זְכַרְתָּם עוֹד; וְהֵמָּה,    מִיָּדְךָ נִגְזָרוּ.   5  Set apart among the dead, {N} like the slain that lie in the grave, whom Thou rememberest no more; {N} and they are cut off from Thy hand.
88.6 ו שַׁתַּנִי, בְּבוֹר תַּחְתִּיּוֹת;    בְּמַחֲשַׁכִּים, בִּמְצֹלוֹת.   6  Thou hast laid me in the nethermost pit, in dark places, in the deeps.
88.7 ז עָלַי, סָמְכָה חֲמָתֶךָ;    וְכָל-מִשְׁבָּרֶיךָ, עִנִּיתָ סֶּלָה.   7  Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and all Thy waves Thou pressest down. Selah
88.8 ח הִרְחַקְתָּ מְיֻדָּעַי, מִמֶּנִּי:    שַׁתַּנִי תוֹעֵבוֹת לָמוֹ; כָּלֻא, וְלֹא אֵצֵא.   8  Thou hast put mine acquaintance far from me; Thou hast made me an abomination unto them; I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.
88.9 ט   9 עֵינִי דָאֲבָה,    מִנִּי-עֹנִי: קְרָאתִיךָ יְהוָה בְּכָל-יוֹם;    שִׁטַּחְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ כַפָּי.  Mine eye languisheth by reason of affliction; {N} I have called upon Thee, O LORD, every day, I have spread forth my hands unto Thee.
88.10 י   1 הֲלַמֵּתִים תַּעֲשֶׂה-פֶּלֶא:    אִם-רְפָאִים, יָקוּמוּ יוֹדוּךָ סֶּלָה.0  Wilt Thou work wonders for the dead? Or shall the shades arise and give Thee thanks? Selah
88.11 י הַיְסֻפַּר בַּקֶּבֶר חַסְדֶּךָ;    אֱמוּנָתְךָ, בָּאֲבַדּוֹן.א   11  Shall Thy mercy be declared in the grave? or Thy faithfulness in destruction?
88.12 י הֲיִוָּדַע בַּחֹשֶׁךְ פִּלְאֶךָ;    וְצִדְקָתְךָ, בְּאֶרֶץ נְשִׁיָּה.ב   12  Shall Thy wonders be known in the dark? and Thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
88.13 י וַאֲנִי, אֵלֶיךָ יְהוָה שִׁוַּעְתִּי;    וּבַבֹּקֶר, תְּפִלָּתִי תְקַדְּמֶךָּ.ג   13  But as for me, unto Thee, O LORD, do I cry, and in the morning doth my prayer come to meet Thee.
88.14 י לָמָה יְהוָה, תִּזְנַח נַפְשִׁי;    תַּסְתִּיר פָּנֶיךָ מִמֶּנִּי.ד   14  LORD, why castest Thou off my soul? Why hidest Thou Thy face from me?
88.15 ט עָנִי אֲנִי וְגֹוֵעַ מִנֹּעַר;    נָשָׂאתִי אֵמֶיךָ אָפוּנָה.ו   15  I am afflicted and at the point of death from my youth up; I have borne Thy terrors, I am distracted.
88.16 ט עָלַי, עָבְרוּ חֲרוֹנֶיךָ;    בִּעוּתֶיךָ, צִמְּתוּתֻנִי.ז   16  Thy fierce wrath is gone over me; Thy terrors have cut me off.
88.17 י סַבּוּנִי כַמַּיִם, כָּל-הַיּוֹם;    הִקִּיפוּ עָלַי יָחַד.ז   17  They came round about me like water all the day; they compassed me about together.
88.18 י הִרְחַקְתָּ מִמֶּנִּי, אֹהֵב וָרֵעַ;    מְיֻדָּעַי מַחְשָׁךְ.ח   18  Friend and companion hast Thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness. {P}
89.1 א  מַשְׂכִּיל, לְאֵיתָן הָאֶזְרָחִי. חַסְדֵי יְהוָה, עוֹלָם אָשִׁירָה;    לְדֹר וָדֹר, אוֹדִיעַ אֱמוּנָתְךָ בְּפִי. 1 Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite. I will sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever; to all generations will I make known Thy faithfulness with my mouth.
89.2 ב כִּי-אָמַרְתִּי--עוֹלָם, חֶסֶד יִבָּנֶה;    שָׁמַיִם, תָּכִן אֱמוּנָתְךָ בָהֶם.   2  For I have said: 'For ever is mercy built; in the very heavens Thou dost establish Thy faithfulness.
89.3 ג כָּרַתִּי בְרִית, לִבְחִירִי;    נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי, לְדָוִד עַבְדִּי.   3  I have made a covenant with My chosen, I have sworn unto David My servant:
89.4 ד עַד-עוֹלָם, אָכִין זַרְעֶךָ;    וּבָנִיתִי לְדֹר-וָדוֹר כִּסְאֲךָ סֶלָה.   4  For ever will I establish thy seed, and build up thy throne to all generations.' Selah
89.5 ה וְיוֹדוּ שָׁמַיִם פִּלְאֲךָ יְהוָה;    אַף-אֱמוּנָתְךָ, בִּקְהַל קְדֹשִׁים.   5  So shall the heavens praise Thy wonders, O LORD, Thy faithfulness also in the assembly of the holy ones.
89.6 ו כִּי מִי בַשַּׁחַק, יַעֲרֹךְ לַיהוָה;    יִדְמֶה לַיהוָה, בִּבְנֵי אֵלִים.   6  For who in the skies can be compared unto the LORD, who among the sons of might can be likened unto the LORD,
89.7 ז אֵל נַעֲרָץ, בְּסוֹד-קְדֹשִׁים רַבָּה;    וְנוֹרָא, עַל-כָּל-סְבִיבָיו.   7  A God dreaded in the great council of the holy ones, and feared of all them that are about Him?
89.8 ח יְהוָה, אֱלֹהֵי צְבָאוֹת--מִי-כָמוֹךָ חֲסִין יָהּ;    וֶאֱמוּנָתְךָ, סְבִיבוֹתֶיךָ.   8  O LORD God of hosts, who is a mighty one, like unto Thee, O LORD? And Thy faithfulness is round about Thee.
89.9 ט   9 אַתָּה מוֹשֵׁל, בְּגֵאוּת הַיָּם;    בְּשׂוֹא גַלָּיו, אַתָּה תְשַׁבְּחֵם.  Thou rulest the proud swelling of the sea; when the waves thereof arise, Thou stillest them.
89.10 י   1 אַתָּה דִכִּאתָ כֶחָלָל רָהַב;    בִּזְרוֹעַ עֻזְּךָ, פִּזַּרְתָּ אוֹיְבֶיךָ.0  Thou didst crush Rahab, as one that is slain; Thou didst scatter Thine enemies with the arm of Thy strength.
89.11 י לְךָ שָׁמַיִם, אַף-לְךָ אָרֶץ;    תֵּבֵל וּמְלֹאָהּ, אַתָּה יְסַדְתָּם.א   11  Thine are the heavens, Thine also the earth; the world and the fulness thereof, Thou hast founded them.
89.12 י צָפוֹן וְיָמִין, אַתָּה בְרָאתָם;    תָּבוֹר וְחֶרְמוֹן, בְּשִׁמְךָ יְרַנֵּנוּ.ב   12  The north and the south, Thou hast created them; Tabor and Hermon rejoice in Thy name.
89.13 י לְךָ זְרוֹעַ, עִם-גְּבוּרָה;    תָּעֹז יָדְךָ, תָּרוּם יְמִינֶךָ.ג   13  Thine is an arm with might; strong is Thy hand, and exalted is Thy right hand.
89.14 י צֶדֶק וּמִשְׁפָּט, מְכוֹן כִּסְאֶךָ;    חֶסֶד וֶאֱמֶת, יְקַדְּמוּ פָנֶיךָ.ד   14  Righteousness and justice are the foundation of Thy throne; mercy and truth go before Thee.
89.15 ט אַשְׁרֵי הָעָם, יֹדְעֵי תְרוּעָה;    יְהוָה, בְּאוֹר-פָּנֶיךָ יְהַלֵּכוּן.ו   15  Happy is the people that know the joyful shout; they walk, O LORD, in the light of Thy countenance.
89.16 ט בְּשִׁמְךָ, יְגִילוּן כָּל-הַיּוֹם;    וּבְצִדְקָתְךָ יָרוּמוּ.ז   16  In Thy name do they rejoice all the day; and through Thy righteousness are they exalted.
89.17 י כִּי-תִפְאֶרֶת עֻזָּמוֹ אָתָּה;    וּבִרְצוֹנְךָ, תרים (תָּרוּם) קַרְנֵינוּ.ז   17  For Thou art the glory of their strength; and in Thy favour our horn is exalted.
89.18 י כִּי לַיהוָה, מָגִנֵּנוּ;    וְלִקְדוֹשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל מַלְכֵּנוּ.ח   18  For of the LORD is our shield; and the Holy One of Israel is our king.
89.19 י אָז דִּבַּרְתָּ בְחָזוֹן, לַחֲסִידֶיךָ--    וַתֹּאמֶר, שִׁוִּיתִי עֵזֶר עַל-גִּבּוֹר; הֲרִימוֹתִי בָחוּר    מֵעָם.ט   19  Then Thou spokest in vision to Thy godly ones, and saidst: 'I have laid help upon one that is mighty; {N} I have exalted one chosen out of the people.
89.20 כ   2 מָצָאתִי, דָּוִד עַבְדִּי;    בְּשֶׁמֶן קָדְשִׁי מְשַׁחְתִּיו.0  I have found David My servant; with My holy oil have I anointed him;
89.21 כ אֲשֶׁר יָדִי, תִּכּוֹן עִמּוֹ;    אַף-זְרוֹעִי תְאַמְּצֶנּוּ.א   21  With whom My hand shall be established; Mine arm also shall strengthen him.
89.22 כ לֹא-יַשִּׁיא אוֹיֵב בּוֹ;    וּבֶן-עַוְלָה, לֹא יְעַנֶּנּוּ.ב   22  The enemy shall not exact from him; nor the son of wickedness afflict him.
89.23 כ וְכַתּוֹתִי מִפָּנָיו צָרָיו;    וּמְשַׂנְאָיו אֶגּוֹף.ג   23  And I will beat to pieces his adversaries before him, and smite them that hate him.
89.24 כ וֶאֱמוּנָתִי וְחַסְדִּי עִמּוֹ;    וּבִשְׁמִי, תָּרוּם קַרְנוֹ.ד   24  But My faithfulness and My mercy shall be with him; and through My name shall his horn be exalted.
89.25 כ וְשַׂמְתִּי בַיָּם יָדוֹ;    וּבַנְּהָרוֹת יְמִינוֹ.ה   25  I will set his hand also on the sea, and his right hand on the rivers.
89.26 כ הוּא יִקְרָאֵנִי, אָבִי אָתָּה;    אֵלִי, וְצוּר יְשׁוּעָתִי.ו   26  He shall call unto Me: Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation.
89.27 כ אַף-אָנִי, בְּכוֹר אֶתְּנֵהוּ;    עֶלְיוֹן, לְמַלְכֵי-אָרֶץ.ז   27  I also will appoint him first-born, the highest of the kings of the earth.
89.28 כ לְעוֹלָם, אשמור- (אֶשְׁמָר-) לוֹ חַסְדִּי;    וּבְרִיתִי, נֶאֱמֶנֶת לוֹ.ח   28  For ever will I keep for him My mercy, and My covenant shall stand fast with him.
89.29 כ וְשַׂמְתִּי לָעַד זַרְעוֹ;    וְכִסְאוֹ, כִּימֵי שָׁמָיִם.ט   29  His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.
89.30 ל   3 אִם-יַעַזְבוּ בָנָיו, תּוֹרָתִי;    וּבְמִשְׁפָּטַי, לֹא יֵלֵכוּן.0  If his children forsake My law, and walk not in Mine ordinances;
89.31 ל אִם-חֻקֹּתַי יְחַלֵּלוּ;    וּמִצְוֺתַי, לֹא יִשְׁמֹרוּ.א   31  If they profane My statutes, and keep not My commandments;
89.32 ל וּפָקַדְתִּי בְשֵׁבֶט פִּשְׁעָם;    וּבִנְגָעִים עֲוֺנָם.ב   32  Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes.
89.33 ל וְחַסְדִּי, לֹא-אָפִיר מֵעִמּוֹ;    וְלֹא-אֲשַׁקֵּר, בֶּאֱמוּנָתִי.ג   33  But My mercy will I not break off from him, nor will I be false to My faithfulness.
89.34 ל לֹא-אֲחַלֵּל בְּרִיתִי;    וּמוֹצָא שְׂפָתַי, לֹא אֲשַׁנֶּה.ד   34  My covenant will I not profane, nor alter that which is gone out of My lips.
89.35 ל אַחַת, נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי בְקָדְשִׁי:    אִם-לְדָוִד אֲכַזֵּב.ה   35  Once have I sworn by My holiness: Surely I will not be false unto David;
89.36 ל זַרְעוֹ, לְעוֹלָם יִהְיֶה;    וְכִסְאוֹ כַשֶּׁמֶשׁ נֶגְדִּי.ו   36  His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before Me.
89.37 ל כְּיָרֵחַ, יִכּוֹן עוֹלָם;    וְעֵד בַּשַּׁחַק, נֶאֱמָן סֶלָה.ז   37  It shall be established for ever as the moon; and be stedfast as the witness in sky.' Selah
89.38 ל וְאַתָּה זָנַחְתָּ, וַתִּמְאָס;    הִתְעַבַּרְתָּ, עִם-מְשִׁיחֶךָ.ח   38  But Thou hast cast off and rejected, Thou hast been wroth with Thine anointed.
89.39 ל נֵאַרְתָּה, בְּרִית עַבְדֶּךָ;    חִלַּלְתָּ לָאָרֶץ נִזְרוֹ.ט   39  Thou hast abhorred the covenant of Thy servant; Thou hast profaned his crown even to the ground.
89.40 מ   4 פָּרַצְתָּ כָל-גְּדֵרֹתָיו;    שַׂמְתָּ מִבְצָרָיו מְחִתָּה.0  Thou hast broken down all his fences; Thou hast brought his strongholds to ruin.
89.41 מ שַׁסֻּהוּ, כָּל-עֹבְרֵי דָרֶךְ;    הָיָה חֶרְפָּה, לִשְׁכֵנָיו.א   41  All that pass by the way spoil him; he is become a taunt to his neighbours.
89.42 מ הֲרִימוֹתָ, יְמִין צָרָיו;    הִשְׂמַחְתָּ, כָּל-אוֹיְבָיו.ב   42  Thou hast exalted the right hand of his adversaries; Thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice.
89.43 מ אַף-תָּשִׁיב, צוּר חַרְבּוֹ;    וְלֹא הֲקֵימֹתוֹ, בַּמִּלְחָמָה.ג   43  Yea, Thou turnest back the edge of his sword, and hast not made him to stand in the battle.
89.44 מ הִשְׁבַּתָּ מִטְּהָרוֹ;    וְכִסְאוֹ, לָאָרֶץ מִגַּרְתָּה.ד   44  Thou hast made his brightness to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground.
89.45 מ הִקְצַרְתָּ, יְמֵי עֲלוּמָיו;    הֶעֱטִיתָ עָלָיו בּוּשָׁה סֶלָה.ה   45  The days of his youth hast Thou shortened; Thou hast covered him with shame. Selah
89.46 מ עַד-מָה יְהוָה, תִּסָּתֵר לָנֶצַח;    תִּבְעַר כְּמוֹ-אֵשׁ חֲמָתֶךָ.ו   46  How long, O LORD, wilt Thou hide Thyself for ever? How long shall Thy wrath burn like fire?
89.47 מ זְכָר-אֲנִי מֶה-חָלֶד;    עַל-מַה-שָּׁוְא, בָּרָאתָ כָל-בְּנֵי-אָדָם.ז   47  O remember how short my time is; for what vanity hast Thou created all the children of men!
89.48 מ מִי גֶבֶר יִחְיֶה, וְלֹא יִרְאֶה-מָּוֶת;    יְמַלֵּט נַפְשׁוֹ מִיַּד-שְׁאוֹל סֶלָה.ח   48  What man is he that liveth and shall not see death, that shall deliver his soul from the power of the grave? Selah
89.49 מ אַיֵּה, חֲסָדֶיךָ הָרִאשֹׁנִים אֲדֹנָי:    נִשְׁבַּעְתָּ לְדָוִד, בֶּאֱמוּנָתֶךָ.ט   49  Where are Thy former mercies, O Lord, which Thou didst swear unto David in Thy faithfulness?
89.50 נ   5 זְכֹר אֲדֹנָי, חֶרְפַּת עֲבָדֶיךָ;    שְׂאֵתִי בְחֵיקִי, כָּל-רַבִּים עַמִּים.0  Remember, Lord, the taunt of Thy servants; how I do bear in my bosom [the taunt of] so many peoples;
89.51 נ אֲשֶׁר חֵרְפוּ אוֹיְבֶיךָ יְהוָה:    אֲשֶׁר חֵרְפוּ, עִקְּבוֹת מְשִׁיחֶךָ.א   51  Wherewith Thine enemies have taunted, O LORD, wherewith they have taunted the footsteps of Thine anointed.
89.52 נ בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה לְעוֹלָם:    אָמֵן וְאָמֵן.ב   52  Blessed be the LORD for evermore. Amen, and Amen. {P}
90.1 א  תְּפִלָּה, לְמֹשֶׁה אִישׁ-הָאֱלֹהִים: אֲדֹנָי--מָעוֹן אַתָּה, הָיִיתָ לָּנוּ;    בְּדֹר וָדֹר. 1 A Prayer of Moses the man of God. {N} Lord, Thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations.
90.2 ב  בְּטֶרֶם, הָרִים יֻלָּדוּ--    וַתְּחוֹלֵל אֶרֶץ וְתֵבֵל; וּמֵעוֹלָם עַד-עוֹלָם,    אַתָּה אֵל. 2 Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever Thou hadst formed the earth and the world, {N} even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God.
90.3 ג  תָּשֵׁב אֱנוֹשׁ, עַד-דַּכָּא;    וַתֹּאמֶר, שׁוּבוּ בְנֵי-אָדָם. 3 Thou turnest man to contrition; and sayest: 'Return, ye children of men.'
90.4 ד  כִּי אֶלֶף שָׁנִים, בְּעֵינֶיךָ--    כְּיוֹם אֶתְמוֹל, כִּי יַעֲבֹר; וְאַשְׁמוּרָה    בַלָּיְלָה. 4 For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, {N} and as a watch in the night.
90.5 ה  זְרַמְתָּם, שֵׁנָה יִהְיוּ;    בַּבֹּקֶר, כֶּחָצִיר יַחֲלֹף. 5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep; in the morning they are like grass which groweth up.
90.6 ו  בַּבֹּקֶר, יָצִיץ וְחָלָף;    לָעֶרֶב, יְמוֹלֵל וְיָבֵשׁ. 6 In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth.
90.7 ז  כִּי-כָלִינוּ בְאַפֶּךָ;    וּבַחֲמָתְךָ נִבְהָלְנוּ. 7 For we are consumed in Thine anger, and by Thy wrath are we hurried away.
90.8 ח  שת (שַׁתָּה) עֲוֺנֹתֵינוּ לְנֶגְדֶּךָ;    עֲלֻמֵנוּ, לִמְאוֹר פָּנֶיךָ. 8 Thou hast set our iniquities before Thee, our secret sins in the light of Thy countenance.
90.9 ט  כִּי כָל-יָמֵינוּ, פָּנוּ בְעֶבְרָתֶךָ;    כִּלִּינוּ שָׁנֵינוּ כְמוֹ-הֶגֶה. 9 For all our days are passed away in Thy wrath; we bring our years to an end as a tale that is told.
90.10 י  יְמֵי-שְׁנוֹתֵינוּ בָהֶם שִׁבְעִים שָׁנָה,    וְאִם בִּגְבוּרֹת שְׁמוֹנִים שָׁנָה-- וְרָהְבָּם,    עָמָל וָאָוֶן: כִּי-גָז חִישׁ,    וַנָּעֻפָה. 10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten, or even by reason of strength fourscore years; {N} yet is their pride but travail and vanity; {N} for it is speedily gone, and we fly away.
90.11 יא  מִי-יוֹדֵעַ, עֹז אַפֶּךָ;    וּכְיִרְאָתְךָ, עֶבְרָתֶךָ. 11 Who knoweth the power of Thine anger, and Thy wrath according to the fear that is due unto Thee?
90.12 יב  לִמְנוֹת יָמֵינוּ, כֵּן הוֹדַע;    וְנָבִא, לְבַב חָכְמָה. 12 So teach us to number our days, that we may get us a heart of wisdom.
90.13 יג  שׁוּבָה יְהוָה, עַד-מָתָי;    וְהִנָּחֵם, עַל-עֲבָדֶיךָ. 13 Return, O LORD; how long? And let it repent Thee concerning Thy servants.
90.14 יד  שַׂבְּעֵנוּ בַבֹּקֶר חַסְדֶּךָ;    וּנְרַנְּנָה וְנִשְׂמְחָה, בְּכָל-יָמֵינוּ. 14 O satisfy us in the morning with Thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
90.15 טו  שַׂמְּחֵנוּ, כִּימוֹת עִנִּיתָנוּ:    שְׁנוֹת, רָאִינוּ רָעָה. 15 Make us glad according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us, according to the years wherein we have seen evil.
90.16 טז  יֵרָאֶה אֶל-עֲבָדֶיךָ פָעֳלֶךָ;    וַהֲדָרְךָ, עַל-בְּנֵיהֶם. 16 Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants, and Thy glory upon their children.
90.17 יז  וִיהִי, נֹעַם אֲדֹנָי אֱלֹהֵינוּ--    עָלֵינוּ: וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדֵינוּ, כּוֹנְנָה עָלֵינוּ;    וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדֵינוּ, כּוֹנְנֵהוּ. 17 And let the graciousness of the Lord our God be upon us; {N} establish Thou also upon us the work of our hands; yea, the work of our hands establish Thou it. {P}
91.1 א  יֹשֵׁב, בְּסֵתֶר עֶלְיוֹן;    בְּצֵל שַׁדַּי, יִתְלוֹנָן. 1 O thou that dwellest in the covert of the Most High, and abidest in the shadow of the Almighty;
91.2 ב  אֹמַר--לַיהוָה, מַחְסִי וּמְצוּדָתִי;    אֱלֹהַי, אֶבְטַח-בּוֹ. 2 I will say of the LORD, who is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust,
91.3 ג  כִּי הוּא יַצִּילְךָ, מִפַּח יָקוּשׁ;    מִדֶּבֶר הַוּוֹת. 3 That He will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence.
91.4 ד  בְּאֶבְרָתוֹ, יָסֶךְ לָךְ--וְתַחַת-כְּנָפָיו תֶּחְסֶה;    צִנָּה וְסֹחֵרָה אֲמִתּוֹ. 4 He will cover thee with His pinions, and under His wings shalt thou take refuge; His truth is a shield and a buckler.
91.5 ה  לֹא-תִירָא, מִפַּחַד לָיְלָה;    מֵחֵץ, יָעוּף יוֹמָם. 5 Thou shalt not be afraid of the terror by night, nor of the arrow that flieth by day;
91.6 ו  מִדֶּבֶר, בָּאֹפֶל יַהֲלֹךְ;    מִקֶּטֶב, יָשׁוּד צָהֳרָיִם. 6 Of the pestilence that walketh in darkness, nor of the destruction that wasteth at noonday.
91.7 ז  יִפֹּל מִצִּדְּךָ, אֶלֶף--וּרְבָבָה מִימִינֶךָ:    אֵלֶיךָ, לֹא יִגָּשׁ. 7 A thousand may fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; it shall not come nigh thee.
91.8 ח  רַק, בְּעֵינֶיךָ תַבִּיט;    וְשִׁלֻּמַת רְשָׁעִים תִּרְאֶה. 8 Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and see the recompense of the wicked.
91.9 ט  כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה מַחְסִי;    עֶלְיוֹן, שַׂמְתָּ מְעוֹנֶךָ. 9 For thou hast made the LORD who is my refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation.
91.10 י  לֹא-תְאֻנֶּה אֵלֶיךָ רָעָה;    וְנֶגַע, לֹא-יִקְרַב בְּאָהֳלֶךָ. 10 There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy tent.
91.11 יא  כִּי מַלְאָכָיו, יְצַוֶּה-לָּךְ;    לִשְׁמָרְךָ, בְּכָל-דְּרָכֶיךָ. 11 For He will give His angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
91.12 יב  עַל-כַּפַּיִם יִשָּׂאוּנְךָ:    פֶּן-תִּגֹּף בָּאֶבֶן רַגְלֶךָ. 12 They shall bear thee upon their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
91.13 יג  עַל-שַׁחַל וָפֶתֶן, תִּדְרֹךְ;    תִּרְמֹס כְּפִיר וְתַנִּין. 13 Thou shalt tread upon the lion and asp; the young lion and the serpent shalt thou trample under feet.
91.14 יד  כִּי בִי חָשַׁק, וַאֲפַלְּטֵהוּ;    אֲשַׂגְּבֵהוּ, כִּי-יָדַע שְׁמִי. 14 'Because he hath set his love upon Me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set him on high, because he hath known My name.
91.15 טו  יִקְרָאֵנִי, וְאֶעֱנֵהוּ--עִמּוֹ-אָנֹכִי בְצָרָה;    אֲחַלְּצֵהוּ, וַאֲכַבְּדֵהוּ. 15 He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble; I will rescue him, and bring him to honour.
91.16 טז  אֹרֶךְ יָמִים, אַשְׂבִּיעֵהוּ;    וְאַרְאֵהוּ, בִּישׁוּעָתִי. 16 With long life will I satisfy him, and make him to behold My salvation.' {P}
92.1 א  מִזְמוֹר שִׁיר, לְיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת. טוֹב, לְהֹדוֹת לַיהוָה;    וּלְזַמֵּר לְשִׁמְךָ עֶלְיוֹן. 1 A Psalm, a Song. For the sabbath day. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the LORD, and to sing praises unto Thy name, O Most High;
92.2 ב לְהַגִּיד בַּבֹּקֶר חַסְדֶּךָ;    וֶאֱמוּנָתְךָ, בַּלֵּילוֹת.   2  To declare Thy lovingkindness in the morning, and Thy faithfulness in the night seasons,
92.3 ג עֲלֵי-עָשׂוֹר, וַעֲלֵי-נָבֶל;    עֲלֵי הִגָּיוֹן בְּכִנּוֹר.   3  With an instrument of ten strings, and with the psaltery; with a solemn sound upon the harp.
92.4 ד כִּי שִׂמַּחְתַּנִי יְהוָה בְּפָעֳלֶךָ;    בְּמַעֲשֵׂי יָדֶיךָ אֲרַנֵּן.   4  For Thou, LORD, hast made me glad through Thy work; I will exult in the works of Thy hands.
92.5 ה מַה-גָּדְלוּ מַעֲשֶׂיךָ יְהוָה;    מְאֹד, עָמְקוּ מַחְשְׁבֹתֶיךָ.   5  How great are Thy works, O LORD! Thy thoughts are very deep.
92.6 ו אִישׁ-בַּעַר, לֹא יֵדָע;    וּכְסִיל, לֹא-יָבִין אֶת-זֹאת.   6  A brutish man knoweth not, neither doth a fool understand this.
92.7 ז בִּפְרֹחַ רְשָׁעִים, כְּמוֹ עֵשֶׂב, וַיָּצִיצוּ, כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן:    לְהִשָּׁמְדָם עֲדֵי-עַד.   7  When the wicked spring up as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they may be destroyed for ever.
92.8 ח וְאַתָּה מָרוֹם--    לְעֹלָם יְהוָה.   8  But Thou, O LORD, art on high for evermore.
92.9 ט   9 כִּי הִנֵּה אֹיְבֶיךָ, יְהוָה--    כִּי-הִנֵּה אֹיְבֶיךָ יֹאבֵדוּ: יִתְפָּרְדוּ,    כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן.  For, lo, Thine enemies, O LORD, for, lo, Thine enemies shall perish: {N} all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
92.10 י   1 וַתָּרֶם כִּרְאֵים קַרְנִי;    בַּלֹּתִי, בְּשֶׁמֶן רַעֲנָן.0  But my horn hast Thou exalted like the horn of the wild-ox; I am anointed with rich oil.
92.11 י וַתַּבֵּט עֵינִי,    בְּשׁוּרָי: בַּקָּמִים עָלַי מְרֵעִים--    תִּשְׁמַעְנָה אָזְנָי.א   11  Mine eye also hath gazed on them that lie in wait for me, {N} mine ears have heard my desire of the evil-doers that rise up against me.
92.12 י צַדִּיק, כַּתָּמָר יִפְרָח;    כְּאֶרֶז בַּלְּבָנוֹן יִשְׂגֶּה.ב   12  The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree; he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
92.13 י שְׁתוּלִים, בְּבֵית יְהוָה;    בְּחַצְרוֹת אֱלֹהֵינוּ יַפְרִיחוּ.ג   13  Planted in the house of the LORD, they shall flourish in the courts of our God.
92.14 י עוֹד, יְנוּבוּן בְּשֵׂיבָה;    דְּשֵׁנִים וְרַעֲנַנִּים יִהְיוּ.ד   14  They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be full of sap and richness;
92.15 ט לְהַגִּיד, כִּי-יָשָׁר יְהוָה;    צוּרִי, וְלֹא-עלתה (עַוְלָתָה) בּוֹ.ו   15  To declare that the LORD is upright, my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness. {P}
93.1 א  יְהוָה מָלָךְ,    גֵּאוּת לָבֵשׁ: לָבֵשׁ יְהוָה, עֹז הִתְאַזָּר;    אַף-תִּכּוֹן תֵּבֵל, בַּל-תִּמּוֹט. 1 The LORD reigneth; He is clothed in majesty; {N} the LORD is clothed, He hath girded Himself with strength; yea, the world is established, that it cannot be moved.
93.2 ב  נָכוֹן כִּסְאֲךָ מֵאָז;    מֵעוֹלָם אָתָּה. 2 Thy throne is established of old; Thou art from everlasting.
93.3 ג  נָשְׂאוּ נְהָרוֹת, יְהוָה--נָשְׂאוּ נְהָרוֹת קוֹלָם;    יִשְׂאוּ נְהָרוֹת דָּכְיָם. 3 The floods have lifted up, O LORD, the floods have lifted up their voice; the floods lift up their roaring.
93.4 ד  מִקֹּלוֹת, מַיִם רַבִּים--אַדִּירִים מִשְׁבְּרֵי-יָם;    אַדִּיר בַּמָּרוֹם יְהוָה. 4 Above the voices of many waters, the mighty breakers of the sea, the LORD on high is mighty.
93.5 ה  עֵדֹתֶיךָ, נֶאֶמְנוּ מְאֹד--לְבֵיתְךָ נַאֲוָה-קֹדֶשׁ:    יְהוָה, לְאֹרֶךְ יָמִים. 5 Thy testimonies are very sure, holiness becometh Thy house, O LORD, for evermore. {P}
94.1 א  אֵל-נְקָמוֹת יְהוָה;    אֵל נְקָמוֹת הוֹפִיעַ. 1 O LORD, Thou God to whom vengeance belongeth, Thou God to whom vengeance belongeth, shine forth.
94.2 ב  הִנָּשֵׂא, שֹׁפֵט הָאָרֶץ;    הָשֵׁב גְּמוּל, עַל-גֵּאִים. 2 Lift up Thyself, Thou Judge of the earth; render to the proud their recompense.
94.3 ג  עַד-מָתַי רְשָׁעִים יְהוָה:    עַד-מָתַי, רְשָׁעִים יַעֲלֹזוּ. 3 LORD, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked exult?
94.4 ד  יַבִּיעוּ יְדַבְּרוּ עָתָק;    יִתְאַמְּרוּ, כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן. 4 They gush out, they speak arrogancy; all the workers of iniquity bear themselves loftily.
94.5 ה  עַמְּךָ יְהוָה יְדַכְּאוּ;    וְנַחֲלָתְךָ יְעַנּוּ. 5 They crush Thy people, O LORD, and afflict Thy heritage.
94.6 ו  אַלְמָנָה וְגֵר יַהֲרֹגוּ;    וִיתוֹמִים יְרַצֵּחוּ. 6 They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.
94.7 ז  וַיֹּאמְרוּ, לֹא יִרְאֶה-יָּהּ;    וְלֹא-יָבִין, אֱלֹהֵי יַעֲקֹב. 7 And they say: 'The LORD will not see, neither will the God of Jacob give heed.'
94.8 ח  בִּינוּ, בֹּעֲרִים בָּעָם;    וּכְסִילִים, מָתַי תַּשְׂכִּילוּ. 8 Consider, ye brutish among the people; and ye fools, when will ye understand?
94.9 ט  הֲנֹטַע אֹזֶן, הֲלֹא יִשְׁמָע;    אִם-יֹצֵר עַיִן, הֲלֹא יַבִּיט. 9 He that planted the ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the eye, shall He not see?
94.10 י  הֲיֹסֵר גּוֹיִם, הֲלֹא יוֹכִיחַ:    הַמְלַמֵּד אָדָם דָּעַת. 10 He that instructeth nations, shall not He correct? even He that teacheth man knowledge?
94.11 יא  יְהוָה--יֹדֵעַ, מַחְשְׁבוֹת אָדָם:    כִּי-הֵמָּה הָבֶל. 11 The LORD knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
94.12 יב  אַשְׁרֵי, הַגֶּבֶר אֲשֶׁר-תְּיַסְּרֶנּוּ יָּהּ;    וּמִתּוֹרָתְךָ תְלַמְּדֶנּוּ. 12 Happy is the man whom Thou instructest, O LORD, and teachest out of Thy law;
94.13 יג  לְהַשְׁקִיט לוֹ, מִימֵי רָע--    עַד יִכָּרֶה לָרָשָׁע שָׁחַת. 13 That Thou mayest give him rest from the days of evil, until the pit be digged for the wicked.
94.14 יד  כִּי, לֹא-יִטֹּשׁ יְהוָה עַמּוֹ;    וְנַחֲלָתוֹ, לֹא יַעֲזֹב. 14 For the LORD will not cast off His people, neither will He forsake His inheritance.
94.15 טו  כִּי-עַד-צֶדֶק, יָשׁוּב מִשְׁפָּט;    וְאַחֲרָיו, כָּל-יִשְׁרֵי-לֵב. 15 For right shall return unto justice, and all the upright in heart shall follow it.
94.16 טז  מִי-יָקוּם לִי, עִם-מְרֵעִים;    מִי-יִתְיַצֵּב לִי, עִם-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן. 16 Who will rise up for me against the evil-doers? Who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?
94.17 יז  לוּלֵי יְהוָה, עֶזְרָתָה לִּי--    כִּמְעַט, שָׁכְנָה דוּמָה נַפְשִׁי. 17 Unless the LORD had been my help, my soul had soon dwelt in silence.
94.18 יח  אִם-אָמַרְתִּי, מָטָה רַגְלִי;    חַסְדְּךָ יְהוָה, יִסְעָדֵנִי. 18 If I say: 'My foot slippeth', Thy mercy, O LORD, holdeth me up.
94.19 יט  בְּרֹב שַׂרְעַפַּי בְּקִרְבִּי--    תַּנְחוּמֶיךָ, יְשַׁעַשְׁעוּ נַפְשִׁי. 19 When my cares are many within me, Thy comforts delight my soul.
94.20 כ  הַיְחָבְרְךָ, כִּסֵּא הַוּוֹת;    יֹצֵר עָמָל עֲלֵי-חֹק. 20 Shall the seat of wickedness have fellowship with Thee, which frameth mischief by statute?
94.21 כא  יָגוֹדּוּ, עַל-נֶפֶשׁ צַדִּיק;    וְדָם נָקִי יַרְשִׁיעוּ. 21 They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn innocent blood.
94.22 כב  וַיְהִי יְהוָה לִי לְמִשְׂגָּב;    וֵאלֹהַי, לְצוּר מַחְסִי. 22 But the LORD hath been my high tower, and my God the rock of my refuge.
94.23 כג  וַיָּשֶׁב עֲלֵיהֶם, אֶת אוֹנָם--    וּבְרָעָתָם יַצְמִיתֵם; יַצְמִיתֵם,    יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ. 23 And He hath brought upon them their own iniquity, and will cut them off in their own evil; {N} the LORD our God will cut them off. {P}
95.1 א  לְכוּ, נְרַנְּנָה לַיהוָה;    נָרִיעָה, לְצוּר יִשְׁעֵנוּ. 1 O come, let us sing unto the LORD; let us shout for joy to the Rock of our salvation.
95.2 ב  נְקַדְּמָה פָנָיו בְּתוֹדָה;    בִּזְמִרוֹת, נָרִיעַ לוֹ. 2 Let us come before His presence with thanksgiving, let us shout for joy unto Him with psalms.
95.3 ג  כִּי אֵל גָּדוֹל יְהוָה;    וּמֶלֶךְ גָּדוֹל, עַל-כָּל-אֱלֹהִים. 3 For the LORD is a great God, and a great King above all gods;
95.4 ד  אֲשֶׁר בְּיָדוֹ, מֶחְקְרֵי-אָרֶץ;    וְתוֹעֲפֹת הָרִים לוֹ. 4 In whose hand are the depths of the earth; the heights of the mountains are His also.
95.5 ה  אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ הַיָּם, וְהוּא עָשָׂהוּ;    וְיַבֶּשֶׁת, יָדָיו יָצָרוּ. 5 The sea is His, and He made it; and His hands formed the dry land.
95.6 ו  בֹּאוּ, נִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה וְנִכְרָעָה;    נִבְרְכָה, לִפְנֵי-יְהוָה עֹשֵׂנוּ. 6 O come, let us bow down and bend the knee; let us kneel before the LORD our Maker;
95.7 ז  כִּי הוּא אֱלֹהֵינוּ--    וַאֲנַחְנוּ עַם מַרְעִיתוֹ, וְצֹאן יָדוֹ: הַיּוֹם,    אִם-בְּקֹלוֹ תִשְׁמָעוּ. 7 For He is our God, and we are the people of His pasture, and the flock of His hand. {N} To-day, if ye would but hearken to His voice!
95.8 ח  אַל-תַּקְשׁוּ לְבַבְכֶם, כִּמְרִיבָה;    כְּיוֹם מַסָּה, בַּמִּדְבָּר. 8 'Harden not your heart, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the wilderness;
95.9 ט  אֲשֶׁר נִסּוּנִי, אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם:    בְּחָנוּנִי, גַּם-רָאוּ פָעֳלִי. 9 When your fathers tried Me, proved Me, even though they saw My work.
95.10 י  אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, אָקוּט בְּדוֹר--    וָאֹמַר, עַם תֹּעֵי לֵבָב הֵם; וְהֵם,    לֹא-יָדְעוּ דְרָכָי. 10 For forty years was I wearied with that generation, and said: It is a people that do err in their heart, {N} and they have not known My ways;
95.11 יא  אֲשֶׁר-נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי בְאַפִּי;    אִם-יְבֹאוּן, אֶל-מְנוּחָתִי. 11 Wherefore I swore in My wrath, that they should not enter into My rest.' {P}
96.1 א  שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה, שִׁיר חָדָשׁ;    שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ. 1 O sing unto the LORD a new song; sing unto the LORD, all the earth.
96.2 ב  שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה, בָּרְכוּ שְׁמוֹ;    בַּשְּׂרוּ מִיּוֹם-לְיוֹם, יְשׁוּעָתוֹ. 2 Sing unto the LORD, bless His name; proclaim His salvation from day to day.
96.3 ג  סַפְּרוּ בַגּוֹיִם כְּבוֹדוֹ;    בְּכָל-הָעַמִּים, נִפְלְאוֹתָיו. 3 Declare His glory among the nations, His marvellous works among all the peoples.
96.4 ד  כִּי גָדוֹל יְהוָה וּמְהֻלָּל מְאֹד;    נוֹרָא הוּא, עַל-כָּל-אֱלֹהִים. 4 For great is the LORD, and highly to be praised; He is to be feared above all gods.
96.5 ה  כִּי, כָּל-אֱלֹהֵי הָעַמִּים אֱלִילִים;    וַיהוָה, שָׁמַיִם עָשָׂה. 5 For all the gods of the peoples are things of nought; but the LORD made the heavens.
96.6 ו  הוֹד-וְהָדָר לְפָנָיו;    עֹז וְתִפְאֶרֶת, בְּמִקְדָּשׁוֹ. 6 Honour and majesty are before Him; strength and beauty are in His sanctuary.
96.7 ז  הָבוּ לַיהוָה, מִשְׁפְּחוֹת עַמִּים;    הָבוּ לַיהוָה, כָּבוֹד וָעֹז. 7 Ascribe unto the LORD, ye kindreds of the peoples, ascribe unto the LORD glory and strength.
96.8 ח  הָבוּ לַיהוָה, כְּבוֹד שְׁמוֹ;    שְׂאוּ-מִנְחָה, וּבֹאוּ לְחַצְרוֹתָיו. 8 Ascribe unto the LORD the glory due unto His name; bring an offering, and come into His courts.
96.9 ט  הִשְׁתַּחֲווּ לַיהוָה, בְּהַדְרַת-קֹדֶשׁ;    חִילוּ מִפָּנָיו, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ. 9 O worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness; tremble before Him, all the earth.
96.10 י  אִמְרוּ בַגּוֹיִם, יְהוָה מָלָךְ--    אַף-תִּכּוֹן תֵּבֵל, בַּל-תִּמּוֹט; יָדִין עַמִּים,    בְּמֵישָׁרִים. 10 Say among the nations: 'The LORD reigneth.' The world also is established that it cannot be moved; {N} He will judge the peoples with equity.
96.11 יא  יִשְׂמְחוּ הַשָּׁמַיִם, וְתָגֵל הָאָרֶץ;    יִרְעַם הַיָּם, וּמְלֹאוֹ. 11 Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice; let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof;
96.12 יב  יַעֲלֹז שָׂדַי, וְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-בּוֹ;    אָז יְרַנְּנוּ, כָּל-עֲצֵי-יָעַר. 12 Let the field exult; and all that is therein; then shall all the trees of the wood sing for joy;
96.13 יג  לִפְנֵי יְהוָה, כִּי בָא--    כִּי בָא, לִשְׁפֹּט הָאָרֶץ: יִשְׁפֹּט-תֵּבֵל בְּצֶדֶק;    וְעַמִּים, בֶּאֱמוּנָתוֹ. 13 Before the LORD, for He is come; for He is come to judge the earth; {N} He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples in His faithfulness. {P}
97.1 א  יְהוָה מָלָךְ, תָּגֵל הָאָרֶץ;    יִשְׂמְחוּ, אִיִּים רַבִּים. 1 The LORD reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad.
97.2 ב  עָנָן וַעֲרָפֶל סְבִיבָיו;    צֶדֶק וּמִשְׁפָּט, מְכוֹן כִּסְאוֹ. 2 Clouds and darkness are round about Him; righteousness and justice are the foundation of His throne.
97.3 ג  אֵשׁ, לְפָנָיו תֵּלֵךְ;    וּתְלַהֵט סָבִיב צָרָיו. 3 A fire goeth before Him, and burneth up His adversaries round about.
97.4 ד  הֵאִירוּ בְרָקָיו תֵּבֵל;    רָאֲתָה וַתָּחֵל הָאָרֶץ. 4 His lightnings lighted up the world; the earth saw, and trembled.
97.5 ה  הָרִים--כַּדּוֹנַג, נָמַסּוּ מִלִּפְנֵי יְהוָה:    מִלִּפְנֵי, אֲדוֹן כָּל-הָאָרֶץ. 5 The mountains melted like wax at the presence of the LORD, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
97.6 ו  הִגִּידוּ הַשָּׁמַיִם צִדְקוֹ;    וְרָאוּ כָל-הָעַמִּים כְּבוֹדוֹ. 6 The heavens declared His righteousness, and all the peoples saw His glory.
97.7 ז  יֵבֹשׁוּ, כָּל-עֹבְדֵי פֶסֶל--    הַמִּתְהַלְלִים בָּאֱלִילִים; הִשְׁתַּחֲווּ-לוֹ,    כָּל-אֱלֹהִים. 7 Ashamed be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of things of nought; {N} bow down to Him, all ye gods.
97.8 ח  שָׁמְעָה וַתִּשְׂמַח, צִיּוֹן,    וַתָּגֵלְנָה, בְּנוֹת יְהוּדָה-- לְמַעַן מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ    יְהוָה. 8 Zion heard and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced; {N} because of Thy judgments, O LORD.
97.9 ט  כִּי-אַתָּה יְהוָה,    עֶלְיוֹן עַל-כָּל-הָאָרֶץ; מְאֹד נַעֲלֵיתָ,    עַל-כָּל-אֱלֹהִים. 9 For Thou, LORD, art most high above all the earth; {N} Thou art exalted far above all gods.
97.10 י  אֹהֲבֵי יְהוָה,    שִׂנְאוּ-רָע: שֹׁמֵר, נַפְשׁוֹת חֲסִידָיו;    מִיַּד רְשָׁעִים, יַצִּילֵם. 10 O ye that love the LORD, hate evil; {N} He preserveth the souls of His saints; He delivered them out of the hand of the wicked.
97.11 יא  אוֹר, זָרֻעַ לַצַּדִּיק;    וּלְיִשְׁרֵי-לֵב שִׂמְחָה. 11 Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.
97.12 יב  שִׂמְחוּ צַדִּיקִים, בַּיהוָה;    וְהוֹדוּ, לְזֵכֶר קָדְשׁוֹ. 12 Be glad in the LORD, ye righteous; and give thanks to His holy name. {P}
98.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה שִׁיר חָדָשׁ--    כִּי-נִפְלָאוֹת עָשָׂה; הוֹשִׁיעָה-לּוֹ יְמִינוֹ,    וּזְרוֹעַ קָדְשׁוֹ. 1 A Psalm. O sing unto the LORD a new song; for He hath done marvellous things; {N} His right hand, and His holy arm, hath wrought salvation for Him.
98.2 ב  הוֹדִיעַ יְהוָה, יְשׁוּעָתוֹ;    לְעֵינֵי הַגּוֹיִם, גִּלָּה צִדְקָתוֹ. 2 The LORD hath made known His salvation; His righteousness hath He revealed in the sight of the nations.
98.3 ג  זָכַר חַסְדּוֹ, וֶאֱמוּנָתוֹ--    לְבֵית יִשְׂרָאֵל: רָאוּ כָל-אַפְסֵי-אָרֶץ--    אֵת, יְשׁוּעַת אֱלֹהֵינוּ. 3 He hath remembered His mercy and His faithfulness toward the house of Israel; {N} all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
98.4 ד  הָרִיעוּ לַיהוָה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ;    פִּצְחוּ וְרַנְּנוּ וְזַמֵּרוּ. 4 Shout unto the LORD, all the earth; break forth and sing for joy, yea, sing praises.
98.5 ה  זַמְּרוּ לַיהוָה בְּכִנּוֹר;    בְּכִנּוֹר, וְקוֹל זִמְרָה. 5 Sing praises unto the LORD with the harp; with the harp and the voice of melody.
98.6 ו  בַּחֲצֹצְרוֹת, וְקוֹל שׁוֹפָר--    הָרִיעוּ, לִפְנֵי הַמֶּלֶךְ יְהוָה. 6 With trumpets and sound of the horn shout ye before the King, the LORD.
98.7 ז  יִרְעַם הַיָּם, וּמְלֹאוֹ;    תֵּבֵל, וְיֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ. 7 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein;
98.8 ח  נְהָרוֹת יִמְחֲאוּ-כָף;    יַחַד, הָרִים יְרַנֵּנוּ. 8 Let the floods clap their hands; let the mountains sing for joy together;
98.9 ט  לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--    כִּי בָא, לִשְׁפֹּט הָאָרֶץ: יִשְׁפֹּט-תֵּבֵל בְּצֶדֶק;    וְעַמִּים, בְּמֵישָׁרִים. 9 Before the LORD, for He is come to judge the earth; {N} He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with equity. {P}
99.1 א  יְהוָה מָלָךְ, יִרְגְּזוּ עַמִּים;    יֹשֵׁב כְּרוּבִים, תָּנוּט הָאָרֶץ. 1 The LORD reigneth; let the peoples tremble; He is enthroned upon the cherubim; let the earth quake.
99.2 ב  יְהוָה, בְּצִיּוֹן גָּדוֹל;    וְרָם הוּא, עַל-כָּל-הָעַמִּים. 2 The LORD is great in Zion; and He is high above all the peoples.
99.3 ג  יוֹדוּ שִׁמְךָ, גָּדוֹל וְנוֹרָא;    קָדוֹשׁ הוּא. 3 Let them praise Thy name as great and awful; Holy is He.
99.4 ד  וְעֹז מֶלֶךְ,    מִשְׁפָּט אָהֵב: אַתָּה, כּוֹנַנְתָּ מֵישָׁרִים;    מִשְׁפָּט וּצְדָקָה, בְּיַעֲקֹב אַתָּה עָשִׂיתָ. 4 The strength also of the king who loveth justice-- {N} Thou hast established equity, Thou hast executed justice and righteousness in Jacob.
99.5 ה  רוֹמְמוּ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ, וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ, לַהֲדֹם רַגְלָיו:    קָדוֹשׁ הוּא. 5 Exalt ye the LORD our God, and prostrate yourselves at His footstool; Holy is He.
99.6 ו  מֹשֶׁה וְאַהֲרֹן, בְּכֹהֲנָיו,    וּשְׁמוּאֵל, בְּקֹרְאֵי שְׁמוֹ; קֹרִאים אֶל-יְהוָה,    וְהוּא יַעֲנֵם. 6 Moses and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel among them that call upon His name, {N} did call upon the LORD, and He answered them.
99.7 ז  בְּעַמּוּד עָנָן, יְדַבֵּר אֲלֵיהֶם;    שָׁמְרוּ עֵדֹתָיו, וְחֹק נָתַן-לָמוֹ. 7 He spoke unto them in the pillar of cloud; they kept His testimonies, and the statute that He gave them.
99.8 ח  יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ,    אַתָּה עֲנִיתָם: אֵל נֹשֵׂא, הָיִיתָ לָהֶם;    וְנֹקֵם, עַל-עֲלִילוֹתָם. 8 O LORD our God, Thou didst answer them; {N} a forgiving God wast Thou unto them, though Thou tookest vengeance of their misdeeds.
99.9 ט  רוֹמְמוּ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ,    וְהִשְׁתַּחֲווּ, לְהַר קָדְשׁוֹ: כִּי-קָדוֹשׁ,    יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ. 9 Exalt ye the LORD our God, and worship at His holy hill; {N} for the LORD our God is holy. {P}
100.1 א  מִזְמוֹר לְתוֹדָה:    הָרִיעוּ לַיהוָה, כָּל-הָאָרֶץ. 1 A Psalm of thanksgiving. Shout unto the LORD, all the earth.
100.2 ב  עִבְדוּ אֶת-יְהוָה בְּשִׂמְחָה;    בֹּאוּ לְפָנָיו, בִּרְנָנָה. 2 Serve the LORD with gladness; come before His presence with singing.
100.3 ג  דְּעוּ--    כִּי יְהוָה, הוּא אֱלֹהִים: הוּא-עָשָׂנוּ, ולא (וְלוֹ) אֲנַחְנוּ--    עַמּוֹ, וְצֹאן מַרְעִיתוֹ. 3 Know ye that the LORD He is God; {N} it is He that hath made us, and we are His, His people, and the flock of His pasture.
100.4 ד  בֹּאוּ שְׁעָרָיו, בְּתוֹדָה--חֲצֵרֹתָיו בִּתְהִלָּה;    הוֹדוּ-לוֹ, בָּרְכוּ שְׁמוֹ. 4 Enter into His gates with thanksgiving, and into His courts with praise; give thanks unto Him, and bless His name.
100.5 ה  כִּי-טוֹב יְהוָה, לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ;    וְעַד-דֹּר וָדֹר, אֱמוּנָתוֹ. 5 For the LORD is good; His mercy endureth for ever; and His faithfulness unto all generations. {P}
101.1 א  לְדָוִד, מִזְמוֹר:    חֶסֶד-וּמִשְׁפָּט אָשִׁירָה; לְךָ יְהוָה אֲזַמֵּרָה. 1 A Psalm of David. I will sing of mercy and justice; unto Thee, O LORD, will I sing praises.
101.2 ב  אַשְׂכִּילָה, בְּדֶרֶךְ תָּמִים--    מָתַי, תָּבוֹא אֵלָי; אֶתְהַלֵּךְ בְּתָם-לְבָבִי,    בְּקֶרֶב בֵּיתִי. 2 I will give heed unto the way of integrity; oh when wilt Thou come unto me? {N} I will walk within my house in the integrity of my heart.
101.3 ג  לֹא-אָשִׁית, לְנֶגֶד עֵינַי--    דְּבַר-בְּלִיָּעַל: עֲשֹׂה-סֵטִים שָׂנֵאתִי;    לֹא יִדְבַּק בִּי. 3 I will set no base thing before mine eyes; {N} I hate the doing of things crooked; it shall not cleave unto me.
101.4 ד  לֵבָב עִקֵּשׁ, יָסוּר מִמֶּנִּי;    רָע, לֹא אֵדָע. 4 A perverse heart shall depart from me; I will know no evil thing.
101.5 ה  מלושני (מְלָשְׁנִי) בַסֵּתֶר, רֵעֵהוּ--    אוֹתוֹ אַצְמִית: גְּבַהּ-עֵינַיִם, וּרְחַב לֵבָב--    אֹתוֹ, לֹא אוּכָל. 5 Whoso slandereth his neighbour in secret, him will I destroy; {N} whoso is haughty of eye and proud of heart, him will I not suffer.
101.6 ו  עֵינַי, בְּנֶאֶמְנֵי-אֶרֶץ--    לָשֶׁבֶת עִמָּדִי: הֹלֵךְ, בְּדֶרֶךְ תָּמִים--    הוּא, יְשָׁרְתֵנִי. 6 Mine eyes are upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me; {N} he that walketh in a way of integrity, he shall minister unto me.
101.7 ז  לֹא-יֵשֵׁב, בְּקֶרֶב בֵּיתִי--    עֹשֵׂה רְמִיָּה: דֹּבֵר שְׁקָרִים--    לֹא-יִכּוֹן, לְנֶגֶד עֵינָי. 7 He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house; {N} he that speaketh falsehood shall not be established before mine eyes.
101.8 ח  לַבְּקָרִים,    אַצְמִית כָּל-רִשְׁעֵי-אָרֶץ; לְהַכְרִית מֵעִיר-יְהוָה,    כָּל-פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן. 8 Morning by morning will I destroy all the wicked of the land; {N} to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the LORD. {P}
102.1 א  תְּפִלָּה, לְעָנִי כִי-יַעֲטֹף--    וְלִפְנֵי יְהוָה, יִשְׁפֹּךְ שִׂיחוֹ. יְהוָה, שִׁמְעָה תְפִלָּתִי;    וְשַׁוְעָתִי, אֵלֶיךָ תָבוֹא. 1 A Prayer of the afflicted, when he fainteth, and poureth out his complaint before the LORD. O LORD, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto Thee.
102.2 ב אַל-תַּסְתֵּר פָּנֶיךָ, מִמֶּנִּי--    בְּיוֹם צַר-לִי: הַטֵּה-אֵלַי אָזְנֶךָ;    בְּיוֹם אֶקְרָא, מַהֵר עֲנֵנִי.   2  Hide not Thy face from me in the day of my distress; {N} incline Thine ear unto me; in the day when I call answer me speedily.
102.3 ג כִּי-כָלוּ בְעָשָׁן יָמָי;    וְעַצְמוֹתַי, כְּמוֹקֵד נִחָרוּ.   3  For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as a hearth.
102.4 ד הוּכָּה-כָעֵשֶׂב וַיִּבַשׁ לִבִּי:    כִּי-שָׁכַחְתִּי, מֵאֲכֹל לַחְמִי.   4  My heart is smitten like grass, and withered; for I forget to eat my bread.
102.5 ה מִקּוֹל אַנְחָתִי--    דָּבְקָה עַצְמִי, לִבְשָׂרִי.   5  By reason of the voice of my sighing my bones cleave to my flesh.
102.6 ו דָּמִיתִי, לִקְאַת מִדְבָּר;    הָיִיתִי, כְּכוֹס חֳרָבוֹת.   6  I am like a pelican of the wilderness; I am become as an owl of the waste places.
102.7 ז שָׁקַדְתִּי וָאֶהְיֶה--    כְּצִפּוֹר, בּוֹדֵד עַל-גָּג.   7  I watch, and am become like a sparrow that is alone upon the housetop.
102.8 ח כָּל-הַיּוֹם, חֵרְפוּנִי אוֹיְבָי;    מְהוֹלָלַי, בִּי נִשְׁבָּעוּ.   8  Mine enemies taunt me all the day; they that are mad against me do curse by me.
102.9 ט   9 כִּי-אֵפֶר, כַּלֶּחֶם אָכָלְתִּי;    וְשִׁקֻּוַי, בִּבְכִי מָסָכְתִּי.  For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,
102.10 י   1 מִפְּנֵי-זַעַמְךָ וְקִצְפֶּךָ--    כִּי נְשָׂאתַנִי, וַתַּשְׁלִיכֵנִי.0  Because of Thine indignation and Thy wrath; for Thou hast taken me up, and cast me away.
102.11 י יָמַי, כְּצֵל נָטוּי;    וַאֲנִי, כָּעֵשֶׂב אִיבָשׁ.א   11  My days are like a lengthening shadow; and I am withered like grass.
102.12 י וְאַתָּה יְהוָה, לְעוֹלָם תֵּשֵׁב;    וְזִכְרְךָ, לְדֹר וָדֹר.ב   12  But Thou, O LORD, sittest enthroned for ever; and Thy name is unto all generations.
102.13 י אַתָּה תָקוּם, תְּרַחֵם צִיּוֹן:    כִּי-עֵת לְחֶנְנָהּ, כִּי-בָא מוֹעֵד.ג   13  Thou wilt arise, and have compassion upon Zion; for it is time to be gracious unto her, for the appointed time is come.
102.14 י כִּי-רָצוּ עֲבָדֶיךָ, אֶת-אֲבָנֶיהָ;    וְאֶת-עֲפָרָהּ, יְחֹנֵנוּ.ד   14  For Thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and love her dust.
102.15 ט וְיִירְאוּ גוֹיִם, אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה;    וְכָל-מַלְכֵי הָאָרֶץ, אֶת-כְּבוֹדֶךָ.ו   15  So the nations will fear the name of the LORD, and all the kings of the earth Thy glory;
102.16 ט כִּי-בָנָה יְהוָה צִיּוֹן--    נִרְאָה, בִּכְבוֹדוֹ.ז   16  When the LORD hath built up Zion, when He hath appeared in His glory;
102.17 י פָּנָה, אֶל-תְּפִלַּת הָעַרְעָר;    וְלֹא-בָזָה, אֶת-תְּפִלָּתָם.ז   17  When He hath regarded the prayer of the destitute, and hath not despised their prayer.
102.18 י תִּכָּתֶב זֹאת, לְדוֹר אַחֲרוֹן;    וְעַם נִבְרָא, יְהַלֶּל-יָהּ.ח   18  This shall be written for the generation to come; and a people which shall be created shall praise the LORD.
102.19 י כִּי-הִשְׁקִיף, מִמְּרוֹם קָדְשׁוֹ;    יְהוָה, מִשָּׁמַיִם אֶל-אֶרֶץ הִבִּיט.ט   19  For He hath looked down from the height of His sanctuary; from heaven did the LORD behold the earth;
102.20 כ   2 לִשְׁמֹעַ, אֶנְקַת אָסִיר;    לְפַתֵּחַ, בְּנֵי תְמוּתָה.0  To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are appointed to death;
102.21 כ לְסַפֵּר בְּצִיּוֹן, שֵׁם יְהוָה;    וּתְהִלָּתוֹ, בִּירוּשָׁלִָם.א   21  That men may tell of the name of the LORD in Zion, and His praise in Jerusalem;
102.22 כ בְּהִקָּבֵץ עַמִּים יַחְדָּו;    וּמַמְלָכוֹת, לַעֲבֹד אֶת-יְהוָה.ב   22  When the peoples are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the LORD.
102.23 כ עִנָּה בַדֶּרֶךְ כחו (כֹּחִי);    קִצַּר יָמָי.ג   23  He weakened my strength in the way; He shortened my days.
102.24 כ אֹמַר--אֵלִי, אַל תַּעֲלֵנִי בַּחֲצִי יָמָי:    בְּדוֹר דּוֹרִים שְׁנוֹתֶיךָ.ד   24  I say: 'O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days, Thou whose years endure throughout all generations.
102.25 כ לְפָנִים, הָאָרֶץ יָסַדְתָּ;    וּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדֶיךָ שָׁמָיִם.ה   25  Of old Thou didst lay the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the work of Thy hands.
102.26 כ הֵמָּה, יֹאבֵדוּ--    וְאַתָּה תַעֲמֹד: וְכֻלָּם, כַּבֶּגֶד יִבְלוּ;    כַּלְּבוּשׁ תַּחֲלִיפֵם וְיַחֲלֹפוּ.ו   26  They shall perish, but Thou shalt endure; {N} yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt Thou change them, and they shall pass away;
102.27 כ וְאַתָּה-הוּא;    וּשְׁנוֹתֶיךָ, לֹא יִתָּמּוּ.ז   27  But Thou art the selfsame, and Thy years shall have no end.
102.28 כ בְּנֵי-עֲבָדֶיךָ יִשְׁכּוֹנוּ;    וְזַרְעָם, לְפָנֶיךָ יִכּוֹן.ח   28  The children of Thy servants shall dwell securely, and their seed shall be established before Thee.' {P}
103.1 א  לְדָוִד:  בָּרְכִי נַפְשִׁי, אֶת-יְהוָה;    וְכָל-קְרָבַי, אֶת-שֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Bless the LORD, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His holy name.
103.2 ב  בָּרְכִי נַפְשִׁי, אֶת-יְהוָה;    וְאַל-תִּשְׁכְּחִי, כָּל-גְּמוּלָיו. 2 Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits;
103.3 ג  הַסֹּלֵחַ לְכָל-עֲוֺנֵכִי;    הָרֹפֵא, לְכָל-תַּחֲלוּאָיְכִי. 3 Who forgiveth all thine iniquity; who healeth all thy diseases;
103.4 ד  הַגּוֹאֵל מִשַּׁחַת חַיָּיְכִי;    הַמְעַטְּרֵכִי, חֶסֶד וְרַחֲמִים. 4 Who redeemeth thy life from the pit; who encompasseth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies;
103.5 ה  הַמַּשְׂבִּיעַ בַּטּוֹב עֶדְיֵךְ;    תִּתְחַדֵּשׁ כַּנֶּשֶׁר נְעוּרָיְכִי. 5 Who satisfieth thine old age with good things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle.
103.6 ו  עֹשֵׂה צְדָקוֹת יְהוָה;    וּמִשְׁפָּטִים, לְכָל-עֲשׁוּקִים. 6 The LORD executeth righteousness, and acts of justice for all that are oppressed.
103.7 ז  יוֹדִיעַ דְּרָכָיו לְמֹשֶׁה;    לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, עֲלִילוֹתָיו. 7 He made known His ways unto Moses, His doings unto the children of Israel.
103.8 ח  רַחוּם וְחַנּוּן יְהוָה;    אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם וְרַב-חָסֶד. 8 The LORD is full of compassion and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.
103.9 ט  לֹא-לָנֶצַח יָרִיב;    וְלֹא לְעוֹלָם יִטּוֹר. 9 He will not always contend; neither will He keep His anger for ever.
103.10 י  לֹא כַחֲטָאֵינוּ, עָשָׂה לָנוּ;    וְלֹא כַעֲוֺנֹתֵינוּ, גָּמַל עָלֵינוּ. 10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor requited us according to our iniquities.
103.11 יא  כִּי כִגְבֹהַּ שָׁמַיִם, עַל-הָאָרֶץ--    גָּבַר חַסְדּוֹ, עַל-יְרֵאָיו. 11 For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is His mercy toward them that fear Him.
103.12 יב  כִּרְחֹק מִזְרָח, מִמַּעֲרָב--    הִרְחִיק מִמֶּנּוּ, אֶת-פְּשָׁעֵינוּ. 12 As far as the east is from the west, so far hath He removed our transgressions from us.
103.13 יג  כְּרַחֵם אָב, עַל-בָּנִים--    רִחַם יְהוָה, עַל-יְרֵאָיו. 13 Like as a father hath compassion upon his children, so hath the LORD compassion upon them that fear Him.
103.14 יד  כִּי-הוּא, יָדַע יִצְרֵנוּ;    זָכוּר, כִּי-עָפָר אֲנָחְנוּ. 14 For He knoweth our frame; He remembereth that we are dust.
103.15 טו  אֱנוֹשׁ, כֶּחָצִיר יָמָיו;    כְּצִיץ הַשָּׂדֶה, כֵּן יָצִיץ. 15 As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.
103.16 טז  כִּי רוּחַ עָבְרָה-בּוֹ וְאֵינֶנּוּ;    וְלֹא-יַכִּירֶנּוּ עוֹד מְקוֹמוֹ. 16 For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof knoweth it no more.
103.17 יז  וְחֶסֶד יְהוָה, מֵעוֹלָם וְעַד-עוֹלָם--    עַל-יְרֵאָיו; וְצִדְקָתוֹ,    לִבְנֵי בָנִים. 17 But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him, {N} and His righteousness unto children's children;
103.18 יח  לְשֹׁמְרֵי בְרִיתוֹ;    וּלְזֹכְרֵי פִקֻּדָיו, לַעֲשׂוֹתָם. 18 To such as keep His covenant, and to those that remember His precepts to do them.
103.19 יט  יְהוָה--בַּשָּׁמַיִם, הֵכִין כִּסְאוֹ;    וּמַלְכוּתוֹ, בַּכֹּל מָשָׁלָה. 19 The LORD hath established His throne in the heavens; and His kingdom ruleth over all.
103.20 כ  בָּרְכוּ יְהוָה,    מַלְאָכָיו: גִּבֹּרֵי כֹחַ, עֹשֵׂי דְבָרוֹ;    לִשְׁמֹעַ, בְּקוֹל דְּבָרוֹ. 20 Bless the LORD, ye angels of His, {N} ye mighty in strength, that fulfil His word, hearkening unto the voice of His word.
103.21 כא  בָּרְכוּ יְהוָה, כָּל-צְבָאָיו--    מְשָׁרְתָיו, עֹשֵׂי רְצוֹנוֹ. 21 Bless the LORD, all ye His hosts; ye ministers of His, that do His pleasure.
103.22 כב  בָּרְכוּ יְהוָה, כָּל-מַעֲשָׂיו--    בְּכָל-מְקֹמוֹת מֶמְשַׁלְתּוֹ; בָּרְכִי נַפְשִׁי,    אֶת-יְהוָה. 22 Bless the LORD, all ye His works, in all places of His dominion; {N} bless the LORD, O my soul. {P}
104.1 א  בָּרְכִי נַפְשִׁי,    אֶת-יְהוָה: יְהוָה אֱלֹהַי, גָּדַלְתָּ מְּאֹד;    הוֹד וְהָדָר לָבָשְׁתָּ. 1 Bless the LORD, O my soul. {N} O LORD my God, Thou art very great; Thou art clothed with glory and majesty.
104.2 ב  עֹטֶה-אוֹר, כַּשַּׂלְמָה;    נוֹטֶה שָׁמַיִם, כַּיְרִיעָה. 2 Who coverest Thyself with light as with a garment, who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain;
104.3 ג  הַמְקָרֶה בַמַּיִם,    עֲלִיּוֹתָיו: הַשָּׂם-עָבִים רְכוּבוֹ;    הַמְהַלֵּךְ, עַל-כַּנְפֵי-רוּחַ. 3 Who layest the beams of Thine upper chambers in the waters, {N} who makest the clouds Thy chariot, who walkest upon the wings of the wind;
104.4 ד  עֹשֶׂה מַלְאָכָיו רוּחוֹת;    מְשָׁרְתָיו, אֵשׁ לֹהֵט. 4 Who makest winds Thy messengers, the flaming fire Thy ministers.
104.5 ה  יָסַד-אֶרֶץ, עַל-מְכוֹנֶיהָ;    בַּל-תִּמּוֹט, עוֹלָם וָעֶד. 5 Who didst establish the earth upon its foundations, that it should not be moved for ever and ever;
104.6 ו  תְּהוֹם, כַּלְּבוּשׁ כִּסִּיתוֹ;    עַל-הָרִים, יַעַמְדוּ מָיִם. 6 Thou didst cover it with the deep as with a vesture; the waters stood above the mountains.
104.7 ז  מִן-גַּעֲרָתְךָ יְנוּסוּן;    מִן-קוֹל רַעַמְךָ, יֵחָפֵזוּן. 7 At Thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of Thy thunder they hasted away--
104.8 ח  יַעֲלוּ הָרִים, יֵרְדוּ בְקָעוֹת--    אֶל-מְקוֹם, זֶה יָסַדְתָּ לָהֶם. 8 The mountains rose, the valleys sank down--unto the place which Thou hadst founded for them;
104.9 ט  גְּבוּל-שַׂמְתָּ, בַּל-יַעֲבֹרוּן;    בַּל-יְשֻׁבוּן, לְכַסּוֹת הָאָרֶץ. 9 Thou didst set a bound which they should not pass over, that they might not return to cover the earth.
104.10 י  הַמְשַׁלֵּחַ מַעְיָנִים, בַּנְּחָלִים;    בֵּין הָרִים, יְהַלֵּכוּן. 10 Who sendest forth springs into the valleys; they run between the mountains;
104.11 יא  יַשְׁקוּ, כָּל-חַיְתוֹ שָׂדָי;    יִשְׁבְּרוּ פְרָאִים צְמָאָם. 11 They give drink to every beast of the field, the wild asses quench their thirst.
104.12 יב  עֲלֵיהֶם, עוֹף-הַשָּׁמַיִם יִשְׁכּוֹן;    מִבֵּין עֳפָאיִם, יִתְּנוּ-קוֹל. 12 Beside them dwell the fowl of the heaven, from among the branches they sing.
104.13 יג  מַשְׁקֶה הָרִים, מֵעֲלִיּוֹתָיו;    מִפְּרִי מַעֲשֶׂיךָ, תִּשְׂבַּע הָאָרֶץ. 13 Who waterest the mountains from Thine upper chambers; the earth is full of the fruit of Thy works.
104.14 יד  מַצְמִיחַ חָצִיר, לַבְּהֵמָה,    וְעֵשֶׂב, לַעֲבֹדַת הָאָדָם; לְהוֹצִיא לֶחֶם,    מִן-הָאָרֶץ. 14 Who causeth the grass to spring up for the cattle, and herb for the service of man; {N} to bring forth bread out of the earth,
104.15 טו  וְיַיִן, יְשַׂמַּח לְבַב-אֱנוֹשׁ--    לְהַצְהִיל פָּנִים מִשָּׁמֶן; וְלֶחֶם,    לְבַב-אֱנוֹשׁ יִסְעָד. 15 And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, making the face brighter than oil, {N} and bread that stayeth man's heart.
104.16 טז  יִשְׂבְּעוּ, עֲצֵי יְהוָה--    אַרְזֵי לְבָנוֹן, אֲשֶׁר נָטָע. 16 The trees of the LORD have their fill, the cedars of Lebanon, which He hath planted;
104.17 יז  אֲשֶׁר-שָׁם, צִפֳּרִים יְקַנֵּנוּ;    חֲסִידָה, בְּרוֹשִׁים בֵּיתָהּ. 17 Wherein the birds make their nests; as for the stork, the fir-trees are her house.
104.18 יח  הָרִים הַגְּבֹהִים, לַיְּעֵלִים;    סְלָעִים, מַחְסֶה לַשְׁפַנִּים. 18 The high mountains are for the wild goats; the rocks are a refuge for the conies.
104.19 יט  עָשָׂה יָרֵחַ, לְמוֹעֲדִים;    שֶׁמֶשׁ, יָדַע מְבוֹאוֹ. 19 Who appointedst the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down.
104.20 כ  תָּשֶׁת-חֹשֶׁךְ, וִיהִי לָיְלָה--    בּוֹ-תִרְמֹשׂ, כָּל-חַיְתוֹ-יָעַר. 20 Thou makest darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth.
104.21 כא  הַכְּפִירִים, שֹׁאֲגִים לַטָּרֶף;    וּלְבַקֵּשׁ מֵאֵל, אָכְלָם. 21 The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their food from God.
104.22 כב  תִּזְרַח הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, יֵאָסֵפוּן;    וְאֶל-מְעוֹנֹתָם, יִרְבָּצוּן. 22 The sun ariseth, they slink away, and couch in their dens.
104.23 כג  יֵצֵא אָדָם לְפָעֳלוֹ;    וְלַעֲבֹדָתוֹ עֲדֵי-עָרֶב. 23 Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.
104.24 כד  מָה-רַבּוּ מַעֲשֶׂיךָ, יְהוָה--    כֻּלָּם, בְּחָכְמָה עָשִׂיתָ; מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ,    קִנְיָנֶךָ. 24 How manifold are Thy works, O LORD! In wisdom hast Thou made them all; {N} the earth is full of Thy creatures.
104.25 כה  זֶה, הַיָּם גָּדוֹל--    וּרְחַב יָדָיִם: שָׁם-רֶמֶשׂ, וְאֵין מִסְפָּר;    חַיּוֹת קְטַנּוֹת, עִם-גְּדֹלוֹת. 25 Yonder sea, great and wide, {N} therein are creeping things innumerable, living creatures, both small and great.
104.26 כו  שָׁם, אֳנִיּוֹת יְהַלֵּכוּן;    לִוְיָתָן, זֶה-יָצַרְתָּ לְשַׂחֶק-בּוֹ. 26 There go the ships; there is leviathan, whom Thou hast formed to sport therein.
104.27 כז  כֻּלָּם, אֵלֶיךָ יְשַׂבֵּרוּן--    לָתֵת אָכְלָם בְּעִתּוֹ. 27 All of them wait for Thee, that Thou mayest give them their food in due season.
104.28 כח  תִּתֵּן לָהֶם, יִלְקֹטוּן;    תִּפְתַּח יָדְךָ, יִשְׂבְּעוּן טוֹב. 28 Thou givest it unto them, they gather it; Thou openest Thy hand, they are satisfied with good.
104.29 כט  תַּסְתִּיר פָּנֶיךָ,    יִבָּהֵלוּן: תֹּסֵף רוּחָם, יִגְוָעוּן;    וְאֶל-עֲפָרָם יְשׁוּבוּן. 29 Thou hidest Thy face, they vanish; {N} Thou withdrawest their breath, they perish, and return to their dust.
104.30 ל  תְּשַׁלַּח רוּחֲךָ, יִבָּרֵאוּן;    וּתְחַדֵּשׁ, פְּנֵי אֲדָמָה. 30 Thou sendest forth Thy spirit, they are created; and Thou renewest the face of the earth.
104.31 לא  יְהִי כְבוֹד יְהוָה לְעוֹלָם;    יִשְׂמַח יְהוָה בְּמַעֲשָׂיו. 31 May the glory of the LORD endure for ever; let the LORD rejoice in His works!
104.32 לב  הַמַּבִּיט לָאָרֶץ, וַתִּרְעָד;    יִגַּע בֶּהָרִים וְיֶעֱשָׁנוּ. 32 Who looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; He toucheth the mountains, and they smoke.
104.33 לג  אָשִׁירָה לַיהוָה בְּחַיָּי;    אֲזַמְּרָה לֵאלֹהַי בְּעוֹדִי. 33 I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live; I will sing praise to my God while I have any being.
104.34 לד  יֶעֱרַב עָלָיו שִׂיחִי;    אָנֹכִי, אֶשְׂמַח בַּיהוָה. 34 Let my musing be sweet unto Him; as for me, I will rejoice in the LORD.
104.35 לה  יִתַּמּוּ חַטָּאִים מִן-הָאָרֶץ,    וּרְשָׁעִים עוֹד אֵינָם-- בָּרְכִי נַפְשִׁי,    אֶת-יְהוָה; הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 35 Let sinners cease out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. {N} Bless the LORD, O my soul. {N} Hallelujah.
105.1 א  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה, קִרְאוּ בִשְׁמוֹ;    הוֹדִיעוּ בָעַמִּים, עֲלִילוֹתָיו. 1 O give thanks unto the LORD, call upon His name; make known His doings among the peoples.
105.2 ב  שִׁירוּ-לוֹ, זַמְּרוּ-לוֹ;    שִׂיחוּ, בְּכָל-נִפְלְאוֹתָיו. 2 Sing unto Him, sing praises unto Him; speak ye of all His marvellous works.
105.3 ג  הִתְהַלְלוּ, בְּשֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ;    יִשְׂמַח, לֵב מְבַקְשֵׁי יְהוָה. 3 Glory ye in His holy name; let the heart of them rejoice that seek the LORD.
105.4 ד  דִּרְשׁוּ יְהוָה וְעֻזּוֹ;    בַּקְּשׁוּ פָנָיו תָּמִיד. 4 Seek ye the LORD and His strength; seek His face continually.
105.5 ה  זִכְרוּ--נִפְלְאוֹתָיו אֲשֶׁר-עָשָׂה;    מֹפְתָיו, וּמִשְׁפְּטֵי-פִיו. 5 Remember His marvellous works that He hath done, His wonders, and the judgments of His mouth;
105.6 ו  זֶרַע, אַבְרָהָם עַבְדּוֹ:    בְּנֵי יַעֲקֹב בְּחִירָיו. 6 O ye seed of Abraham His servant, ye children of Jacob, His chosen ones.
105.7 ז  הוּא, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ;    בְּכָל-הָאָרֶץ, מִשְׁפָּטָיו. 7 He is the LORD our God; His judgments are in all the earth.
105.8 ח  זָכַר לְעוֹלָם בְּרִיתוֹ;    דָּבָר צִוָּה, לְאֶלֶף דּוֹר. 8 He hath remembered His covenant for ever, the word which He commanded to a thousand generations;
105.9 ט  אֲשֶׁר כָּרַת, אֶת-אַבְרָהָם;    וּשְׁבוּעָתוֹ לְיִשְׂחָק. 9 [The covenant] which He made with Abraham, and His oath unto Isaac;
105.10 י  וַיַּעֲמִידֶהָ לְיַעֲקֹב לְחֹק;    לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּרִית עוֹלָם. 10 And He established it unto Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant;
105.11 יא  לֵאמֹר--לְךָ, אֶתֵּן אֶת-אֶרֶץ-כְּנָעַן:    חֶבֶל, נַחֲלַתְכֶם. 11 Saying: 'Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance.'
105.12 יב  בִּהְיוֹתָם, מְתֵי מִסְפָּר;    כִּמְעַט, וְגָרִים בָּהּ. 12 When they were but a few men in number. Yea, very few, and sojourners in it,
105.13 יג  וַיִּתְהַלְּכוּ, מִגּוֹי אֶל-גּוֹי;    מִמַּמְלָכָה, אֶל-עַם אַחֵר. 13 And when they went about from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another people,
105.14 יד  לֹא-הִנִּיחַ אָדָם לְעָשְׁקָם;    וַיּוֹכַח עֲלֵיהֶם מְלָכִים. 14 He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, for their sake He reproved kings:
105.15 טו  אַל-תִּגְּעוּ בִמְשִׁיחָי;    וְלִנְבִיאַי, אַל-תָּרֵעוּ. 15 'Touch not Mine anointed ones, and do My prophets no harm.'
105.16 טז  וַיִּקְרָא רָעָב, עַל-הָאָרֶץ;    כָּל-מַטֵּה-לֶחֶם שָׁבָר. 16 And He called a famine upon the land; He broke the whole staff of bread.
105.17 יז  שָׁלַח לִפְנֵיהֶם אִישׁ;    לְעֶבֶד, נִמְכַּר יוֹסֵף. 17 He sent a man before them; Joseph was sold for a servant;
105.18 יח  עִנּוּ בַכֶּבֶל רגליו (רַגְלוֹ);    בַּרְזֶל, בָּאָה נַפְשׁוֹ. 18 His feet they hurt with fetters, his person was laid in iron;
105.19 יט  עַד-עֵת בֹּא-דְבָרוֹ--    אִמְרַת יְהוָה צְרָפָתְהוּ. 19 Until the time that his word came to pass, the word of the LORD tested him.
105.20 כ  שָׁלַח מֶלֶךְ, וַיַתִּירֵהוּ;    מֹשֵׁל עַמִּים, וַיְפַתְּחֵהוּ. 20 The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the peoples, and set him free.
105.21 כא  שָׂמוֹ אָדוֹן לְבֵיתוֹ;    וּמֹשֵׁל, בְּכָל-קִנְיָנוֹ. 21 He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his possessions;
105.22 כב  לֶאְסֹר שָׂרָיו בְּנַפְשׁוֹ;    וּזְקֵנָיו יְחַכֵּם. 22 To bind his princes at his pleasure, and teach his elders wisdom.
105.23 כג  וַיָּבֹא יִשְׂרָאֵל מִצְרָיִם;    וְיַעֲקֹב, גָּר בְּאֶרֶץ-חָם. 23 Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
105.24 כד  וַיֶּפֶר אֶת-עַמּוֹ מְאֹד;    וַיַּעֲצִמֵהוּ, מִצָּרָיו. 24 And He increased His people greatly, and made them too mighty for their adversaries.
105.25 כה  הָפַךְ לִבָּם, לִשְׂנֹא עַמּוֹ;    לְהִתְנַכֵּל, בַּעֲבָדָיו. 25 He turned their heart to hate His people, to deal craftily with His servants.
105.26 כו  שָׁלַח, מֹשֶׁה עַבְדּוֹ;    אַהֲרֹן, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר-בּוֹ. 26 He sent Moses His servant, and Aaron whom He had chosen.
105.27 כז  שָׂמוּ-בָם, דִּבְרֵי אֹתוֹתָיו;    וּמֹפְתִים, בְּאֶרֶץ חָם. 27 They wrought among them His manifold signs, and wonders in the land of Ham.
105.28 כח  שָׁלַח חֹשֶׁךְ, וַיַּחְשִׁךְ;    וְלֹא-מָרוּ, אֶת-דבריו (דְּבָרוֹ). 28 He sent darkness, and it was dark; and they rebelled not against His word.
105.29 כט  הָפַךְ אֶת-מֵימֵיהֶם לְדָם;    וַיָּמֶת, אֶת-דְּגָתָם. 29 He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.
105.30 ל  שָׁרַץ אַרְצָם צְפַרְדְּעִים;    בְּחַדְרֵי, מַלְכֵיהֶם. 30 Their land swarmed with frogs, in the chambers of their kings.
105.31 לא  אָמַר, וַיָּבֹא עָרֹב;    כִּנִּים, בְּכָל-גְּבוּלָם. 31 He spoke, and there came swarms of flies, and gnats in all their borders.
105.32 לב  נָתַן גִּשְׁמֵיהֶם בָּרָד;    אֵשׁ לֶהָבוֹת בְּאַרְצָם. 32 He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
105.33 לג  וַיַּךְ גַּפְנָם, וּתְאֵנָתָם;    וַיְשַׁבֵּר, עֵץ גְּבוּלָם. 33 He smote their vines also and their fig-trees; and broke the trees of their borders.
105.34 לד  אָמַר, וַיָּבֹא אַרְבֶּה;    וְיֶלֶק, וְאֵין מִסְפָּר. 34 He spoke, and the locust came, and the canker-worm without number,
105.35 לה  וַיֹּאכַל כָּל-עֵשֶׂב בְּאַרְצָם;    וַיֹּאכַל, פְּרִי אַדְמָתָם. 35 And did eat up every herb in their land, and did eat up the fruit of their ground.
105.36 לו  וַיַּךְ כָּל-בְּכוֹר בְּאַרְצָם;    רֵאשִׁית, לְכָל-אוֹנָם. 36 He smote also all the first-born in their land, the first-fruits of all their strength.
105.37 לז  וַיּוֹצִיאֵם, בְּכֶסֶף וְזָהָב;    וְאֵין בִּשְׁבָטָיו כּוֹשֵׁל. 37 And He brought them forth with silver and gold; and there was none that stumbled among His tribes.
105.38 לח  שָׂמַח מִצְרַיִם בְּצֵאתָם:    כִּי-נָפַל פַּחְדָּם עֲלֵיהֶם. 38 Egypt was glad when they departed; for the fear of them had fallen upon them.
105.39 לט  פָּרַשׂ עָנָן לְמָסָךְ;    וְאֵשׁ, לְהָאִיר לָיְלָה. 39 He spread a cloud for a screen; and fire to give light in the night.
105.40 מ  שָׁאַל, וַיָּבֵא שְׂלָו;    וְלֶחֶם שָׁמַיִם, יַשְׂבִּיעֵם. 40 They asked, and He brought quails, and gave them in plenty the bread of heaven.
105.41 מא  פָּתַח צוּר, וַיָּזוּבוּ מָיִם;    הָלְכוּ, בַּצִּיּוֹת נָהָר. 41 He opened the rock, and waters gushed out; they ran, a river in the dry places.
105.42 מב  כִּי-זָכַר, אֶת-דְּבַר קָדְשׁוֹ;    אֶת-אַבְרָהָם עַבְדּוֹ. 42 For He remembered His holy word unto Abraham His servant;
105.43 מג  וַיּוֹצִא עַמּוֹ בְשָׂשׂוֹן;    בְּרִנָּה, אֶת-בְּחִירָיו. 43 And He brought forth His people with joy, His chosen ones with singing.
105.44 מד  וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם, אַרְצוֹת גּוֹיִם;    וַעֲמַל לְאֻמִּים יִירָשׁוּ. 44 And He gave them the lands of the nations, and they took the labour of the peoples in possession;
105.45 מה  בַּעֲבוּר, יִשְׁמְרוּ חֻקָּיו--    וְתוֹרֹתָיו יִנְצֹרוּ; הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 45 That they might keep His statutes, and observe His laws. {N} Hallelujah.
106.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה כִּי-טוֹב--    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 1 Hallelujah. {N} O give thanks unto the LORD; for He is good; for His mercy endureth for ever.
106.2 ב  מִי--יְמַלֵּל, גְּבוּרוֹת יְהוָה;    יַשְׁמִיעַ, כָּל-תְּהִלָּתוֹ. 2 Who can express the mighty acts of the LORD, or make all His praise to be heard?
106.3 ג  אַשְׁרֵי, שֹׁמְרֵי מִשְׁפָּט;    עֹשֵׂה צְדָקָה בְכָל-עֵת. 3 Happy are they that keep justice, that do righteousness at all times.
106.4 ד  זָכְרֵנִי יְהוָה, בִּרְצוֹן עַמֶּךָ;    פָּקְדֵנִי, בִּישׁוּעָתֶךָ. 4 Remember me, O LORD, when Thou favourest Thy people; O think of me at Thy salvation;
106.5 ה  לִרְאוֹת, בְּטוֹבַת בְּחִירֶיךָ--    לִשְׂמֹחַ, בְּשִׂמְחַת גּוֹיֶךָ; לְהִתְהַלֵּל,    עִם-נַחֲלָתֶךָ. 5 That I may behold the prosperity of Thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of Thy nation, {N} that I may glory with Thine inheritance.
106.6 ו  חָטָאנוּ עִם-אֲבוֹתֵינוּ;    הֶעֱוִינוּ הִרְשָׁעְנוּ. 6 We have sinned with our fathers, we have done iniquitously, we have dealt wickedly.
106.7 ז  אֲבוֹתֵינוּ בְמִצְרַיִם,    לֹא-הִשְׂכִּילוּ נִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ-- לֹא זָכְרוּ,    אֶת-רֹב חֲסָדֶיךָ; וַיַּמְרוּ עַל-יָם    בְּיַם-סוּף. 7 Our fathers in Egypt gave no heed unto Thy wonders; {N} they remembered not the multitude of Thy mercies; {N} but were rebellious at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
106.8 ח  וַיּוֹשִׁיעֵם, לְמַעַן שְׁמוֹ--    לְהוֹדִיעַ, אֶת-גְּבוּרָתוֹ. 8 Nevertheless He saved them for His name's sake, that He might make His mighty power to be known.
106.9 ט  וַיִּגְעַר בְּיַם-סוּף, וַיֶּחֱרָב;    וַיּוֹלִיכֵם בַּתְּהֹמוֹת, כַּמִּדְבָּר. 9 And He rebuked the Red Sea, and it was dried up; and He led them through the depths, as through a wilderness.
106.10 י  וַיּוֹשִׁיעֵם, מִיַּד שׂוֹנֵא;    וַיִּגְאָלֵם, מִיַּד אוֹיֵב. 10 And He saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
106.11 יא  וַיְכַסּוּ-מַיִם צָרֵיהֶם;    אֶחָד מֵהֶם, לֹא נוֹתָר. 11 And the waters covered their adversaries; there was not one of them left.
106.12 יב  וַיַּאֲמִינוּ בִדְבָרָיו;    יָשִׁירוּ, תְּהִלָּתוֹ. 12 Then believed they His words; they sang His praise.
106.13 יג  מִהֲרוּ, שָׁכְחוּ מַעֲשָׂיו;    לֹא-חִכּוּ, לַעֲצָתוֹ. 13 They soon forgot His works; they waited not for His counsel;
106.14 יד  וַיִּתְאַוּוּ תַאֲוָה, בַּמִּדְבָּר;    וַיְנַסּוּ-אֵל, בִּישִׁימוֹן. 14 But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tried God in the desert.
106.15 טו  וַיִּתֵּן לָהֶם, שֶׁאֱלָתָם;    וַיְשַׁלַּח רָזוֹן בְּנַפְשָׁם. 15 And He gave them their request; but sent leanness into their soul.
106.16 טז  וַיְקַנְאוּ לְמֹשֶׁה, בַּמַּחֲנֶה;    לְאַהֲרֹן, קְדוֹשׁ יְהוָה. 16 They were jealous also of Moses in the camp, and of Aaron the holy one of the LORD.
106.17 יז  תִּפְתַּח-אֶרֶץ, וַתִּבְלַע דָּתָן;    וַתְּכַס, עַל-עֲדַת אֲבִירָם. 17 The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram.
106.18 יח  וַתִּבְעַר-אֵשׁ בַּעֲדָתָם;    לֶהָבָה, תְּלַהֵט רְשָׁעִים. 18 And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up the wicked.
106.19 יט  יַעֲשׂוּ-עֵגֶל בְּחֹרֵב;    וַיִּשְׁתַּחֲווּ, לְמַסֵּכָה. 19 They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped a molten image.
106.20 כ  וַיָּמִירוּ אֶת-כְּבוֹדָם;    בְּתַבְנִית שׁוֹר, אֹכֵל עֵשֶׂב. 20 Thus they exchanged their glory for the likeness of an ox that eateth grass.
106.21 כא  שָׁכְחוּ, אֵל מוֹשִׁיעָם--    עֹשֶׂה גְדֹלוֹת בְּמִצְרָיִם. 21 They forgot God their saviour, who had done great things in Egypt;
106.22 כב  נִפְלָאוֹת, בְּאֶרֶץ חָם;    נוֹרָאוֹת, עַל-יַם-סוּף. 22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham, terrible things by the Red Sea.
106.23 כג  וַיֹּאמֶר,    לְהַשְׁמִידָם: לוּלֵי, מֹשֶׁה בְחִירוֹ--    עָמַד בַּפֶּרֶץ לְפָנָיו; לְהָשִׁיב חֲמָתוֹ,    מֵהַשְׁחִית. 23 Therefore He said that He would destroy them, {N} had not Moses His chosen stood before Him in the breach, {N} to turn back His wrath, lest He should destroy them.
106.24 כד  וַיִּמְאֲסוּ, בְּאֶרֶץ חֶמְדָּה;    לֹא-הֶאֱמִינוּ, לִדְבָרוֹ. 24 Moreover, they scorned the desirable land, they believed not His word;
106.25 כה  וַיֵּרָגְנוּ בְאָהֳלֵיהֶם;    לֹא שָׁמְעוּ, בְּקוֹל יְהוָה. 25 And they murmured in their tents, they hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD.
106.26 כו  וַיִּשָּׂא יָדוֹ לָהֶם--    לְהַפִּיל אוֹתָם, בַּמִּדְבָּר. 26 Therefore He swore concerning them, that He would overthrow them in the wilderness;
106.27 כז  וּלְהַפִּיל זַרְעָם, בַּגּוֹיִם;    וּלְזָרוֹתָם, בָּאֲרָצוֹת. 27 And that He would cast out their seed among the nations, and scatter them in the lands.
106.28 כח  וַיִּצָּמְדוּ, לְבַעַל פְּעוֹר;    וַיֹּאכְלוּ, זִבְחֵי מֵתִים. 28 They joined themselves also unto Baal of Peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
106.29 כט  וַיַּכְעִיסוּ, בְּמַעַלְלֵיהֶם;    וַתִּפְרָץ-בָּם, מַגֵּפָה. 29 Thus they provoked Him with their doings, and the plague broke in upon them.
106.30 ל  וַיַּעֲמֹד פִּינְחָס, וַיְפַלֵּל;    וַתֵּעָצַר, הַמַּגֵּפָה. 30 Then stood up Phinehas, and wrought judgment, and so the plague was stayed.
106.31 לא  וַתֵּחָשֶׁב לוֹ, לִצְדָקָה;    לְדֹר וָדֹר, עַד-עוֹלָם. 31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness, unto all generations for ever.
106.32 לב  וַיַּקְצִיפוּ, עַל-מֵי מְרִיבָה;    וַיֵּרַע לְמֹשֶׁה, בַּעֲבוּרָם. 32 They angered Him also at the waters of Meribah, and it went ill with Moses because of them;
106.33 לג  כִּי-הִמְרוּ אֶת-רוּחוֹ;    וַיְבַטֵּא, בִּשְׂפָתָיו. 33 For they embittered his spirit, and he spoke rashly with his lips.
106.34 לד  לֹא-הִשְׁמִידוּ, אֶת-הָעַמִּים--    אֲשֶׁר אָמַר יְהוָה לָהֶם. 34 They did not destroy the peoples, as the LORD commanded them;
106.35 לה  וַיִּתְעָרְבוּ בַגּוֹיִם;    וַיִּלְמְדוּ, מַעֲשֵׂיהֶם. 35 But mingled themselves with the nations, and learned their works;
106.36 לו  וַיַּעַבְדוּ אֶת-עֲצַבֵּיהֶם;    וַיִּהְיוּ לָהֶם לְמוֹקֵשׁ. 36 And they served their idols, which became a snare unto them;
106.37 לז  וַיִּזְבְּחוּ אֶת-בְּנֵיהֶם, וְאֶת-בְּנוֹתֵיהֶם--    לַשֵּׁדִים. 37 Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto demons,
106.38 לח  וַיִּשְׁפְּכוּ דָם נָקִי, דַּם-בְּנֵיהֶם וּבְנוֹתֵיהֶם--    אֲשֶׁר זִבְּחוּ, לַעֲצַבֵּי כְנָעַן; וַתֶּחֱנַף הָאָרֶץ,    בַּדָּמִים. 38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan; {N} and the land was polluted with blood.
106.39 לט  וַיִּטְמְאוּ בְמַעֲשֵׂיהֶם;    וַיִּזְנוּ, בְּמַעַלְלֵיהֶם. 39 Thus were they defiled with their works, and went astray in their doings.
106.40 מ  וַיִּחַר-אַף יְהוָה בְּעַמּוֹ;    וַיְתָעֵב, אֶת-נַחֲלָתוֹ. 40 Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled against His people, and He abhorred His inheritance.
106.41 מא  וַיִּתְּנֵם בְּיַד-גּוֹיִם;    וַיִּמְשְׁלוּ בָהֶם, שֹׂנְאֵיהֶם. 41 And He gave them into the hand of the nations; and they that hated them ruled over them.
106.42 מב  וַיִּלְחָצוּם אוֹיְבֵיהֶם;    וַיִּכָּנְעוּ, תַּחַת יָדָם. 42 Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were subdued under their hand.
106.43 מג  פְּעָמִים רַבּוֹת,    יַצִּילֵם: וְהֵמָּה, יַמְרוּ בַעֲצָתָם;    וַיָּמֹכּוּ, בַּעֲוֺנָם. 43 Many times did He deliver them; {N} but they were rebellious in their counsel, and sank low through their iniquity.
106.44 מד  וַיַּרְא, בַּצַּר לָהֶם--    בְּשָׁמְעוֹ, אֶת-רִנָּתָם. 44 Nevertheless He looked upon their distress, when He heard their cry;
106.45 מה  וַיִּזְכֹּר לָהֶם בְּרִיתוֹ;    וַיִּנָּחֵם, כְּרֹב חֲסָדָו. 45 And He remembered for them His covenant, and repented according to the multitude of His mercies.
106.46 מו  וַיִּתֵּן אוֹתָם לְרַחֲמִים--    לִפְנֵי, כָּל-שׁוֹבֵיהֶם. 46 He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captive.
106.47 מז  הוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ, יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ,    וְקַבְּצֵנוּ, מִן-הַגּוֹיִם: לְהֹדוֹת, לְשֵׁם קָדְשֶׁךָ;    לְהִשְׁתַּבֵּחַ, בִּתְהִלָּתֶךָ. 47 Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from among the nations, {N} that we may give thanks unto Thy holy name, that we may triumph in Thy praise.
106.48 מח  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל,    מִן-הָעוֹלָם וְעַד הָעוֹלָם-- וְאָמַר כָּל-הָעָם    אָמֵן: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 48 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting, {N} and let all the people say: 'Amen.' {N} Hallelujah. {P}
107.1 א  הֹדוּ לַיהוָה כִּי-טוֹב:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 1 'O give thanks unto the LORD, for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever.'
107.2 ב  יֹאמְרוּ, גְּאוּלֵי יְהוָה--    אֲשֶׁר גְּאָלָם, מִיַּד-צָר. 2 So let the redeemed of the LORD say, whom He hath redeemed from the hand of the adversary;
107.3 ג  וּמֵאֲרָצוֹת, קִבְּצָם:    מִמִּזְרָח וּמִמַּעֲרָב; מִצָּפוֹן וּמִיָּם. 3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the sea.
107.4 ד  תָּעוּ בַמִּדְבָּר, בִּישִׁימוֹן דָּרֶךְ;    עִיר מוֹשָׁב, לֹא מָצָאוּ. 4 They wandered in the wilderness in a desert way; they found no city of habitation.
107.5 ה  רְעֵבִים גַּם-צְמֵאִים--    נַפְשָׁם, בָּהֶם תִּתְעַטָּף. 5 Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
107.6 ו  וַיִּצְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, בַּצַּר לָהֶם;    מִמְּצוּקוֹתֵיהֶם, יַצִּילֵם. 6 Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and He delivered them out of their distresses.
107.7 ז  וַיַּדְרִיכֵם, בְּדֶרֶךְ יְשָׁרָה--    לָלֶכֶת, אֶל-עִיר מוֹשָׁב. 7 And He led them by a straight way, that they might go to a city of habitation.
107.8 ח  יוֹדוּ לַיהוָה חַסְדּוֹ;    וְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו, לִבְנֵי אָדָם. 8 Let them give thanks unto the LORD for His mercy, and for His wonderful works to the children of men!
107.9 ט  כִּי-הִשְׂבִּיעַ, נֶפֶשׁ שֹׁקֵקָה;    וְנֶפֶשׁ רְעֵבָה, מִלֵּא-טוֹב. 9 For He hath satisfied the longing soul, and the hungry soul He hath filled with good.
107.10 י  יֹשְׁבֵי, חֹשֶׁךְ וְצַלְמָוֶת;    אֲסִירֵי עֳנִי וּבַרְזֶל. 10 Such as sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron--
107.11 יא  כִּי-הִמְרוּ אִמְרֵי-אֵל;    וַעֲצַת עֶלְיוֹן נָאָצוּ. 11 Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the Most High.
107.12 יב  וַיַּכְנַע בֶּעָמָל לִבָּם;    כָּשְׁלוּ, וְאֵין עֹזֵר. 12 Therefore He humbled their heart with travail, they stumbled, and there was none to help--
107.13 יג  וַיִּזְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, בַּצַּר לָהֶם;    מִמְּצֻקוֹתֵיהֶם, יוֹשִׁיעֵם. 13 They cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and He saved them out of their distresses.
107.14 יד  יוֹצִיאֵם, מֵחֹשֶׁךְ וְצַלְמָוֶת;    וּמוֹסְרוֹתֵיהֶם יְנַתֵּק. 14 He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and broke their bands in sunder.
107.15 טו  יוֹדוּ לַיהוָה חַסְדּוֹ;    וְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו, לִבְנֵי אָדָם. 15 Let them give thanks unto the LORD for His mercy, and for His wonderful works to the children of men!
107.16 טז  כִּי-שִׁבַּר, דַּלְתוֹת נְחֹשֶׁת;    וּבְרִיחֵי בַרְזֶל גִּדֵּעַ. 16 For He hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder.
107.17 יז  אֱוִלִים, מִדֶּרֶךְ פִּשְׁעָם;    וּמֵעֲוֺנֹתֵיהֶם, יִתְעַנּוּ. 17 Crazed because of the way of their transgression, and afflicted because of their iniquities--
107.18 יח  כָּל-אֹכֶל, תְּתַעֵב נַפְשָׁם;    וַיַּגִּיעוּ, עַד-שַׁעֲרֵי מָוֶת. 18 Their soul abhorred all manner of food, and they drew near unto the gates of death--
107.19 יט  וַיִּזְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, בַּצַּר לָהֶם;    מִמְּצֻקוֹתֵיהֶם יוֹשִׁיעֵם. 19 They cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and He saved them out of their distresses;
107.20 כ  יִשְׁלַח דְּבָרוֹ, וְיִרְפָּאֵם;    וִימַלֵּט, מִשְּׁחִיתוֹתָם. 20 He sent His word, and healed them, and delivered them from their graves.
107.21 כא  יוֹדוּ לַיהוָה חַסְדּוֹ;    וְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו, לִבְנֵי אָדָם. 21 Let them give thanks unto the LORD for His mercy, and for His wonderful works to the children of men!
107.22 כב  וְיִזְבְּחוּ, זִבְחֵי תוֹדָה;    וִיסַפְּרוּ מַעֲשָׂיו בְּרִנָּה. 22 And let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare His works with singing.
107.23 כג ]  יוֹרְדֵי הַיָּם, בָּאֳנִיּוֹת;    עֹשֵׂי מְלָאכָה, בְּמַיִם רַבִּים. 23 They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters--
107.24 כד ]  הֵמָּה רָאוּ, מַעֲשֵׂי יְהוָה;    וְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו, בִּמְצוּלָה. 24 These saw the works of the LORD, and His wonders in the deep;
107.25 כה ]  וַיֹּאמֶר--וַיַּעֲמֵד, רוּחַ סְעָרָה;    וַתְּרוֹמֵם גַּלָּיו. 25 For He commanded, and raised the stormy wind, which lifted up the waves thereof;
107.26 כו ]  יַעֲלוּ שָׁמַיִם, יֵרְדוּ תְהוֹמוֹת;    נַפְשָׁם, בְּרָעָה תִתְמוֹגָג. 26 They mounted up to the heaven, they went down to the deeps; their soul melted away because of trouble;
107.27 כז ]  יָחוֹגּוּ וְיָנוּעוּ, כַּשִּׁכּוֹר;    וְכָל-חָכְמָתָם, תִּתְבַּלָּע. 27 They reeled to and fro, and staggered like a drunken man, and all their wisdom was swallowed up--
107.28 כח ]  וַיִּצְעֲקוּ אֶל-יְהוָה, בַּצַּר לָהֶם;    וּמִמְּצוּקֹתֵיהֶם, יוֹצִיאֵם. 28 They cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and He brought them out of their distresses.
107.29 כט  יָקֵם סְעָרָה, לִדְמָמָה;    וַיֶּחֱשׁוּ, גַּלֵּיהֶם. 29 He made the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof were still.
107.30 ל  וַיִּשְׂמְחוּ כִי-יִשְׁתֹּקוּ;    וַיַּנְחֵם, אֶל-מְחוֹז חֶפְצָם. 30 Then were they glad because they were quiet, and He led them unto their desired haven.
107.31 לא  יוֹדוּ לַיהוָה חַסְדּוֹ;    וְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו, לִבְנֵי אָדָם. 31 Let them give thanks unto the LORD for His mercy, and for His wonderful works to the children of men!
107.32 לב  וִירוֹמְמוּהוּ, בִּקְהַל-עָם;    וּבְמוֹשַׁב זְקֵנִים יְהַלְלוּהוּ. 32 Let them exalt Him also in the assembly of the people, and praise Him in the seat of the elders.
107.33 לג  יָשֵׂם נְהָרוֹת לְמִדְבָּר;    וּמֹצָאֵי מַיִם, לְצִמָּאוֹן. 33 He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and watersprings into a thirsty ground;
107.34 לד  אֶרֶץ פְּרִי, לִמְלֵחָה;    מֵרָעַת, יוֹשְׁבֵי בָהּ. 34 A fruitful land into a salt waste, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
107.35 לה  יָשֵׂם מִדְבָּר, לַאֲגַם-מַיִם;    וְאֶרֶץ צִיָּה, לְמֹצָאֵי מָיִם. 35 He turneth a wilderness into a pool of water, and a dry land into watersprings.
107.36 לו  וַיּוֹשֶׁב שָׁם רְעֵבִים;    וַיְכוֹנְנוּ, עִיר מוֹשָׁב. 36 And there He maketh the hungry to dwell, and they establish a city of habitation;
107.37 לז  וַיִּזְרְעוּ שָׂדוֹת, וַיִּטְּעוּ כְרָמִים;    וַיַּעֲשׂוּ, פְּרִי תְבוּאָה. 37 And sow fields, and plant vineyards, which yield fruits of increase.
107.38 לח  וַיְבָרְכֵם וַיִּרְבּוּ מְאֹד;    וּבְהֶמְתָּם, לֹא יַמְעִיט. 38 He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly, and suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
107.39 לט  וַיִּמְעֲטוּ וַיָּשֹׁחוּ--    מֵעֹצֶר רָעָה וְיָגוֹן. 39 Again, they are minished and dwindle away through oppression of evil and sorrow.
107.40 מ  ]  שֹׁפֵךְ בּוּז, עַל-נְדִיבִים;    וַיַּתְעֵם, בְּתֹהוּ לֹא-דָרֶךְ. 40 He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the waste, where there is no way.
107.41 מא  וַיְשַׂגֵּב אֶבְיוֹן מֵעוֹנִי;    וַיָּשֶׂם כַּצֹּאן, מִשְׁפָּחוֹת. 41 Yet setteth He the needy on high from affliction, and maketh his families like a flock.
107.42 מב  יִרְאוּ יְשָׁרִים וְיִשְׂמָחוּ;    וְכָל-עַוְלָה, קָפְצָה פִּיהָ. 42 The upright see it, and are glad; and all iniquity stoppeth her mouth.
107.43 מג  מִי-חָכָם וְיִשְׁמָר-אֵלֶּה;    וְיִתְבּוֹנְנוּ, חַסְדֵי יְהוָה. 43 Whoso is wise, let him observe these things, and let them consider the mercies of the LORD. {P}
108.1 א  שִׁיר מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד.    נָכוֹן לִבִּי אֱלֹהִים; אָשִׁירָה וַאֲזַמְּרָה, אַף-כְּבוֹדִי. 1 A Song, a Psalm of David.  2 My heart is steadfast, O God; I will sing, yea, I will sing praises, even with my glory.
108.2 ב  עוּרָה, הַנֵּבֶל וְכִנּוֹר;    אָעִירָה שָּׁחַר. 3 Awake, psaltery and harp; I will awake the dawn.
108.3 ג  אוֹדְךָ בָעַמִּים יְהוָה;    וַאֲזַמֶּרְךָ, בַּלְאֻמִּים. 4 I will give thanks unto Thee, O LORD, among the peoples; and I will sing praises unto Thee among the nations.
108.4 ד  כִּי-גָדוֹל מֵעַל-שָׁמַיִם חַסְדֶּךָ;    וְעַד-שְׁחָקִים אֲמִתֶּךָ. 5 For Thy mercy is great above the heavens, and Thy truth reacheth unto the skies.
108.5 ה  רוּמָה עַל-שָׁמַיִם אֱלֹהִים;    וְעַל כָּל-הָאָרֶץ כְּבוֹדֶךָ. 6 Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and Thy glory be above all the earth.
108.6 ו  לְמַעַן, יֵחָלְצוּן יְדִידֶיךָ;    הוֹשִׁיעָה יְמִינְךָ וַעֲנֵנִי. 7 That Thy beloved may be delivered, save with Thy right hand, and answer me.
108.7 ז  אֱלֹהִים, דִּבֶּר בְּקָדְשׁוֹ--אֶעְלֹזָה:    אֲחַלְּקָה שְׁכֶם; וְעֵמֶק סֻכּוֹת אֲמַדֵּד. 8 God spoke in His holiness, that I would exult; that I would divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
108.8 ח  לִי גִלְעָד, לִי מְנַשֶּׁה, וְאֶפְרַיִם, מָעוֹז רֹאשִׁי;    יְהוּדָה, מְחֹקְקִי. 9 Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the defence of my head; Judah is my sceptre.
108.9 ט מוֹאָב, סִיר רַחְצִי--עַל-אֱדוֹם, אַשְׁלִיךְ נַעֲלִי;    עֲלֵי-פְלֶשֶׁת, אֶתְרוֹעָע. 10 Moab is my washpot; upon Edom do I cast my shoe; over Philistia do I cry aloud.
108.10 י  מִי יֹבִלֵנִי, עִיר מִבְצָר;    מִי נָחַנִי עַד-אֱדוֹם. 11 Who will bring me into the fortified city? Who will lead me unto Edom?
108.11 יא  הֲלֹא-אֱלֹהִים זְנַחְתָּנוּ;    וְלֹא-תֵצֵא אֱלֹהִים, בְּצִבְאֹתֵינוּ. 12 Hast not Thou cast us off, O God? and Thou goest not forth, O God, with our hosts?
108.12 יב  הָבָה-לָּנוּ עֶזְרָת מִצָּר;    וְשָׁוְא, תְּשׁוּעַת אָדָם. 13 Give us help against the adversary; for vain is the help of man.
108.13 יג  בֵּאלֹהִים נַעֲשֶׂה-חָיִל;    וְהוּא, יָבוּס צָרֵינוּ. 14 Through God we shall do valiantly; for He it is that will tread down our adversaries. {P}
109.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְדָוִד מִזְמוֹר: אֱלֹהֵי תְהִלָּתִי,    אַל-תֶּחֱרַשׁ. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. {N} O God of my praise, keep not silence;
109.2 ב  כִּי פִי רָשָׁע, וּפִי-מִרְמָה--עָלַי פָּתָחוּ;    דִּבְּרוּ אִתִּי, לְשׁוֹן שָׁקֶר. 2 For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of deceit have they opened against me; they have spoken unto me with a lying tongue.
109.3 ג  וְדִבְרֵי שִׂנְאָה סְבָבוּנִי;    וַיִּלָּחֲמוּנִי חִנָּם. 3 They compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause.
109.4 ד  תַּחַת-אַהֲבָתִי יִשְׂטְנוּנִי;    וַאֲנִי תְפִלָּה. 4 In return for my love they are my adversaries; but I am all prayer.
109.5 ה  וַיָּשִׂימוּ עָלַי רָעָה, תַּחַת טוֹבָה;    וְשִׂנְאָה, תַּחַת אַהֲבָתִי. 5 And they have laid upon me evil for good, and hatred for my love:
109.6 ו  הַפְקֵד עָלָיו רָשָׁע;    וְשָׂטָן, יַעֲמֹד עַל-יְמִינוֹ. 6 'Set Thou a wicked man over him; and let an adversary stand at his right hand.
109.7 ז  בְּהִשָּׁפְטוֹ, יֵצֵא רָשָׁע;    וּתְפִלָּתוֹ, תִּהְיֶה לַחֲטָאָה. 7 When he is judged, let him go forth condemned; and let his prayer be turned into sin.
109.8 ח  יִהְיוּ-יָמָיו מְעַטִּים;    פְּקֻדָּתוֹ, יִקַּח אַחֵר. 8 Let his days be few; let another take his charge.
109.9 ט  יִהְיוּ-בָנָיו יְתוֹמִים;    וְאִשְׁתּוֹ, אַלְמָנָה. 9 Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.
109.10 י  וְנוֹעַ יָנוּעוּ בָנָיו וְשִׁאֵלוּ;    וְדָרְשׁוּ, מֵחָרְבוֹתֵיהֶם. 10 Let his children be vagabonds, and beg; and let them seek their bread out of their desolate places.
109.11 יא  יְנַקֵּשׁ נוֹשֶׁה, לְכָל-אֲשֶׁר-לוֹ;    וְיָבֹזּוּ זָרִים יְגִיעוֹ. 11 Let the creditor distrain all that he hath; and let strangers make spoil of his labour.
109.12 יב  אַל-יְהִי-לוֹ, מֹשֵׁךְ חָסֶד;    וְאַל-יְהִי חוֹנֵן, לִיתוֹמָיו. 12 Let there be none to extend kindness unto him; neither let there be any to be gracious unto his fatherless children.
109.13 יג  יְהִי-אַחֲרִיתוֹ לְהַכְרִית;    בְּדוֹר אַחֵר, יִמַּח שְׁמָם. 13 Let his posterity be cut off; in the generation following let their name be blotted out.
109.14 יד  יִזָּכֵר, עֲוֺן אֲבֹתָיו--אֶל-יְהוָה;    וְחַטַּאת אִמּוֹ, אַל-תִּמָּח. 14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be brought to remembrance unto the LORD; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
109.15 טו  יִהְיוּ נֶגֶד-יְהוָה תָּמִיד;    וְיַכְרֵת מֵאֶרֶץ זִכְרָם. 15 Let them be before the LORD continually, that He may cut off the memory of them from the earth.
109.16 טז  יַעַן--    אֲשֶׁר לֹא זָכַר, עֲשׂוֹת חָסֶד: וַיִּרְדֹּף, אִישׁ-עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן--וְנִכְאֵה לֵבָב;    לְמוֹתֵת. 16 Because that he remembered not to do kindness, {N} but persecuted the poor and needy man, and the broken in heart he was ready to slay.
109.17 יז  וַיֶּאֱהַב קְלָלָה, וַתְּבוֹאֵהוּ;    וְלֹא-חָפֵץ בִּבְרָכָה, וַתִּרְחַק מִמֶּנּוּ. 17 Yea, he loved cursing, and it came unto him; and he delighted not in blessing, and it is far from him.
109.18 יח  וַיִּלְבַּשׁ קְלָלָה, כְּמַדּוֹ:    וַתָּבֹא כַמַּיִם בְּקִרְבּוֹ; וְכַשֶּׁמֶן, בְּעַצְמוֹתָיו. 18 He clothed himself also with cursing as with his raiment, and it is come into his inward parts like water, and like oil into his bones.
109.19 יט  תְּהִי-לוֹ, כְּבֶגֶד יַעְטֶה;    וּלְמֵזַח, תָּמִיד יַחְגְּרֶהָ. 19 Let it be unto him as the garment which he putteth on, and for the girdle wherewith he is girded continually.'
109.20 כ  זֹאת פְּעֻלַּת שֹׂטְנַי, מֵאֵת יְהוָה;    וְהַדֹּבְרִים רָע, עַל-נַפְשִׁי. 20 This would mine adversaries effect from the LORD, and they that speak evil against my soul.
109.21 כא  וְאַתָּה, יְהוִה אֲדֹנָי--    עֲשֵׂה-אִתִּי, לְמַעַן שְׁמֶךָ; כִּי-טוֹב חַסְדְּךָ,    הַצִּילֵנִי. 21 But Thou, O GOD the Lord, deal with me for Thy name's sake; {N} because Thy mercy is good, deliver Thou me.
109.22 כב  כִּי-עָנִי וְאֶבְיוֹן אָנֹכִי;    וְלִבִּי, חָלַל בְּקִרְבִּי. 22 For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
109.23 כג  כְּצֵל-כִּנְטוֹתוֹ נֶהֱלָכְתִּי;    נִנְעַרְתִּי, כָּאַרְבֶּה. 23 I am gone like the shadow when it lengtheneth; I am shaken off as the locust.
109.24 כד  בִּרְכַּי, כָּשְׁלוּ מִצּוֹם;    וּבְשָׂרִי, כָּחַשׁ מִשָּׁמֶן. 24 My knees totter through fasting; and my flesh is lean, and hath no fatness.
109.25 כה  וַאֲנִי, הָיִיתִי חֶרְפָּה לָהֶם;    יִרְאוּנִי, יְנִיעוּן רֹאשָׁם. 25 I am become also a taunt unto them; when they see me, they shake their head.
109.26 כו  עָזְרֵנִי, יְהוָה אֱלֹהָי;    הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי כְחַסְדֶּךָ. 26 Help me, O LORD my God; O save me according to Thy mercy;
109.27 כז  וְיֵדְעוּ, כִּי-יָדְךָ זֹּאת;    אַתָּה יְהוָה עֲשִׂיתָהּ. 27 That they may know that this is Thy hand; that Thou, LORD, hast done it.
109.28 כח  יְקַלְלוּ-הֵמָּה, וְאַתָּה תְבָרֵךְ:    קָמוּ, וַיֵּבֹשׁוּ--וְעַבְדְּךָ יִשְׂמָח. 28 Let them curse, but bless Thou; when they arise, they shall be put to shame, but Thy servant shall rejoice.
109.29 כט  יִלְבְּשׁוּ שׂוֹטְנַי כְּלִמָּה;    וְיַעֲטוּ כַמְעִיל בָּשְׁתָּם. 29 Mine adversaries shall be clothed with confusion, and shall put on their own shame as a robe.
109.30 ל  אוֹדֶה יְהוָה מְאֹד בְּפִי;    וּבְתוֹךְ רַבִּים אֲהַלְלֶנּוּ. 30 I will give great thanks unto the LORD with my mouth; yea, I will praise Him among the multitude;
109.31 לא  כִּי-יַעֲמֹד, לִימִין אֶבְיוֹן--    לְהוֹשִׁיעַ, מִשֹּׁפְטֵי נַפְשׁוֹ. 31 Because He standeth at the right hand of the needy, to save him from them that judge his soul. {P}
110.1 א  לְדָוִד, מִזְמוֹר: נְאֻם יְהוָה, לַאדֹנִי--שֵׁב לִימִינִי;    עַד-אָשִׁית אֹיְבֶיךָ, הֲדֹם לְרַגְלֶיךָ. 1 A Psalm of David. {N} The LORD saith unto my lord: 'Sit thou at My right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.'
110.2 ב  מַטֵּה-עֻזְּךָ--יִשְׁלַח יְהוָה, מִצִּיּוֹן;    רְדֵה, בְּקֶרֶב אֹיְבֶיךָ. 2 The rod of Thy strength the LORD will send out of Zion: 'Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.'
110.3 ג  עַמְּךָ נְדָבֹת,    בְּיוֹם חֵילֶךָ: בְּהַדְרֵי-קֹדֶשׁ, מֵרֶחֶם מִשְׁחָר;    לְךָ, טַל יַלְדֻתֶיךָ. 3 Thy people offer themselves willingly in the day of thy warfare; {N} in adornments of holiness, from the womb of the dawn, thine is the dew of thy youth.
110.4 ד  נִשְׁבַּע יְהוָה, וְלֹא יִנָּחֵם--    אַתָּה-כֹהֵן לְעוֹלָם; עַל-דִּבְרָתִי,    מַלְכִּי-צֶדֶק. 4 The LORD hath sworn, and will not repent: 'Thou art a priest for ever {N} after the manner of Melchizedek.'
110.5 ה  אֲדֹנָי עַל-יְמִינְךָ;    מָחַץ בְּיוֹם-אַפּוֹ מְלָכִים. 5 The Lord at thy right hand doth crush kings in the day of His wrath.
110.6 ו  יָדִין בַּגּוֹיִם, מָלֵא גְוִיּוֹת;    מָחַץ רֹאשׁ, עַל-אֶרֶץ רַבָּה. 6 He will judge among the nations; He filleth it with dead bodies, He crusheth the head over a wide land.
110.7 ז  מִנַּחַל, בַּדֶּרֶךְ יִשְׁתֶּה;    עַל-כֵּן, יָרִים רֹאשׁ. 7 He will drink of the brook in the way; therefore will he lift up the head. {P}
111.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: אוֹדֶה יְהוָה, בְּכָל-לֵבָב;    בְּסוֹד יְשָׁרִים וְעֵדָה. 1 Hallelujah. {N} I will give thanks unto the LORD with my whole heart, in the council of the upright, and in the congregation.
111.2 ב  גְּדֹלִים, מַעֲשֵׂי יְהוָה;    דְּרוּשִׁים, לְכָל-חֶפְצֵיהֶם. 2 The works of the LORD are great, sought out of all them that have delight therein.
111.3 ג  הוֹד-וְהָדָר פָּעֳלוֹ;    וְצִדְקָתוֹ, עֹמֶדֶת לָעַד. 3 His work is glory and majesty; and His righteousness endureth for ever.
111.4 ד  זֵכֶר עָשָׂה, לְנִפְלְאוֹתָיו;    חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם יְהוָה. 4 He hath made a memorial for His wonderful works; the LORD is gracious and full of compassion.
111.5 ה  טֶרֶף, נָתַן לִירֵאָיו;    יִזְכֹּר לְעוֹלָם בְּרִיתוֹ. 5 He hath given food unto them that fear Him; He will ever be mindful of His covenant.
111.6 ו  כֹּחַ מַעֲשָׂיו, הִגִּיד לְעַמּוֹ--    לָתֵת לָהֶם, נַחֲלַת גּוֹיִם. 6 He hath declared to His people the power of His works, in giving them the heritage of the nations.
111.7 ז  מַעֲשֵׂי יָדָיו, אֱמֶת וּמִשְׁפָּט;    נֶאֱמָנִים, כָּל-פִּקּוּדָיו. 7 The works of His hands are truth and justice; all His precepts are sure.
111.8 ח  סְמוּכִים לָעַד לְעוֹלָם;    עֲשׂוּיִם, בֶּאֱמֶת וְיָשָׁר. 8 They are established for ever and ever, they are done in truth and uprightness.
111.9 ט  פְּדוּת, שָׁלַח לְעַמּוֹ--    צִוָּה-לְעוֹלָם בְּרִיתוֹ; קָדוֹשׁ וְנוֹרָא    שְׁמוֹ. 9 He hath sent redemption unto His people; He hath commanded His covenant for ever; {N} Holy and awful is His name.
111.10 י  רֵאשִׁית חָכְמָה, יִרְאַת יְהוָה--    שֵׂכֶל טוֹב, לְכָל-עֹשֵׂיהֶם; תְּהִלָּתוֹ,    עֹמֶדֶת לָעַד. 10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have all they that do thereafter; {N} His praise endureth for ever. {P}
112.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: אַשְׁרֵי-אִישׁ, יָרֵא אֶת-יְהוָה;    בְּמִצְוֺתָיו, חָפֵץ מְאֹד. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Happy is the man that feareth the LORD, that delighteth greatly in His commandments.
112.2 ב  גִּבּוֹר בָּאָרֶץ, יִהְיֶה זַרְעוֹ;    דּוֹר יְשָׁרִים יְבֹרָךְ. 2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth; the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
112.3 ג  הוֹן-וָעֹשֶׁר בְּבֵיתוֹ;    וְצִדְקָתוֹ, עֹמֶדֶת לָעַד. 3 Wealth and riches are in his house; and his merit endureth for ever.
112.4 ד  זָרַח בַּחֹשֶׁךְ אוֹר, לַיְשָׁרִים;    חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם וְצַדִּיק. 4 Unto the upright He shineth as a light in the darkness, gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous.
112.5 ה  טוֹב-אִישׁ, חוֹנֵן וּמַלְוֶה;    יְכַלְכֵּל דְּבָרָיו בְּמִשְׁפָּט. 5 Well is it with the man that dealeth graciously and lendeth, that ordereth his affairs rightfully.
112.6 ו  כִּי-לְעוֹלָם לֹא-יִמּוֹט;    לְזֵכֶר עוֹלָם, יִהְיֶה צַדִּיק. 6 For he shall never be moved; the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
112.7 ז  מִשְּׁמוּעָה רָעָה, לֹא יִירָא;    נָכוֹן לִבּוֹ, בָּטֻחַ בַּיהוָה. 7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart is stedfast, trusting in the LORD.
112.8 ח  סָמוּךְ לִבּוֹ, לֹא יִירָא;    עַד אֲשֶׁר-יִרְאֶה בְצָרָיו. 8 His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he gaze upon his adversaries.
112.9 ט  פִּזַּר, נָתַן לָאֶבְיוֹנִים--    צִדְקָתוֹ, עֹמֶדֶת לָעַד; קַרְנוֹ,    תָּרוּם בְּכָבוֹד. 9 He hath scattered abroad, he hath given to the needy; his righteousness endureth for ever; {N} his horn shall be exalted in honour.
112.10 י  רָשָׁע יִרְאֶה, וְכָעָס--    שִׁנָּיו יַחֲרֹק וְנָמָס; תַּאֲוַת רְשָׁעִים    תֹּאבֵד. 10 The wicked shall see it, and be vexed; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away; {N} the desire of the wicked shall perish. {P}
113.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: הַלְלוּ, עַבְדֵי יְהוָה;    הַלְלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Praise, O ye servants of the LORD, praise the name of the LORD.
113.2 ב  יְהִי שֵׁם יְהוָה מְבֹרָךְ--    מֵעַתָּה, וְעַד-עוֹלָם. 2 Blessed be the name of the LORD from this time forth and for ever.
113.3 ג  מִמִּזְרַח-שֶׁמֶשׁ עַד-מְבוֹאוֹ--    מְהֻלָּל, שֵׁם יְהוָה. 3 From the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof the LORD'S name is to be praised.
113.4 ד  רָם עַל-כָּל-גּוֹיִם יְהוָה;    עַל הַשָּׁמַיִם כְּבוֹדוֹ. 4 The LORD is high above all nations, His glory is above the heavens.
113.5 ה  מִי, כַּיהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--    הַמַּגְבִּיהִי לָשָׁבֶת. 5 Who is like unto the LORD our God, that is enthroned on high,
113.6 ו  הַמַּשְׁפִּילִי לִרְאוֹת--    בַּשָּׁמַיִם וּבָאָרֶץ. 6 That looketh down low upon heaven and upon the earth?
113.7 ז  מְקִימִי מֵעָפָר דָּל;    מֵאַשְׁפֹּת, יָרִים אֶבְיוֹן. 7 Who raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the needy out of the dunghill;
113.8 ח  לְהוֹשִׁיבִי עִם-נְדִיבִים;    עִם, נְדִיבֵי עַמּוֹ. 8 That He may set him with princes, even with the princes of His people.
113.9 ט  מוֹשִׁיבִי, עֲקֶרֶת הַבַּיִת--    אֵם-הַבָּנִים שְׂמֵחָה: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 9 Who maketh the barren woman to dwell in her house as a joyful mother of children. {N} Hallelujah.
114.1 א  בְּצֵאת יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִמִּצְרָיִם;    בֵּית יַעֲקֹב, מֵעַם לֹעֵז. 1 When Israel came forth out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language;
114.2 ב  הָיְתָה יְהוּדָה לְקָדְשׁוֹ;    יִשְׂרָאֵל, מַמְשְׁלוֹתָיו. 2 Judah became His sanctuary, Israel His dominion.
114.3 ג  הַיָּם רָאָה, וַיָּנֹס;    הַיַּרְדֵּן, יִסֹּב לְאָחוֹר. 3 The sea saw it, and fled; the Jordan turned backward.
114.4 ד  הֶהָרִים, רָקְדוּ כְאֵילִים;    גְּבָעוֹת, כִּבְנֵי-צֹאן. 4 The mountains skipped like rams, the hills like young sheep.
114.5 ה  מַה-לְּךָ הַיָּם, כִּי תָנוּס;    הַיַּרְדֵּן, תִּסֹּב לְאָחוֹר. 5 What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleest? thou Jordan, that thou turnest backward?
114.6 ו  הֶהָרִים, תִּרְקְדוּ כְאֵילִים;    גְּבָעוֹת, כִּבְנֵי-צֹאן. 6 Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams; ye hills, like young sheep?
114.7 ז  מִלִּפְנֵי אָדוֹן, חוּלִי אָרֶץ;    מִלִּפְנֵי, אֱלוֹהַּ יַעֲקֹב. 7 Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob;
114.8 ח  הַהֹפְכִי הַצּוּר אֲגַם-מָיִם;    חַלָּמִישׁ, לְמַעְיְנוֹ-מָיִם. 8 Who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters.
115.1 א  לֹא לָנוּ יְהוָה, לֹא-לָנוּ:    כִּי-לְשִׁמְךָ, תֵּן כָּבוֹד--עַל-חַסְדְּךָ, עַל-אֲמִתֶּךָ. 1 Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto Thy name give glory, for Thy mercy, and for Thy truth's sake.
115.2 ב  לָמָּה, יֹאמְרוּ הַגּוֹיִם:    אַיֵּה-נָא, אֱלֹהֵיהֶם. 2 Wherefore should the nations say: 'Where is now their God?'
115.3 ג  וֵאלֹהֵינוּ בַשָּׁמָיִם--    כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-חָפֵץ עָשָׂה. 3 But our God is in the heavens; whatsoever pleased Him He hath done.
115.4 ד  עֲצַבֵּיהֶם, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב;    מַעֲשֵׂה, יְדֵי אָדָם. 4 Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
115.5 ה  פֶּה-לָהֶם, וְלֹא יְדַבֵּרוּ;    עֵינַיִם לָהֶם, וְלֹא יִרְאוּ. 5 They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not;
115.6 ו  אָזְנַיִם לָהֶם, וְלֹא יִשְׁמָעוּ;    אַף לָהֶם, וְלֹא יְרִיחוּן. 6 They have ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not;
115.7 ז  יְדֵיהֶם, וְלֹא יְמִישׁוּן--רַגְלֵיהֶם, וְלֹא יְהַלֵּכוּ;    לֹא-יֶהְגּוּ, בִּגְרוֹנָם. 7 They have hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak they with their throat.
115.8 ח  כְּמוֹהֶם, יִהְיוּ עֹשֵׂיהֶם--    כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-בֹּטֵחַ בָּהֶם. 8 They that make them shall be like unto them; yea, every one that trusteth in them.
115.9 ט  יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּטַח בַּיהוָה;    עֶזְרָם וּמָגִנָּם הוּא. 9 O Israel, trust thou in the LORD! He is their help and their shield!
115.10 י  בֵּית אַהֲרֹן, בִּטְחוּ בַיהוָה;    עֶזְרָם וּמָגִנָּם הוּא. 10 O house of Aaron, trust ye in the LORD! He is their help and their shield!
115.11 יא  יִרְאֵי יְהוָה, בִּטְחוּ בַיהוָה;    עֶזְרָם וּמָגִנָּם הוּא. 11 Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD! He is their help and their shield.
115.12 יב  יְהוָה,    זְכָרָנוּ יְבָרֵךְ: יְבָרֵךְ, אֶת-בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל;    יְבָרֵךְ, אֶת-בֵּית אַהֲרֹן. 12 The LORD hath been mindful of us, He will bless-- {N} He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron.
115.13 יג  יְבָרֵךְ, יִרְאֵי יְהוָה--    הַקְּטַנִּים, עִם-הַגְּדֹלִים. 13 He will bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great.
115.14 יד  יֹסֵף יְהוָה עֲלֵיכֶם;    עֲלֵיכֶם, וְעַל בְּנֵיכֶם. 14 The LORD increase you more and more, you and your children.
115.15 טו  בְּרוּכִים אַתֶּם, לַיהוָה--    עֹשֵׂה, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ. 15 Blessed be ye of the LORD who made heaven and earth.
115.16 טז  הַשָּׁמַיִם שָׁמַיִם, לַיהוָה;    וְהָאָרֶץ, נָתַן לִבְנֵי-אָדָם. 16 The heavens are the heavens of the LORD; but the earth hath He given to the children of men.
115.17 יז  לֹא הַמֵּתִים, יְהַלְלוּ-יָהּ;    וְלֹא, כָּל-יֹרְדֵי דוּמָה. 17 The dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into silence;
115.18 יח  וַאֲנַחְנוּ, נְבָרֵךְ יָהּ--    מֵעַתָּה וְעַד-עוֹלָם: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 18 But we will bless the LORD from this time forth and for ever. {N} Hallelujah.
116.1 א  אָהַבְתִּי, כִּי-יִשְׁמַע יְהוָה--    אֶת-קוֹלִי, תַּחֲנוּנָי. 1 I love that the LORD should hear my voice and my supplications.
116.2 ב  כִּי-הִטָּה אָזְנוֹ לִי;    וּבְיָמַי אֶקְרָא. 2 Because He hath inclined His ear unto me, therefore will I call upon Him all my days.
116.3 ג  אֲפָפוּנִי, חֶבְלֵי-מָוֶת--וּמְצָרֵי שְׁאוֹל מְצָאוּנִי;    צָרָה וְיָגוֹן אֶמְצָא. 3 The cords of death compassed me, and the straits of the nether-world got hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow.
116.4 ד  וּבְשֵׁם-יְהוָה אֶקְרָא:    אָנָּה יְהוָה, מַלְּטָה נַפְשִׁי. 4 But I called upon the name of the LORD: 'I beseech thee, O LORD, deliver my soul.'
116.5 ה  חַנּוּן יְהוָה וְצַדִּיק;    וֵאלֹהֵינוּ מְרַחֵם. 5 Gracious is the LORD, and righteous; yea, our God is compassionate.
116.6 ו  שֹׁמֵר פְּתָאיִם יְהוָה;    דַּלֹּתִי, וְלִי יְהוֹשִׁיעַ. 6 The LORD preserveth the simple; I was brought low, and He saved me.
116.7 ז  שׁוּבִי נַפְשִׁי, לִמְנוּחָיְכִי:    כִּי-יְהוָה, גָּמַל עָלָיְכִי. 7 Return, O my soul, unto thy rest; for the LORD hath dealt bountifully with thee.
116.8 ח  כִּי חִלַּצְתָּ נַפְשִׁי, מִמָּוֶת:    אֶת-עֵינִי מִן-דִּמְעָה; אֶת-רַגְלִי מִדֶּחִי. 8 For Thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from stumbling.
116.9 ט  אֶתְהַלֵּךְ, לִפְנֵי יְהוָה--    בְּאַרְצוֹת, הַחַיִּים. 9 I shall walk before the LORD in the lands of the living.
116.10 י  הֶאֱמַנְתִּי, כִּי אֲדַבֵּר;    אֲנִי, עָנִיתִי מְאֹד. 10 I trusted even when I spoke: 'I am greatly afflicted.'
116.11 יא  אֲנִי, אָמַרְתִּי בְחָפְזִי:    כָּל-הָאָדָם כֹּזֵב. 11 I said in my haste: 'All men are liars.'
116.12 יב  מָה-אָשִׁיב לַיהוָה--    כָּל-תַּגְמוּלוֹהִי עָלָי. 12 How can I repay unto the LORD all His bountiful dealings toward me?
116.13 יג  כּוֹס-יְשׁוּעוֹת אֶשָּׂא;    וּבְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֶקְרָא. 13 I will lift up the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the LORD.
116.14 יד  נְדָרַי, לַיהוָה אֲשַׁלֵּם;    נֶגְדָה-נָּא, לְכָל-עַמּוֹ. 14 My vows will I pay unto the LORD, yea, in the presence of all His people.
116.15 טו  יָקָר, בְּעֵינֵי יְהוָה--    הַמָּוְתָה, לַחֲסִידָיו. 15 Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of His saints.
116.16 טז  אָנָּה יְהוָה,    כִּי-אֲנִי עַבְדֶּךָ: אֲנִי-עַבְדְּךָ, בֶּן-אֲמָתֶךָ;    פִּתַּחְתָּ, לְמוֹסֵרָי. 16 I beseech Thee, O LORD, for I am Thy servant; {N} I am Thy servant, the son of Thy handmaid; Thou hast loosed my bands.
116.17 יז  לְךָ-אֶזְבַּח, זֶבַח תּוֹדָה;    וּבְשֵׁם יְהוָה אֶקְרָא. 17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the LORD.
116.18 יח  נְדָרַי, לַיהוָה אֲשַׁלֵּם;    נֶגְדָה-נָּא, לְכָל-עַמּוֹ. 18 I will pay my vows unto the LORD, yea, in the presence of all His people;
116.19 יט  בְּחַצְרוֹת, בֵּית יְהוָה--    בְּתוֹכֵכִי יְרוּשָׁלִָם: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 19 In the courts of the LORD'S house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. {N} Hallelujah.
117.1 א  הַלְלוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, כָּל-גּוֹיִם;    שַׁבְּחוּהוּ, כָּל-הָאֻמִּים. 1 O praise the LORD, all ye nations; laud Him, all ye peoples.
117.2 ב  כִּי גָבַר עָלֵינוּ, חַסְדּוֹ--    וֶאֱמֶת-יְהוָה לְעוֹלָם: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 2 For His mercy is great toward us; and the truth of the LORD endureth for ever. {N} Hallelujah.
118.1 א  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה כִּי-טוֹב:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 1 'O give thanks unto the LORD, for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever.'
118.2 ב  יֹאמַר-נָא יִשְׂרָאֵל:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 2 So let Israel now say, for His mercy endureth for ever,
118.3 ג  יֹאמְרוּ-נָא בֵית-אַהֲרֹן:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 3 So let the house of Aaron now say, for His mercy endureth for ever.
118.4 ד  יֹאמְרוּ-נָא יִרְאֵי יְהוָה:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 4 So let them now that fear the LORD say, for His mercy endureth for ever.
118.5 ה  מִן-הַמֵּצַר, קָרָאתִי יָּהּ;    עָנָנִי בַמֶּרְחָב יָהּ. 5 Out of my straits I called upon the LORD; He answered me with great enlargement.
118.6 ו  יְהוָה לִי, לֹא אִירָא;    מַה-יַּעֲשֶׂה לִי אָדָם. 6 The LORD is for me; I will not fear; what can man do unto me?
118.7 ז  יְהוָה לִי, בְּעֹזְרָי;    וַאֲנִי, אֶרְאֶה בְשֹׂנְאָי. 7 The LORD is for me as my helper; and I shall gaze upon them that hate me.
118.8 ח  טוֹב, לַחֲסוֹת בַּיהוָה--    מִבְּטֹחַ, בָּאָדָם. 8 It is better to take refuge in the LORD than to trust in man.
118.9 ט  טוֹב, לַחֲסוֹת בַּיהוָה--    מִבְּטֹחַ, בִּנְדִיבִים. 9 It is better to take refuge in the LORD than to trust in princes.
118.10 י  כָּל-גּוֹיִם סְבָבוּנִי;    בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה, כִּי אֲמִילַם. 10 All nations compass me about; verily, in the name of the LORD I will cut them off.
118.11 יא  סַבּוּנִי גַם-סְבָבוּנִי;    בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה, כִּי אֲמִילַם. 11 They compass me about, yea, they compass me about; verily, in the name of the LORD I will cut them off.
118.12 יב  סַבּוּנִי כִדְבוֹרִים--    דֹּעֲכוּ, כְּאֵשׁ קוֹצִים; בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה,    כִּי אֲמִילַם. 12 They compass me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns; {N} verily, in the name of the LORD I will cut them off.
118.13 יג  דַּחֹה דְחִיתַנִי לִנְפֹּל;    וַיהוָה עֲזָרָנִי. 13 Thou didst thrust sore at me that I might fall; but the LORD helped me.
118.14 יד  עָזִּי וְזִמְרָת יָהּ;    וַיְהִי-לִי, לִישׁוּעָה. 14 The LORD is my strength and song; and He is become my salvation.
118.15 טו  קוֹל, רִנָּה וִישׁוּעָה--בְּאָהֳלֵי צַדִּיקִים;    יְמִין יְהוָה, עֹשָׂה חָיִל. 15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous; the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.
118.16 טז  יְמִין יְהוָה, רוֹמֵמָה;    יְמִין יְהוָה, עֹשָׂה חָיִל. 16 The right hand of the LORD is exalted; the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.
118.17 יז  לֹא-אָמוּת כִּי-אֶחְיֶה;    וַאֲסַפֵּר, מַעֲשֵׂי יָהּ. 17 I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the LORD.
118.18 יח  יַסֹּר יִסְּרַנִּי יָּהּ;    וְלַמָּוֶת, לֹא נְתָנָנִי. 18 The LORD hath chastened me sore; but He hath not given me over unto death.
118.19 יט  פִּתְחוּ-לִי שַׁעֲרֵי-צֶדֶק;    אָבֹא-בָם, אוֹדֶה יָהּ. 19 Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto the LORD.
118.20 כ  זֶה-הַשַּׁעַר לַיהוָה;    צַדִּיקִים, יָבֹאוּ בוֹ. 20 This is the gate of the LORD; the righteous shall enter into it.
118.21 כא  אוֹדְךָ, כִּי עֲנִיתָנִי;    וַתְּהִי-לִי, לִישׁוּעָה. 21 I will give thanks unto Thee, for Thou hast answered me, and art become my salvation.
118.22 כב  אֶבֶן, מָאֲסוּ הַבּוֹנִים--    הָיְתָה, לְרֹאשׁ פִּנָּה. 22 The stone which the builders rejected is become the chief corner-stone.
118.23 כג  מֵאֵת יְהוָה, הָיְתָה זֹּאת;    הִיא נִפְלָאת בְּעֵינֵינוּ. 23 This is the LORD'S doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.
118.24 כד  זֶה-הַיּוֹם, עָשָׂה יְהוָה;    נָגִילָה וְנִשְׂמְחָה בוֹ. 24 This is the day which the LORD hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.
118.25 כה  אָנָּא יְהוָה, הוֹשִׁיעָה נָּא;    אָנָּא יְהוָה, הַצְלִיחָה נָּא. 25 We beseech Thee, O LORD, save now! We beseech Thee, O LORD, make us now to prosper!
118.26 כו  בָּרוּךְ הַבָּא, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה;    בֵּרַכְנוּכֶם, מִבֵּית יְהוָה. 26 Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the LORD; we bless you out of the house of the LORD.
118.27 כז  אֵל, יְהוָה--וַיָּאֶר-לָנוּ:    אִסְרוּ-חַג בַּעֲבֹתִים--עַד קַרְנוֹת, הַמִּזְבֵּחַ. 27 The LORD is God, and hath given us light; order the festival procession with boughs, even unto the horns of the altar.
118.28 כח  אֵלִי אַתָּה וְאוֹדֶךָּ;    אֱלֹהַי, אֲרוֹמְמֶךָּ. 28 Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto Thee; Thou art my God, I will exalt Thee.
118.29 כט  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה כִּי-טוֹב:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 29 O give thanks unto the LORD, for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever. {P}
119.1 א  אַשְׁרֵי תְמִימֵי-דָרֶךְ--    הַהֹלְכִים, בְּתוֹרַת יְהוָה. 1 ALEPH. Happy are they that are upright in the way, who walk in the law of the LORD.
119.2 ב  אַשְׁרֵי, נֹצְרֵי עֵדֹתָיו;    בְּכָל-לֵב יִדְרְשׁוּהוּ. 2 Happy are they that keep His testimonies, that seek Him with the whole heart.
119.3 ג  אַף, לֹא-פָעֲלוּ עַוְלָה;    בִּדְרָכָיו הָלָכוּ. 3 Yea, they do no unrighteousness; they walk in His ways.
119.4 ד  אַתָּה, צִוִּיתָה פִקֻּדֶיךָ--    לִשְׁמֹר מְאֹד. 4 Thou hast ordained Thy precepts, that we should observe them diligently.
119.5 ה  אַחֲלַי, יִכֹּנוּ דְרָכָי--    לִשְׁמֹר חֻקֶּיךָ. 5 Oh that my ways were directed to observe Thy statutes!
119.6 ו  אָז לֹא-אֵבוֹשׁ--    בְּהַבִּיטִי, אֶל-כָּל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ. 6 Then should I not be ashamed, when I have regard unto all Thy commandments.
119.7 ז  אוֹדְךָ, בְּיֹשֶׁר לֵבָב--    בְּלָמְדִי, מִשְׁפְּטֵי צִדְקֶךָ. 7 I will give thanks unto Thee with uprightness of heart, when I learn Thy righteous ordinances.
119.8 ח  אֶת-חֻקֶּיךָ אֶשְׁמֹר;    אַל-תַּעַזְבֵנִי עַד-מְאֹד. 8 I will observe Thy statutes; O forsake me not utterly. {P}
119.9 ט  בַּמֶּה יְזַכֶּה-נַּעַר, אֶת-אָרְחוֹ--    לִשְׁמֹר, כִּדְבָרֶךָ. 9 BETH. Wherewithal shall a young man keep his way pure? By taking heed thereto according to Thy word.
119.10 י  בְּכָל-לִבִּי דְרַשְׁתִּיךָ;    אַל-תַּשְׁגֵּנִי, מִמִּצְוֺתֶיךָ. 10 With my whole heart have I sought Thee; O let me not err from Thy commandments.
119.11 יא  בְּלִבִּי, צָפַנְתִּי אִמְרָתֶךָ--    לְמַעַן, לֹא אֶחֱטָא-לָךְ. 11 Thy word have I laid up in my heart, that I might not sin against Thee.
119.12 יב  בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְהוָה--    לַמְּדֵנִי חֻקֶּיךָ. 12 Blessed art Thou, O LORD; teach me Thy statutes.
119.13 יג  בִּשְׂפָתַי סִפַּרְתִּי--    כֹּל, מִשְׁפְּטֵי-פִיךָ. 13 With my lips have I told all the ordinances of Thy mouth.
119.14 יד  בְּדֶרֶךְ עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ שַׂשְׂתִּי--    כְּעַל כָּל-הוֹן. 14 I have rejoiced in the way of Thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.
119.15 טו  בְּפִקּוּדֶיךָ אָשִׂיחָה;    וְאַבִּיטָה, אֹרְחֹתֶיךָ. 15 I will meditate in Thy precepts, and have respect unto Thy ways.
119.16 טז  בְּחֻקֹּתֶיךָ אֶשְׁתַּעֲשָׁע;    לֹא אֶשְׁכַּח דְּבָרֶךָ. 16 I will delight myself in Thy statutes; I will not forget Thy word. {P}
119.17 יז  גְּמֹל עַל-עַבְדְּךָ אֶחְיֶה;    וְאֶשְׁמְרָה דְבָרֶךָ. 17 GIMEL. Deal bountifully with Thy servant that I may live, and I will observe Thy word.
119.18 יח  גַּל-עֵינַי וְאַבִּיטָה--    נִפְלָאוֹת, מִתּוֹרָתֶךָ. 18 Open Thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy law.
119.19 יט  גֵּר אָנֹכִי בָאָרֶץ;    אַל-תַּסְתֵּר מִמֶּנִּי, מִצְוֺתֶיךָ. 19 I am a sojourner in the earth; hide not Thy commandments from me.
119.20 כ  גָּרְסָה נַפְשִׁי לְתַאֲבָה--    אֶל-מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ בְכָל-עֵת. 20 My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto Thine ordinances at all times.
119.21 כא  גָּעַרְתָּ, זֵדִים אֲרוּרִים--    הַשֹּׁגִים, מִמִּצְוֺתֶיךָ. 21 Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, that do err from Thy commandments.
119.22 כב  גַּל מֵעָלַי, חֶרְפָּה וָבוּז:    כִּי עֵדֹתֶיךָ נָצָרְתִּי. 22 Take away from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept Thy testimonies.
119.23 כג  גַּם יָשְׁבוּ שָׂרִים, בִּי נִדְבָּרוּ--    עַבְדְּךָ, יָשִׂיחַ בְּחֻקֶּיךָ. 23 Even though princes sit and talk against me, thy servant doth meditate in Thy statutes.
119.24 כד  גַּם-עֵדֹתֶיךָ, שַׁעֲשֻׁעָי--    אַנְשֵׁי עֲצָתִי. 24 Yea, Thy testimonies are my delight, they are my counsellors. {P}
119.25 כה  דָּבְקָה לֶעָפָר נַפְשִׁי;    חַיֵּנִי, כִּדְבָרֶךָ. 25 DALETH. My soul cleaveth unto the dust; quicken Thou me according to Thy word.
119.26 כו  דְּרָכַי סִפַּרְתִּי, וַתַּעֲנֵנִי;    לַמְּדֵנִי חֻקֶּיךָ. 26 I told of my ways, and Thou didst answer me; teach me Thy statutes.
119.27 כז  דֶּרֶךְ-פִּקּוּדֶיךָ הֲבִינֵנִי;    וְאָשִׂיחָה, בְּנִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ. 27 Make me to understand the way of Thy precepts, that I may talk of Thy wondrous works.
119.28 כח  דָּלְפָה נַפְשִׁי, מִתּוּגָה;    קַיְּמֵנִי, כִּדְבָרֶךָ. 28 My soul melteth away for heaviness; sustain me according unto Thy word.
119.29 כט  דֶּרֶךְ-שֶׁקֶר, הָסֵר מִמֶּנִּי;    וְתוֹרָתְךָ חָנֵּנִי. 29 Remove from me the way of falsehood; and grant me Thy law graciously.
119.30 ל  דֶּרֶךְ-אֱמוּנָה בָחָרְתִּי;    מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ שִׁוִּיתִי. 30 I have chosen the way of faithfulness; Thine ordinances have I set [before me].
119.31 לא  דָּבַקְתִּי בְעֵדְוֺתֶיךָ;    יְהוָה, אַל-תְּבִישֵׁנִי. 31 I cleave unto Thy testimonies; O LORD, put me not to shame.
119.32 לב  דֶּרֶךְ-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ אָרוּץ:    כִּי תַרְחִיב לִבִּי. 32 I will run the way of Thy commandments, for Thou dost enlarge my heart. {P}
119.33 לג  הוֹרֵנִי יְהוָה, דֶּרֶךְ חֻקֶּיךָ;    וְאֶצְּרֶנָּה עֵקֶב. 33 HE. Teach me, O LORD, the way of Thy statutes; and I will keep it at every step.
119.34 לד  הֲבִינֵנִי, וְאֶצְּרָה תוֹרָתֶךָ;    וְאֶשְׁמְרֶנָּה בְכָל-לֵב. 34 Give me understanding, that I keep Thy law and observe it with my whole heart.
119.35 לה  הַדְרִיכֵנִי, בִּנְתִיב מִצְוֺתֶיךָ:    כִּי-בוֹ חָפָצְתִּי. 35 Make me to tread in the path of Thy commandments; for therein do I delight.
119.36 לו  הַט-לִבִּי, אֶל-עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ;    וְאַל אֶל-בָּצַע. 36 Incline my heart unto Thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
119.37 לז  הַעֲבֵר עֵינַי, מֵרְאוֹת שָׁוְא;    בִּדְרָכֶךָ חַיֵּנִי. 37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in Thy ways.
119.38 לח  הָקֵם לְעַבְדְּךָ, אִמְרָתֶךָ--    אֲשֶׁר, לְיִרְאָתֶךָ. 38 Confirm Thy word unto Thy servant, which pertaineth unto the fear of Thee.
119.39 לט  הַעֲבֵר חֶרְפָּתִי, אֲשֶׁר יָגֹרְתִּי:    כִּי מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ טוֹבִים. 39 Turn away my reproach which I dread; for Thine ordinances are good.
119.40 מ  הִנֵּה, תָּאַבְתִּי לְפִקֻּדֶיךָ;    בְּצִדְקָתְךָ חַיֵּנִי. 40 Behold, I have longed after Thy precepts; quicken me in Thy righteousness. {P}
119.41 מא  וִיבֹאֻנִי חֲסָדֶךָ יְהוָה;    תְּשׁוּעָתְךָ, כְּאִמְרָתֶךָ. 41 VAU. Let Thy mercies also come unto me, O LORD, even Thy salvation, according to Thy word;
119.42 מב  וְאֶעֱנֶה חֹרְפִי דָבָר:    כִּי-בָטַחְתִּי, בִּדְבָרֶךָ. 42 That I may have an answer for him that taunteth me; for I trust in Thy word.
119.43 מג  וְאַל-תַּצֵּל מִפִּי דְבַר-אֱמֶת עַד-מְאֹד:    כִּי לְמִשְׁפָּטֶךָ, יִחָלְתִּי. 43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I hope in Thine ordinances;
119.44 מד  וְאֶשְׁמְרָה תוֹרָתְךָ תָמִיד--    לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד. 44 So shall I observe Thy law continually for ever and ever;
119.45 מה  וְאֶתְהַלְּכָה בָרְחָבָה:    כִּי פִקֻּדֶיךָ דָרָשְׁתִּי. 45 And I will walk at ease, for I have sought Thy precepts;
119.46 מו  וַאֲדַבְּרָה בְעֵדֹתֶיךָ, נֶגֶד מְלָכִים;    וְלֹא אֵבוֹשׁ. 46 I will also speak of Thy testimonies before kings, and will not be ashamed.
119.47 מז  וְאֶשְׁתַּעֲשַׁע בְּמִצְוֺתֶיךָ,    אֲשֶׁר אָהָבְתִּי. 47 And I will delight myself in Thy commandments, which I have loved.
119.48 מח  וְאֶשָּׂא-כַפַּי--אֶל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ, אֲשֶׁר אָהָבְתִּי;    וְאָשִׂיחָה בְחֻקֶּיךָ. 48 I will lift up my hands also unto Thy commandments, which I have loved; and I will meditate in Thy statutes. {P}
119.49 מט  זְכֹר-דָּבָר, לְעַבְדֶּךָ--    עַל, אֲשֶׁר יִחַלְתָּנִי. 49 ZAIN. Remember the word unto Thy servant, because Thou hast made me to hope.
119.50 נ  זֹאת נֶחָמָתִי בְעָנְיִי:    כִּי אִמְרָתְךָ חִיָּתְנִי. 50 This is my comfort in my affliction, that Thy word hath quickened me.
119.51 נא  זֵדִים, הֱלִיצֻנִי עַד-מְאֹד;    מִתּוֹרָתְךָ, לֹא נָטִיתִי. 51 The proud have had me greatly in derision; yet have I not turned aside from Thy law.
119.52 נב  זָכַרְתִּי מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ מֵעוֹלָם יְהוָה;    וָאֶתְנֶחָם. 52 I have remembered Thine ordinances which are of old, O LORD, and have comforted myself.
119.53 נג  זַלְעָפָה אֲחָזַתְנִי, מֵרְשָׁעִים--    עֹזְבֵי, תּוֹרָתֶךָ. 53 Burning indignation hath taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake Thy law.
119.54 נד  זְמִרוֹת, הָיוּ-לִי חֻקֶּיךָ--    בְּבֵית מְגוּרָי. 54 Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
119.55 נה  זָכַרְתִּי בַלַּיְלָה שִׁמְךָ יְהוָה;    וָאֶשְׁמְרָה, תּוֹרָתֶךָ. 55 I have remembered Thy name, O LORD, in the night, and have observed Thy law.
119.56 נו  זֹאת הָיְתָה-לִּי:    כִּי פִקֻּדֶיךָ נָצָרְתִּי. 56 This I have had, that I have kept Thy precepts. {P}
119.57 נז  חֶלְקִי יְהוָה אָמַרְתִּי--    לִשְׁמֹר דְּבָרֶיךָ. 57 HETH. My portion is the LORD, I have said that I would observe Thy words.
119.58 נח  חִלִּיתִי פָנֶיךָ בְכָל-לֵב;    חָנֵּנִי, כְּאִמְרָתֶךָ. 58 I have entreated Thy favour with my whole heart; be gracious unto me according to Thy word.
119.59 נט  חִשַּׁבְתִּי דְרָכָי;    וָאָשִׁיבָה רַגְלַי, אֶל-עֵדֹתֶיךָ. 59 I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto Thy testimonies.
119.60 ס  חַשְׁתִּי, וְלֹא הִתְמַהְמָהְתִּי--    לִשְׁמֹר, מִצְוֺתֶיךָ. 60 I made haste, and delayed not, to observe Thy commandments.
119.61 סא  חֶבְלֵי רְשָׁעִים עִוְּדֻנִי;    תּוֹרָתְךָ, לֹא שָׁכָחְתִּי. 61 The bands of the wicked have enclosed me; but I have not forgotten Thy law.
119.62 סב  חֲצוֹת-לַיְלָה--אָקוּם, לְהוֹדוֹת לָךְ:    עַל, מִשְׁפְּטֵי צִדְקֶךָ. 62 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto Thee because of Thy righteous ordinances.
119.63 סג  חָבֵר אָנִי, לְכָל-אֲשֶׁר יְרֵאוּךָ;    וּלְשֹׁמְרֵי, פִּקּוּדֶיךָ. 63 I am a companion of all them that fear Thee, and of them that observe Thy precepts.
119.64 סד  חַסְדְּךָ יְהוָה, מָלְאָה הָאָרֶץ;    חֻקֶּיךָ לַמְּדֵנִי. 64 The earth, O LORD, is full of Thy mercy; teach me Thy statutes. {P}
119.65 סה  טוֹב, עָשִׂיתָ עִם-עַבְדְּךָ--    יְהוָה, כִּדְבָרֶךָ. 65 TETH. Thou hast dealt well with Thy servant, O LORD, according unto Thy word.
119.66 סו  טוּב טַעַם וָדַעַת לַמְּדֵנִי:    כִּי בְמִצְוֺתֶיךָ הֶאֱמָנְתִּי. 66 Teach me good discernment and knowledge; for I have believed in Thy commandments.
119.67 סז  טֶרֶם אֶעֱנֶה, אֲנִי שֹׁגֵג;    וְעַתָּה, אִמְרָתְךָ שָׁמָרְתִּי. 67 Before I was afflicted, I did err; but now I observe Thy word.
119.68 סח  טוֹב-אַתָּה וּמֵטִיב;    לַמְּדֵנִי חֻקֶּיךָ. 68 Thou art good, and doest good; teach me Thy statutes.
119.69 סט  טָפְלוּ עָלַי שֶׁקֶר זֵדִים;    אֲנִי, בְּכָל-לֵב אֶצֹּר פִּקּוּדֶיךָ. 69 The proud have forged a lie against me; but I with my whole heart will keep Thy precepts.
119.70 ע  טָפַשׁ כַּחֵלֶב לִבָּם;    אֲנִי, תּוֹרָתְךָ שִׁעֲשָׁעְתִּי. 70 Their heart is gross like fat; but I delight in Thy law.
119.71 עא  טוֹב-לִי כִי-עֻנֵּיתִי--    לְמַעַן, אֶלְמַד חֻקֶּיךָ. 71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted, in order that I might learn Thy statutes.
119.72 עב  טוֹב-לִי תוֹרַת-פִּיךָ--    מֵאַלְפֵי, זָהָב וָכָסֶף. 72 The law of Thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver. {P}
119.73 עג  יָדֶיךָ עָשׂוּנִי, וַיְכוֹנְנוּנִי;    הֲבִינֵנִי, וְאֶלְמְדָה מִצְוֺתֶיךָ. 73 IOD. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding, that I may learn Thy commandments.
119.74 עד  יְרֵאֶיךָ, יִרְאוּנִי וְיִשְׂמָחוּ:    כִּי לִדְבָרְךָ יִחָלְתִּי. 74 They that fear Thee shall see me and be glad, because I have hope in Thy word.
119.75 עה  יָדַעְתִּי יְהוָה, כִּי-צֶדֶק מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ;    וֶאֱמוּנָה, עִנִּיתָנִי. 75 I know, O LORD, that Thy judgments are righteous, and that in faithfulness Thou hast afflicted me.
119.76 עו  יְהִי-נָא חַסְדְּךָ לְנַחֲמֵנִי--    כְּאִמְרָתְךָ לְעַבְדֶּךָ. 76 Let, I pray Thee, Thy lovingkindness be ready to comfort me, according to Thy promise unto Thy servant.
119.77 עז  יְבֹאוּנִי רַחֲמֶיךָ וְאֶחְיֶה:    כִּי-תוֹרָתְךָ, שַׁעֲשֻׁעָי. 77 Let Thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live; for Thy law is my delight.
119.78 עח  יֵבֹשׁוּ זֵדִים, כִּי-שֶׁקֶר עִוְּתוּנִי;    אֲנִי, אָשִׂיחַ בְּפִקּוּדֶיךָ. 78 Let the proud be put to shame, for they have distorted my cause with falsehood; but I will meditate in Thy precepts.
119.79 עט  יָשׁוּבוּ לִי יְרֵאֶיךָ;    וידעו (וְיֹדְעֵי), עֵדֹתֶיךָ. 79 Let those that fear Thee return unto me, and they that know Thy testimonies.
119.80 פ  יְהִי-לִבִּי תָמִים בְּחֻקֶּיךָ--    לְמַעַן, לֹא אֵבוֹשׁ. 80 Let my heart be undivided in Thy statutes, in order that I may not be put to shame. {P}
119.81 פא  כָּלְתָה לִתְשׁוּעָתְךָ נַפְשִׁי;    לִדְבָרְךָ יִחָלְתִּי. 81 CAPH. My soul pineth for Thy salvation; in Thy word do I hope.
119.82 פב  כָּלוּ עֵינַי, לְאִמְרָתֶךָ--    לֵאמֹר, מָתַי תְּנַחֲמֵנִי. 82 Mine eyes fail for Thy word, saying: 'When wilt Thou comfort me?'
119.83 פג  כִּי-הָיִיתִי, כְּנֹאד בְּקִיטוֹר--    חֻקֶּיךָ, לֹא שָׁכָחְתִּי. 83 For I am become like a wine-skin in the smoke; yet do I not forget Thy statutes.
119.84 פד  כַּמָּה יְמֵי-עַבְדֶּךָ;    מָתַי תַּעֲשֶׂה בְרֹדְפַי מִשְׁפָּט. 84 How many are the days of Thy servant? When wilt Thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?
119.85 פה  כָּרוּ-לִי זֵדִים שִׁיחוֹת--    אֲשֶׁר, לֹא כְתוֹרָתֶךָ. 85 The proud have digged pits for me, which is not according to Thy law.
119.86 פו  כָּל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ אֱמוּנָה;    שֶׁקֶר רְדָפוּנִי עָזְרֵנִי. 86 All Thy commandments are faithful; they persecute me for nought; help Thou me.
119.87 פז  כִּמְעַט, כִּלּוּנִי בָאָרֶץ;    וַאֲנִי, לֹא-עָזַבְתִּי פִקֻּדֶיךָ. 87 They had almost consumed me upon earth; but as for me, I forsook not Thy precepts.
119.88 פח  כְּחַסְדְּךָ חַיֵּנִי;    וְאֶשְׁמְרָה, עֵדוּת פִּיךָ. 88 Quicken me after Thy lovingkindness, and I will observe the testimony of Thy mouth. {P}
119.89 פט  לְעוֹלָם יְהוָה--    דְּבָרְךָ, נִצָּב בַּשָּׁמָיִם. 89 LAMED. For ever, O LORD, Thy word standeth fast in heaven.
119.90 צ  לְדֹר וָדֹר, אֱמוּנָתֶךָ;    כּוֹנַנְתָּ אֶרֶץ, וַתַּעֲמֹד. 90 Thy faithfulness is unto all generations; Thou hast established the earth, and it standeth.
119.91 צא  לְמִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ, עָמְדוּ הַיּוֹם:    כִּי הַכֹּל עֲבָדֶיךָ. 91 They stand this day according to Thine ordinances; for all things are Thy servants.
119.92 צב  לוּלֵי תוֹרָתְךָ, שַׁעֲשֻׁעָי--    אָז, אָבַדְתִּי בְעָנְיִי. 92 Unless Thy law had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine affliction.
119.93 צג  לְעוֹלָם, לֹא-אֶשְׁכַּח פִּקּוּדֶיךָ:    כִּי בָם, חִיִּיתָנִי. 93 I will never forget Thy precepts; for with them Thou hast quickened me.
119.94 צד  לְךָ-אֲנִי, הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי:    כִּי פִקּוּדֶיךָ דָרָשְׁתִּי. 94 I am Thine, save me; for I have sought Thy precepts.
119.95 צה  לִי קִוּוּ רְשָׁעִים לְאַבְּדֵנִי;    עֵדֹתֶיךָ, אֶתְבּוֹנָן. 95 The wicked have waited for me to destroy me; but I will consider Thy testimonies.
119.96 צו  לְכָל-תִּכְלָה, רָאִיתִי קֵץ;    רְחָבָה מִצְוָתְךָ מְאֹד. 96 I have seen an end to every purpose; but Thy commandment is exceeding broad. {P}
119.97 צז  מָה-אָהַבְתִּי תוֹרָתֶךָ:    כָּל-הַיּוֹם, הִיא שִׂיחָתִי. 97 MEM. O how love I Thy law! It is my meditation all the day.
119.98 צח  מֵאֹיְבַי, תְּחַכְּמֵנִי מִצְוֺתֶךָ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם הִיא-לִי. 98 Thy commandments make me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with me.
119.99 צט  מִכָּל-מְלַמְּדַי הִשְׂכַּלְתִּי:    כִּי עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ, שִׂיחָה לִי. 99 I have more understanding than all my teachers; for Thy testimonies are my meditation.
119.100 ק  מִזְּקֵנִים אֶתְבּוֹנָן:    כִּי פִקּוּדֶיךָ נָצָרְתִּי. 100 I understand more than mine elders, because I have kept Thy precepts.
119.101 קא  מִכָּל-אֹרַח רָע, כָּלִאתִי רַגְלָי--    לְמַעַן, אֶשְׁמֹר דְּבָרֶךָ. 101 I have refrained my feet from every evil way, in order that I might observe Thy word.
119.102 קב  מִמִּשְׁפָּטֶיךָ לֹא-סָרְתִּי:    כִּי-אַתָּה, הוֹרֵתָנִי. 102 I have not turned aside from Thine ordinances; for Thou hast instructed me.
119.103 קג  מַה-נִּמְלְצוּ לְחִכִּי, אִמְרָתֶךָ--    מִדְּבַשׁ לְפִי. 103 How sweet are Thy words unto my palate! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
119.104 קד  מִפִּקּוּדֶיךָ אֶתְבּוֹנָן;    עַל כֵּן, שָׂנֵאתִי כָּל-אֹרַח שָׁקֶר. 104 From Thy precepts I get understanding; therefore I hate every false way. {P}
119.105 קה  נֵר-לְרַגְלִי דְבָרֶךָ;    וְאוֹר, לִנְתִיבָתִי. 105 NUN. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
119.106 קו  נִשְׁבַּעְתִּי וָאֲקַיֵּמָה--    לִשְׁמֹר, מִשְׁפְּטֵי צִדְקֶךָ. 106 I have sworn, and have confirmed it, to observe Thy righteous ordinances.
119.107 קז  נַעֲנֵיתִי עַד-מְאֹד;    יְהוָה, חַיֵּנִי כִדְבָרֶךָ. 107 I am afflicted very much; quicken me, O LORD, according unto Thy word.
119.108 קח  נִדְבוֹת פִּי, רְצֵה-נָא יְהוָה;    וּמִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ לַמְּדֵנִי. 108 Accept, I beseech Thee, the freewill-offerings of my mouth, O LORD, and teach me Thine ordinances.
119.109 קט  נַפְשִׁי בְכַפִּי תָמִיד;    וְתוֹרָתְךָ, לֹא שָׁכָחְתִּי. 109 My soul is continually in my hand; yet have I not forgotten Thy law.
119.110 קי  נָתְנוּ רְשָׁעִים פַּח לִי;    וּמִפִּקּוּדֶיךָ, לֹא תָעִיתִי. 110 The wicked have laid a snare for me; yet went I not astray from Thy precepts.
119.111 קיא  נָחַלְתִּי עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ לְעוֹלָם:    כִּי-שְׂשׂוֹן לִבִּי הֵמָּה. 111 Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage for ever; for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
119.112 קיב  נָטִיתִי לִבִּי, לַעֲשׂוֹת חֻקֶּיךָ--    לְעוֹלָם עֵקֶב. 112 I have inclined my heart to perform Thy statutes, for ever, at every step. {P}
119.113 קיג  סֵעֲפִים שָׂנֵאתִי;    וְתוֹרָתְךָ אָהָבְתִּי. 113 SAMECH. I hate them that are of a double mind; but Thy law do I love.
119.114 קיד  סִתְרִי וּמָגִנִּי אָתָּה;    לִדְבָרְךָ יִחָלְתִּי. 114 Thou art my covert and my shield; in Thy word do I hope.
119.115 קטו  סוּרוּ-מִמֶּנִּי מְרֵעִים;    וְאֶצְּרָה, מִצְוֺת אֱלֹהָי. 115 Depart from me, ye evildoers; that I may keep the commandments of my God.
119.116 קטז  סָמְכֵנִי כְאִמְרָתְךָ וְאֶחְיֶה;    וְאַל-תְּבִישֵׁנִי, מִשִּׂבְרִי. 116 Uphold me according unto Thy word, that I may live; and put me not to shame in my hope.
119.117 קיז  סְעָדֵנִי וְאִוָּשֵׁעָה;    וְאֶשְׁעָה בְחֻקֶּיךָ תָמִיד. 117 Support Thou me, and I shall be saved; and I will occupy myself with Thy statutes continually.
119.118 קיח  סָלִיתָ, כָּל-שׁוֹגִים מֵחֻקֶּיךָ:    כִּי-שֶׁקֶר, תַּרְמִיתָם. 118 Thou hast made light of all them that err from Thy statutes; for their deceit is vain.
119.119 קיט  סִגִים--הִשְׁבַּתָּ כָל-רִשְׁעֵי-אָרֶץ;    לָכֵן, אָהַבְתִּי עֵדֹתֶיךָ. 119 Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross; therefore I love Thy testimonies.
119.120 קכ  סָמַר מִפַּחְדְּךָ בְשָׂרִי;    וּמִמִּשְׁפָּטֶיךָ יָרֵאתִי. 120 My flesh shuddereth for fear of Thee; and I am afraid of Thy judgments. {P}
119.121 קכא  עָשִׂיתִי, מִשְׁפָּט וָצֶדֶק;    בַּל-תַּנִּיחֵנִי, לְעֹשְׁקָי. 121 AIN. I have done justice and righteousness; leave me not to mine oppressors.
119.122 קכב  עֲרֹב עַבְדְּךָ לְטוֹב;    אַל-יַעַשְׁקֻנִי זֵדִים. 122 Be surety for Thy servant for good; let not the proud oppress me.
119.123 קכג  עֵינַי, כָּלוּ לִישׁוּעָתֶךָ;    וּלְאִמְרַת צִדְקֶךָ. 123 Mine eyes fail for Thy salvation, and for Thy righteous word.
119.124 קכד  עֲשֵׂה עִם-עַבְדְּךָ כְחַסְדֶּךָ;    וְחֻקֶּיךָ לַמְּדֵנִי. 124 Deal with Thy servant according unto Thy mercy, and teach me Thy statutes.
119.125 קכה  עַבְדְּךָ-אָנִי הֲבִינֵנִי;    וְאֵדְעָה, עֵדֹתֶיךָ. 125 I am Thy servant, give me understanding, that I may know Thy testimonies.
119.126 קכו  עֵת, לַעֲשׂוֹת לַיהוָה--    הֵפֵרוּ, תּוֹרָתֶךָ. 126 It is time for the LORD to work; they have made void Thy law.
119.127 קכז  עַל-כֵּן, אָהַבְתִּי מִצְוֺתֶיךָ--    מִזָּהָב וּמִפָּז. 127 Therefore I love Thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.
119.128 קכח  עַל-כֵּן, כָּל-פִּקּוּדֵי כֹל יִשָּׁרְתִּי;    כָּל-אֹרַח שֶׁקֶר שָׂנֵאתִי. 128 Therefore I esteem all [Thy] precepts concerning all things to be right; every false way I hate. {P}
119.129 קכט  פְּלָאוֹת עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ;    עַל-כֵּן, נְצָרָתַם נַפְשִׁי. 129 PE. Thy testimonies are wonderful; therefore doth my soul keep them.
119.130 קל  פֵּתַח דְּבָרֶיךָ יָאִיר;    מֵבִין פְּתָיִים. 130 The opening of Thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple.
119.131 קלא  פִּי-פָעַרְתִּי, וָאֶשְׁאָפָה:    כִּי לְמִצְוֺתֶיךָ יָאָבְתִּי. 131 I opened wide my mouth, and panted; for I longed for Thy commandments.
119.132 קלב  פְּנֵה-אֵלַי וְחָנֵּנִי--    כְּמִשְׁפָּט, לְאֹהֲבֵי שְׁמֶךָ. 132 Turn Thee towards me, and be gracious unto me, as is Thy wont to do unto those that love Thy name.
119.133 קלג  פְּעָמַי, הָכֵן בְּאִמְרָתֶךָ;    וְאַל-תַּשְׁלֶט-בִּי כָל-אָוֶן. 133 Order my footsteps by Thy word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
119.134 קלד  פְּדֵנִי, מֵעֹשֶׁק אָדָם;    וְאֶשְׁמְרָה, פִּקּוּדֶיךָ. 134 Redeem me from the oppression of man, and I will observe Thy precepts.
119.135 קלה  פָּנֶיךָ, הָאֵר בְּעַבְדֶּךָ;    וְלַמְּדֵנִי, אֶת-חֻקֶּיךָ. 135 Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant; and teach me Thy statutes.
119.136 קלו  פַּלְגֵי-מַיִם, יָרְדוּ עֵינָי--    עַל, לֹא-שָׁמְרוּ תוֹרָתֶךָ. 136 Mine eyes run down with rivers of water, because they observe not Thy law. {P}
119.137 קלז  צַדִּיק אַתָּה יְהוָה;    וְיָשָׁר, מִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ. 137 TZADE. Righteous art Thou, O LORD, and upright are Thy judgments.
119.138 קלח  צִוִּיתָ, צֶדֶק עֵדֹתֶיךָ;    וֶאֱמוּנָה מְאֹד. 138 Thou hast commanded Thy testimonies in righteousness and exceeding faithfulness.
119.139 קלט  צִמְּתַתְנִי קִנְאָתִי:    כִּי-שָׁכְחוּ דְבָרֶיךָ צָרָי. 139 My zeal hath undone me, because mine adversaries have forgotten Thy words.
119.140 קמ  צְרוּפָה אִמְרָתְךָ מְאֹד;    וְעַבְדְּךָ אֲהֵבָהּ. 140 Thy word is tried to the uttermost, and Thy servant loveth it.
119.141 קמא  צָעִיר אָנֹכִי וְנִבְזֶה;    פִּקֻּדֶיךָ, לֹא שָׁכָחְתִּי. 141 I am small and despised; yet have I not forgotten Thy precepts.
119.142 קמב  צִדְקָתְךָ צֶדֶק לְעוֹלָם;    וְתוֹרָתְךָ אֱמֶת. 142 Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and Thy law is truth.
119.143 קמג  צַר-וּמָצוֹק מְצָאוּנִי;    מִצְוֺתֶיךָ, שַׁעֲשֻׁעָי. 143 Trouble and anguish have overtaken me; yet Thy commandments are my delight.
119.144 קמד  צֶדֶק עֵדְוֺתֶיךָ לְעוֹלָם;    הֲבִינֵנִי וְאֶחְיֶה. 144 Thy testimonies are righteous for ever; give me understanding, and I shall live. {P}
119.145 קמה  קָרָאתִי בְכָל-לֵב, עֲנֵנִי יְהוָה;    חֻקֶּיךָ אֶצֹּרָה. 145 KOPH. I have called with my whole heart; answer me, O LORD; I will keep Thy statutes.
119.146 קמו  קְרָאתִיךָ הוֹשִׁיעֵנִי;    וְאֶשְׁמְרָה, עֵדֹתֶיךָ. 146 I have called Thee, save me, and I will observe Thy testimonies.
119.147 קמז  קִדַּמְתִּי בַנֶּשֶׁף, וָאֲשַׁוֵּעָה;    לדבריך (לִדְבָרְךָ) יִחָלְתִּי. 147 I rose early at dawn, and cried; I hoped in Thy word.
119.148 קמח  קִדְּמוּ עֵינַי, אַשְׁמֻרוֹת--    לָשִׂיחַ, בְּאִמְרָתֶךָ. 148 Mine eyes forestalled the night-watches, that I might meditate in Thy word.
119.149 קמט  קוֹלִי, שִׁמְעָה כְחַסְדֶּךָ;    יְהוָה, כְּמִשְׁפָּטֶךָ חַיֵּנִי. 149 Hear my voice according unto Thy lovingkindness; quicken me, O LORD, as Thou art wont.
119.150 קנ  קָרְבוּ, רֹדְפֵי זִמָּה;    מִתּוֹרָתְךָ רָחָקוּ. 150 They draw nigh that follow after wickedness; they are far from Thy law.
119.151 קנא  קָרוֹב אַתָּה יְהוָה;    וְכָל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ אֱמֶת. 151 Thou art nigh, O LORD; and all Thy commandments are truth.
119.152 קנב  קֶדֶם יָדַעְתִּי, מֵעֵדֹתֶיךָ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם יְסַדְתָּם. 152 Of old have I known from Thy testimonies that Thou hast founded them for ever. {P}
119.153 קנג  רְאֵה-עָנְיִי וְחַלְּצֵנִי:    כִּי-תוֹרָתְךָ, לֹא שָׁכָחְתִּי. 153 RESH. O see mine affliction, and rescue me; for I do not forget Thy law.
119.154 קנד  רִיבָה רִיבִי, וּגְאָלֵנִי;    לְאִמְרָתְךָ חַיֵּנִי. 154 Plead Thou my cause, and redeem me; quicken me according to Thy word.
119.155 קנה  רָחוֹק מֵרְשָׁעִים יְשׁוּעָה:    כִּי חֻקֶּיךָ, לֹא דָרָשׁוּ. 155 Salvation is far from the wicked; for they seek not Thy statutes.
119.156 קנו  רַחֲמֶיךָ רַבִּים יְהוָה;    כְּמִשְׁפָּטֶיךָ חַיֵּנִי. 156 Great are Thy compassions, O LORD; quicken me as Thou art wont.
119.157 קנז  רַבִּים, רֹדְפַי וְצָרָי;    מֵעֵדְוֺתֶיךָ, לֹא נָטִיתִי. 157 Many are my persecutors and mine adversaries; yet have I not turned aside from Thy testimonies.
119.158 קנח  רָאִיתִי בֹגְדִים, וָאֶתְקוֹטָטָה--    אֲשֶׁר אִמְרָתְךָ, לֹא שָׁמָרוּ. 158 I beheld them that were faithless, and strove with them; because they observed not Thy word.
119.159 קנט  רְאֵה, כִּי-פִקּוּדֶיךָ אָהָבְתִּי;    יְהוָה, כְּחַסְדְּךָ חַיֵּנִי. 159 O see how I love Thy precepts; quicken me, O LORD, according to Thy lovingkindness.
119.160 קס  רֹאשׁ-דְּבָרְךָ אֱמֶת;    וּלְעוֹלָם, כָּל-מִשְׁפַּט צִדְקֶךָ. 160 The beginning of Thy word is truth; and all Thy righteous ordinance endureth for ever. {P}
119.161 קסא  שָׂרִים, רְדָפוּנִי חִנָּם;    ומדבריך (וּמִדְּבָרְךָ), פָּחַד לִבִּי. 161 SHIN. Princes have persecuted me without a cause; but my heart standeth in awe of Thy words.
119.162 קסב  שָׂשׂ אָנֹכִי, עַל-אִמְרָתֶךָ--    כְּמוֹצֵא, שָׁלָל רָב. 162 I rejoice at Thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.
119.163 קסג  שֶׁקֶר שָׂנֵאתִי, וַאֲתַעֵבָה;    תּוֹרָתְךָ אָהָבְתִּי. 163 I hate and abhor falsehood; Thy law do I love.
119.164 קסד  שֶׁבַע בַּיּוֹם, הִלַּלְתִּיךָ--    עַל, מִשְׁפְּטֵי צִדְקֶךָ. 164 Seven times a day do I praise Thee, because of Thy righteous ordinances.
119.165 קסה  שָׁלוֹם רָב, לְאֹהֲבֵי תוֹרָתֶךָ;    וְאֵין-לָמוֹ מִכְשׁוֹל. 165 Great peace have they that love Thy law; and there is no stumbling for them.
119.166 קסו  שִׂבַּרְתִּי לִישׁוּעָתְךָ יְהוָה;    וּמִצְוֺתֶיךָ עָשִׂיתִי. 166 I have hoped for Thy salvation, O LORD, and have done Thy commandments.
119.167 קסז  שָׁמְרָה נַפְשִׁי, עֵדֹתֶיךָ;    וָאֹהֲבֵם מְאֹד. 167 My soul hath observed Thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly.
119.168 קסח  שָׁמַרְתִּי פִקּוּדֶיךָ, וְעֵדֹתֶיךָ:    כִּי כָל-דְּרָכַי נֶגְדֶּךָ. 168 I have observed Thy precepts and Thy testimonies; for all my ways are before Thee. {P}
119.169 קסט  תִּקְרַב רִנָּתִי לְפָנֶיךָ יְהוָה;    כִּדְבָרְךָ הֲבִינֵנִי. 169 TAU. Let my cry come near before Thee, O LORD; give me understanding according to Thy word.
119.170 קע  תָּבוֹא תְחִנָּתִי לְפָנֶיךָ;    כְּאִמְרָתְךָ, הַצִּילֵנִי. 170 Let my supplication come before Thee; deliver me according to Thy word.
119.171 קעא  תַּבַּעְנָה שְׂפָתַי תְּהִלָּה:    כִּי תְלַמְּדֵנִי חֻקֶּיךָ. 171 Let my lips utter praise: because Thou teachest me Thy statutes.
119.172 קעב  תַּעַן לְשׁוֹנִי, אִמְרָתֶךָ:    כִּי כָל-מִצְוֺתֶיךָ צֶּדֶק. 172 Let my tongue sing of Thy word; for all Thy commandments are righteousness.
119.173 קעג  תְּהִי-יָדְךָ לְעָזְרֵנִי:    כִּי פִקּוּדֶיךָ בָחָרְתִּי. 173 Let Thy hand be ready to help me; for I have chosen Thy precepts.
119.174 קעד  תָּאַבְתִּי לִישׁוּעָתְךָ יְהוָה;    וְתוֹרָתְךָ, שַׁעֲשֻׁעָי. 174 I have longed for Thy salvation, O LORD; and Thy law is my delight.
119.175 קעה  תְּחִי-נַפְשִׁי, וּתְהַלְלֶךָּ;    וּמִשְׁפָּטֶךָ יַעְזְרֻנִי. 175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise Thee; and let Thine ordinances help me.
119.176 קעו  תָּעִיתִי--    כְּשֶׂה אֹבֵד, בַּקֵּשׁ עַבְדֶּךָ: כִּי מִצְוֺתֶיךָ,    לֹא שָׁכָחְתִּי. 176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek Thy servant; {N} for I have not forgotten Thy commandments. {P}
120.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: אֶל-יְהוָה, בַּצָּרָתָה לִּי--    קָרָאתִי, וַיַּעֲנֵנִי. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} In my distress I called unto the LORD, and He answered me.
120.2 ב  יְהוָה--הַצִּילָה נַפְשִׁי, מִשְּׂפַת-שֶׁקֶר:    מִלָּשׁוֹן רְמִיָּה. 2 O LORD, deliver my soul from lying lips, from a deceitful tongue.
120.3 ג  מַה-יִּתֵּן לְךָ, וּמַה-יֹּסִיף לָךְ--    לָשׁוֹן רְמִיָּה. 3 What shall be given unto thee, and what shall be done more unto thee, thou deceitful tongue?
120.4 ד  חִצֵּי גִבּוֹר שְׁנוּנִים;    עִם, גַּחֲלֵי רְתָמִים. 4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of broom.
120.5 ה  אוֹיָה-לִי, כִּי-גַרְתִּי מֶשֶׁךְ;    שָׁכַנְתִּי, עִם-אָהֳלֵי קֵדָר. 5 Woe is me, that I sojourn with Meshech, that I dwell beside the tents of Kedar!
120.6 ו  רַבַּת, שָׁכְנָה-לָּהּ נַפְשִׁי--    עִם, שׂוֹנֵא שָׁלוֹם. 6 My soul hath full long had her dwelling with him that hateth peace.
120.7 ז  אֲנִי-שָׁלוֹם, וְכִי אֲדַבֵּר;    הֵמָּה, לַמִּלְחָמָה. 7 I am all peace; but when I speak, they are for war. {P}
121.1 א  שִׁיר, לַמַּעֲלוֹת: אֶשָּׂא עֵינַי, אֶל-הֶהָרִים--    מֵאַיִן, יָבֹא עֶזְרִי. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} I will lift up mine eyes unto the mountains: from whence shall my help come?
121.2 ב  עֶזְרִי, מֵעִם יְהוָה--    עֹשֵׂה, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ. 2 My help cometh from the LORD, who made heaven and earth.
121.3 ג  אַל-יִתֵּן לַמּוֹט רַגְלֶךָ;    אַל-יָנוּם, שֹׁמְרֶךָ. 3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; He that keepeth thee will not slumber.
121.4 ד  הִנֵּה לֹא-יָנוּם, וְלֹא יִישָׁן--    שׁוֹמֵר, יִשְׂרָאֵל. 4 Behold, He that keepeth Israel doth neither slumber nor sleep.
121.5 ה  יְהוָה שֹׁמְרֶךָ;    יְהוָה צִלְּךָ, עַל-יַד יְמִינֶךָ. 5 The LORD is thy keeper; the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand.
121.6 ו  יוֹמָם, הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ לֹא-יַכֶּכָּה;    וְיָרֵחַ בַּלָּיְלָה. 6 The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
121.7 ז  יְהוָה, יִשְׁמָרְךָ מִכָּל-רָע:    יִשְׁמֹר, אֶת-נַפְשֶׁךָ. 7 The LORD shall keep thee from all evil; He shall keep thy soul.
121.8 ח  יְהוָה, יִשְׁמָר-צֵאתְךָ וּבוֹאֶךָ--    מֵעַתָּה, וְעַד-עוֹלָם. 8 The LORD shall guard thy going out and thy coming in, from this time forth and for ever. {P}
122.1 א  שִׁיר הַמַּעֲלוֹת, לְדָוִד: שָׂמַחְתִּי, בְּאֹמְרִים לִי--    בֵּית יְהוָה נֵלֵךְ. 1 A Song of Ascents; of David. {N} I rejoiced when they said unto me: 'Let us go unto the house of the LORD.'
122.2 ב  עֹמְדוֹת, הָיוּ רַגְלֵינוּ--    בִּשְׁעָרַיִךְ, יְרוּשָׁלִָם. 2 Our feet are standing within thy gates, O Jerusalem;
122.3 ג  יְרוּשָׁלִַם הַבְּנוּיָה--    כְּעִיר, שֶׁחֻבְּרָה-לָּהּ יַחְדָּו. 3 Jerusalem, that art builded as a city that is compact together;
122.4 ד  שֶׁשָּׁם עָלוּ שְׁבָטִים, שִׁבְטֵי-יָהּ--עֵדוּת לְיִשְׂרָאֵל:    לְהֹדוֹת, לְשֵׁם יְהוָה. 4 Whither the tribes went up, even the tribes of the LORD, as a testimony unto Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the LORD.
122.5 ה  כִּי שָׁמָּה, יָשְׁבוּ כִסְאוֹת לְמִשְׁפָּט:    כִּסְאוֹת, לְבֵית דָּוִד. 5 For there were set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
122.6 ו  שַׁאֲלוּ, שְׁלוֹם יְרוּשָׁלִָם;    יִשְׁלָיוּ, אֹהֲבָיִךְ. 6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; may they prosper that love thee.
122.7 ז  יְהִי-שָׁלוֹם בְּחֵילֵךְ;    שַׁלְוָה, בְּאַרְמְנוֹתָיִךְ. 7 Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
122.8 ח  לְמַעַן, אַחַי וְרֵעָי--    אֲדַבְּרָה-נָּא שָׁלוֹם בָּךְ. 8 For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say: 'Peace be within thee.'
122.9 ט  לְמַעַן, בֵּית-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--    אֲבַקְשָׁה טוֹב לָךְ. 9 For the sake of the house of the LORD our God I will seek thy good. {P}
123.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: אֵלֶיךָ, נָשָׂאתִי אֶת-עֵינַי--    הַיֹּשְׁבִי, בַּשָּׁמָיִם. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} Unto Thee I lift up mine eyes, O Thou that art enthroned in the heavens.
123.2 ב  הִנֵּה כְעֵינֵי עֲבָדִים,    אֶל-יַד אֲדוֹנֵיהֶם-- כְּעֵינֵי שִׁפְחָה,    אֶל-יַד גְּבִרְתָּהּ: כֵּן עֵינֵינוּ, אֶל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--    עַד, שֶׁיְּחָנֵּנוּ. 2 Behold, as the eyes of servants unto the hand of their master, {N} as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; {N} so our eyes look unto the LORD our God, until He be gracious unto us.
123.3 ג  חָנֵּנוּ יְהוָה חָנֵּנוּ:    כִּי-רַב, שָׂבַעְנוּ בוּז. 3 Be gracious unto us, O LORD, be gracious unto us; for we are full sated with contempt.
123.4 ד  רַבַּת,    שָׂבְעָה-לָּהּ נַפְשֵׁנוּ: הַלַּעַג הַשַּׁאֲנַנִּים;    הַבּוּז, לגאיונים (לִגְאֵי יוֹנִים). 4 Our soul is full sated {N} with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud oppressors. {P}
124.1 א  שִׁיר הַמַּעֲלוֹת, לְדָוִד: לוּלֵי יְהוָה, שֶׁהָיָה לָנוּ--    יֹאמַר-נָא, יִשְׂרָאֵל. 1 A Song of Ascents; of David. {N} 'If it had not been the LORD who was for us', let Israel now say;
124.2 ב  לוּלֵי יְהוָה, שֶׁהָיָה לָנוּ--    בְּקוּם עָלֵינוּ אָדָם. 2 'If it had not been the LORD who was for us, when men rose up against us,
124.3 ג  אֲזַי, חַיִּים בְּלָעוּנוּ--    בַּחֲרוֹת אַפָּם בָּנוּ. 3 Then they had swallowed us up alive, when their wrath was kindled against us;
124.4 ד  אֲזַי, הַמַּיִם שְׁטָפוּנוּ--    נַחְלָה, עָבַר עַל-נַפְשֵׁנוּ. 4 Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul;
124.5 ה  אֲזַי, עָבַר עַל-נַפְשֵׁנוּ--    הַמַּיִם, הַזֵּידוֹנִים. 5 Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.'
124.6 ו  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה--    שֶׁלֹּא נְתָנָנוּ טֶרֶף, לְשִׁנֵּיהֶם. 6 Blessed be the LORD, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth.
124.7 ז  נַפְשֵׁנוּ--    כְּצִפּוֹר נִמְלְטָה, מִפַּח יוֹקְשִׁים: הַפַּח נִשְׁבָּר,    וַאֲנַחְנוּ נִמְלָטְנוּ. 7 Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; {N} the snare is broken, and we are escaped.
124.8 ח  עֶזְרֵנוּ, בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה--    עֹשֵׂה, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ. 8 Our help is in the name of the LORD, who made heaven and earth. {P}
125.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: הַבֹּטְחִים בַּיהוָה--    כְּהַר-צִיּוֹן לֹא-יִמּוֹט, לְעוֹלָם יֵשֵׁב. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} They that trust in the LORD are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abideth for ever.
125.2 ב  יְרוּשָׁלִַם--    הָרִים, סָבִיב לָהּ: וַיהוָה, סָבִיב לְעַמּוֹ--    מֵעַתָּה, וְעַד-עוֹלָם. 2 As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, {N} so the LORD is round about His people, from this time forth and for ever.
125.3 ג  כִּי לֹא יָנוּחַ, שֵׁבֶט הָרֶשַׁע--    עַל, גּוֹרַל הַצַּדִּיקִים: לְמַעַן, לֹא-יִשְׁלְחוּ הַצַּדִּיקִים בְּעַוְלָתָה    יְדֵיהֶם. 3 For the rod of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; {N} that the righteous put not forth their hands unto iniquity.
125.4 ד  הֵיטִיבָה יְהוָה, לַטּוֹבִים;    וְלִישָׁרִים, בְּלִבּוֹתָם. 4 Do good, O LORD, unto the good, and to them that are upright in their hearts.
125.5 ה  וְהַמַּטִּים עֲקַלְקַלּוֹתָם--    יוֹלִיכֵם יְהוָה, אֶת-פֹּעֲלֵי הָאָוֶן: שָׁלוֹם,    עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל. 5 But as for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the LORD will lead them away with the workers of iniquity. {N} Peace be upon Israel. {P}
126.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: בְּשׁוּב יְהוָה, אֶת-שִׁיבַת צִיּוֹן--    הָיִינוּ, כְּחֹלְמִים. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} When the LORD brought back those that returned to Zion, we were like unto them that dream.
126.2 ב  אָז יִמָּלֵא שְׂחוֹק, פִּינוּ--    וּלְשׁוֹנֵנוּ רִנָּה: אָז, יֹאמְרוּ בַגּוֹיִם--    הִגְדִּיל יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת עִם-אֵלֶּה. 2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing; {N} then said they among the nations: 'The LORD hath done great things with these.'
126.3 ג  הִגְדִּיל יְהוָה, לַעֲשׂוֹת עִמָּנוּ--    הָיִינוּ שְׂמֵחִים. 3 The LORD hath done great things with us; we are rejoiced.
126.4 ד  שׁוּבָה יְהוָה, אֶת-שבותנו (שְׁבִיתֵנוּ)--    כַּאֲפִיקִים בַּנֶּגֶב. 4 Turn our captivity, O LORD, as the streams in the dry land.
126.5 ה  הַזֹּרְעִים בְּדִמְעָה--    בְּרִנָּה יִקְצֹרוּ. 5 They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
126.6 ו  הָלוֹךְ יֵלֵךְ, וּבָכֹה--    נֹשֵׂא מֶשֶׁךְ-הַזָּרַע: בֹּא-יָבֹא בְרִנָּה--    נֹשֵׂא, אֲלֻמֹּתָיו. 6 Though he goeth on his way weeping that beareth the measure of seed, {N} he shall come home with joy, bearing his sheaves. {P}
127.1 א  שִׁיר הַמַּעֲלוֹת, לִשְׁלֹמֹה: אִם-יְהוָה, לֹא-יִבְנֶה בַיִת--    שָׁוְא עָמְלוּ בוֹנָיו בּוֹ; אִם-יְהוָה לֹא-יִשְׁמָר-עִיר,    שָׁוְא שָׁקַד שׁוֹמֵר. 1 A Song of Ascents; of Solomon. {N} Except the LORD build the house, they labour in vain that build it; {N} except the LORD keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.
127.2 ב  שָׁוְא לָכֶם מַשְׁכִּימֵי קוּם,    מְאַחֲרֵי-שֶׁבֶת-- אֹכְלֵי,    לֶחֶם הָעֲצָבִים; כֵּן יִתֵּן לִידִידוֹ    שֵׁנָא. 2 It is vain for you that ye rise early, and sit up late, {N} ye that eat the bread of toil; {N} so He giveth unto His beloved in sleep.
127.3 ג  הִנֵּה נַחֲלַת יְהוָה בָּנִים:    שָׂכָר, פְּרִי הַבָּטֶן. 3 Lo, children are a heritage of the LORD; the fruit of the womb is a reward.
127.4 ד  כְּחִצִּים בְּיַד-גִּבּוֹר--    כֵּן, בְּנֵי הַנְּעוּרִים. 4 As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of one's youth.
127.5 ה  אַשְׁרֵי הַגֶּבֶר--    אֲשֶׁר מִלֵּא אֶת-אַשְׁפָּתוֹ, מֵהֶם: לֹא-יֵבֹשׁוּ--    כִּי-יְדַבְּרוּ אֶת-אוֹיְבִים בַּשָּׁעַר. 5 Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them; {N} they shall not be put to shame, when they speak with their enemies in the gate. {P}
128.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: אַשְׁרֵי, כָּל-יְרֵא יְהוָה--    הַהֹלֵךְ, בִּדְרָכָיו. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} Happy is every one that feareth the LORD, that walketh in His ways.
128.2 ב  יְגִיעַ כַּפֶּיךָ, כִּי תֹאכֵל;    אַשְׁרֶיךָ, וְטוֹב לָךְ. 2 When thou eatest the labour of thy hands, happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.
128.3 ג  אֶשְׁתְּךָ, כְּגֶפֶן פֹּרִיָּה--    בְּיַרְכְּתֵי בֵיתֶךָ: בָּנֶיךָ, כִּשְׁתִלֵי זֵיתִים--    סָבִיב, לְשֻׁלְחָנֶךָ. 3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, in the innermost parts of thy house; {N} thy children like olive plants, round about thy table.
128.4 ד  הִנֵּה כִי-כֵן, יְבֹרַךְ גָּבֶר--    יְרֵא יְהוָה. 4 Behold, surely thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the LORD.
128.5 ה  יְבָרֶכְךָ יְהוָה, מִצִּיּוֹן:    וּרְאֵה, בְּטוּב יְרוּשָׁלִָם--כֹּל, יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ. 5 The LORD bless thee out of Zion; and see thou the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life;
128.6 ו  וּרְאֵה-בָנִים לְבָנֶיךָ:    שָׁלוֹם, עַל-יִשְׂרָאֵל. 6 And see thy children's children. Peace be upon Israel! {P}
129.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: רַבַּת, צְרָרוּנִי מִנְּעוּרַי--    יֹאמַר-נָא, יִשְׂרָאֵל. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} 'Much have they afflicted me from my youth up', let Israel now say;
129.2 ב  רַבַּת, צְרָרוּנִי מִנְּעוּרָי;    גַּם, לֹא-יָכְלוּ לִי. 2 'Much have they afflicted me from my youth up; but they have not prevailed against me.
129.3 ג  עַל-גַּבִּי, חָרְשׁוּ חֹרְשִׁים;    הֶאֱרִיכוּ, למענותם (לְמַעֲנִיתָם). 3 The plowers plowed upon my back; they made long their furrows.
129.4 ד  יְהוָה צַדִּיק;    קִצֵּץ, עֲבוֹת רְשָׁעִים. 4 The LORD is righteous; He hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked.'
129.5 ה  יֵבֹשׁוּ, וְיִסֹּגוּ אָחוֹר--    כֹּל, שֹׂנְאֵי צִיּוֹן. 5 Let them be ashamed and turned backward, all they that hate Zion.
129.6 ו  יִהְיוּ, כַּחֲצִיר גַּגּוֹת--    שֶׁקַּדְמַת שָׁלַף יָבֵשׁ. 6 Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth afore it springeth up;
129.7 ז  שֶׁלֹּא מִלֵּא כַפּוֹ קוֹצֵר;    וְחִצְנוֹ מְעַמֵּר. 7 Wherewith the reaper filleth not his hand, nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom.
129.8 ח  וְלֹא אָמְרוּ, הָעֹבְרִים--    בִּרְכַּת-יְהוָה אֲלֵיכֶם; בֵּרַכְנוּ אֶתְכֶם,    בְּשֵׁם יְהוָה. 8 Neither do they that go by say: 'The blessing of the LORD be upon you; {N} we bless you in the name of the LORD.' {P}
130.1 א  שִׁיר הַמַּעֲלוֹת: מִמַּעֲמַקִּים קְרָאתִיךָ    יְהוָה. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} Out of the depths have I called Thee, O LORD.
130.2 ב  אֲדֹנָי,    שִׁמְעָה בְקוֹלִי: תִּהְיֶינָה אָזְנֶיךָ, קַשֻּׁבוֹת--    לְקוֹל, תַּחֲנוּנָי. 2 Lord, hearken unto my voice; {N} let Thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications.
130.3 ג  אִם-עֲוֺנוֹת תִּשְׁמָר-יָהּ--    אֲדֹנָי, מִי יַעֲמֹד. 3 If Thou, LORD, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who could stand?
130.4 ד  כִּי-עִמְּךָ הַסְּלִיחָה--    לְמַעַן, תִּוָּרֵא. 4 For with Thee there is forgiveness, that Thou mayest be feared.
130.5 ה  קִוִּיתִי יְהוָה, קִוְּתָה נַפְשִׁי;    וְלִדְבָרוֹ הוֹחָלְתִּי. 5 I wait for the LORD, my soul doth wait, and in His word do I hope.
130.6 ו  נַפְשִׁי לַאדֹנָי--    מִשֹּׁמְרִים לַבֹּקֶר, שֹׁמְרִים לַבֹּקֶר. 6 My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than watchmen for the morning; yea, more than watchmen for the morning.
130.7 ז  יַחֵל יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה:    כִּי-עִם-יְהוָה הַחֶסֶד; וְהַרְבֵּה עִמּוֹ פְדוּת. 7 O Israel, hope in the LORD; for with the LORD there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous redemption.
130.8 ח  וְהוּא, יִפְדֶּה אֶת-יִשְׂרָאֵל--    מִכֹּל, עֲוֺנֹתָיו. 8 And He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities. {P}
131.1 א  שִׁיר הַמַּעֲלוֹת, לְדָוִד: יְהוָה, לֹא-גָבַהּ לִבִּי--    וְלֹא-רָמוּ עֵינַי; וְלֹא-הִלַּכְתִּי,    בִּגְדֹלוֹת וּבְנִפְלָאוֹת מִמֶּנִּי. 1 A Song of Ascents; of David. {N} LORD, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; {N} neither do I exercise myself in things too great, or in things too wonderful for me.
131.2 ב  אִם-לֹא שִׁוִּיתִי, וְדוֹמַמְתִּי--    נַפְשִׁי: כְּגָמֻל, עֲלֵי אִמּוֹ;    כַּגָּמֻל עָלַי נַפְשִׁי. 2 Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul; {N} like a weaned child with his mother; my soul is with me like a weaned child.
131.3 ג  יַחֵל יִשְׂרָאֵל, אֶל-יְהוָה--    מֵעַתָּה, וְעַד-עוֹלָם. 3 O Israel, hope in the LORD from this time forth and for ever. {P}
132.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: זְכוֹר-יְהוָה לְדָוִד--    אֵת, כָּל-עֻנּוֹתוֹ. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} LORD, remember unto David all his affliction;
132.2 ב  אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע, לַיהוָה;    נָדַר, לַאֲבִיר יַעֲקֹב. 2 How he swore unto the LORD, and vowed unto the Mighty One of Jacob:
132.3 ג  אִם-אָבֹא, בְּאֹהֶל בֵּיתִי;    אִם-אֶעֱלֶה, עַל-עֶרֶשׂ יְצוּעָי. 3 'Surely I will not come into the tent of my house, nor go up into the bed that is spread for me;
132.4 ד  אִם אֶתֵּן שְׁנַת לְעֵינָי;    לְעַפְעַפַּי תְּנוּמָה. 4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids;
132.5 ה  עַד-אֶמְצָא מָקוֹם, לַיהוָה;    מִשְׁכָּנוֹת, לַאֲבִיר יַעֲקֹב. 5 Until I find out a place for the LORD, a dwelling-place for the Mighty One of Jacob.'
132.6 ו  הִנֵּה-שְׁמַעֲנוּהָ בְאֶפְרָתָה;    מְצָאנוּהָ, בִּשְׂדֵי-יָעַר. 6 Lo, we heard of it as being in Ephrath; we found it in the field of the wood.
132.7 ז  נָבוֹאָה לְמִשְׁכְּנוֹתָיו;    נִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה, לַהֲדֹם רַגְלָיו. 7 Let us go into His dwelling-place; let us worship at His footstool.
132.8 ח  קוּמָה יְהוָה, לִמְנוּחָתֶךָ:    אַתָּה, וַאֲרוֹן עֻזֶּךָ. 8 Arise, O LORD, unto Thy resting-place; Thou, and the ark of Thy strength.
132.9 ט  כֹּהֲנֶיךָ יִלְבְּשׁוּ-צֶדֶק;    וַחֲסִידֶיךָ יְרַנֵּנוּ. 9 Let Thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let Thy saints shout for joy.
132.10 י  בַּעֲבוּר, דָּוִד עַבְדֶּךָ--    אַל-תָּשֵׁב, פְּנֵי מְשִׁיחֶךָ. 10 For Thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of Thine anointed.
132.11 יא  נִשְׁבַּע-יְהוָה, לְדָוִד אֱמֶת--    לֹא-יָשׁוּב מִמֶּנָּה: מִפְּרִי בִטְנְךָ--    אָשִׁית, לְכִסֵּא-לָךְ. 11 The LORD swore unto David in truth; He will not turn back from it: {N} 'Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.
132.12 יב  אִם-יִשְׁמְרוּ בָנֶיךָ, בְּרִיתִי--    וְעֵדֹתִי זוֹ, אֲלַמְּדֵם: גַּם-בְּנֵיהֶם עֲדֵי-עַד--    יֵשְׁבוּ, לְכִסֵּא-לָךְ. 12 If thy children keep My covenant and My testimony that I shall teach them, {N} their children also for ever shall sit upon thy throne.'
132.13 יג  כִּי-בָחַר יְהוָה בְּצִיּוֹן;    אִוָּהּ, לְמוֹשָׁב לוֹ. 13 For the LORD hath chosen Zion; He hath desired it for His habitation:
132.14 יד  זֹאת-מְנוּחָתִי עֲדֵי-עַד:    פֹּה-אֵשֵׁב, כִּי אִוִּתִיהָ. 14 'This is My resting-place for ever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it.
132.15 טו  צֵידָהּ, בָּרֵךְ אֲבָרֵךְ;    אֶבְיוֹנֶיהָ, אַשְׂבִּיעַ לָחֶם. 15 I will abundantly bless her provision; I will give her needy bread in plenty.
132.16 טז  וְכֹהֲנֶיהָ, אַלְבִּישׁ יֶשַׁע;    וַחֲסִידֶיהָ, רַנֵּן יְרַנֵּנוּ. 16 Her priests also will I clothe with salvation; and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.
132.17 יז  שָׁם אַצְמִיחַ קֶרֶן לְדָוִד;    עָרַכְתִּי נֵר, לִמְשִׁיחִי. 17 There will I make a horn to shoot up unto David, there have I ordered a lamp for Mine anointed.
132.18 יח  אוֹיְבָיו, אַלְבִּישׁ בֹּשֶׁת;    וְעָלָיו, יָצִיץ נִזְרוֹ. 18 His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon himself shall his crown shine.' {P}
133.1 א  שִׁיר הַמַּעֲלוֹת, לְדָוִד: הִנֵּה מַה-טּוֹב, וּמַה-נָּעִים--    שֶׁבֶת אַחִים גַּם-יָחַד. 1 A Song of Ascents; of David. {N} Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!
133.2 ב  כַּשֶּׁמֶן הַטּוֹב,    עַל-הָרֹאשׁ-- יֹרֵד,    עַל-הַזָּקָן זְקַן-אַהֲרֹן: שֶׁיֹּרֵד,    עַל-פִּי מִדּוֹתָיו. 2 It is like the precious oil upon the head, {N} coming down upon the beard; even Aaron's beard, {N} that cometh down upon the collar of his garments;
133.3 ג  כְּטַל-חֶרְמוֹן--    שֶׁיֹּרֵד, עַל-הַרְרֵי צִיּוֹן: כִּי שָׁם צִוָּה יְהוָה,    אֶת-הַבְּרָכָה-- חַיִּים,    עַד-הָעוֹלָם. 3 Like the dew of Hermon, that cometh down upon the mountains of Zion; {N} for there the LORD commanded the blessing, {N} even life for ever. {P}
134.1 א  שִׁיר, הַמַּעֲלוֹת: הִנֵּה בָּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה,    כָּל-עַבְדֵי יְהוָה-- הָעֹמְדִים בְּבֵית-יְהוָה,    בַּלֵּילוֹת. 1 A Song of Ascents. {N} Behold, bless ye the LORD, all ye servants of the LORD, {N} that stand in the house of the LORD in the night seasons.
134.2 ב  שְׂאוּ-יְדֵכֶם קֹדֶשׁ;    וּבָרְכוּ, אֶת-יְהוָה. 2 Lift up your hands to the sanctuary, and bless ye the LORD.
134.3 ג  יְבָרֶכְךָ יְהוָה, מִצִּיּוֹן:    עֹשֵׂה, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ. 3 The LORD bless thee out of Zion; even He that made heaven and earth. {P}
135.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: הַלְלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה;    הַלְלוּ, עַבְדֵי יְהוָה. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Praise ye the name of the LORD; give praise, O ye servants of the LORD,
135.2 ב  שֶׁעֹמְדִים, בְּבֵית יְהוָה--    בְּחַצְרוֹת, בֵּית אֱלֹהֵינוּ. 2 Ye that stand in the house of the LORD, in the courts of the house of our God.
135.3 ג  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ, כִּי-טוֹב יְהוָה;    זַמְּרוּ לִשְׁמוֹ, כִּי נָעִים. 3 Praise ye the LORD, for the LORD is good; sing praises unto His name, for it is pleasant.
135.4 ד  כִּי-יַעֲקֹב, בָּחַר לוֹ יָהּ;    יִשְׂרָאֵל, לִסְגֻלָּתוֹ. 4 For the LORD hath chosen Jacob unto Himself, and Israel for His own treasure.
135.5 ה  כִּי אֲנִי יָדַעְתִּי, כִּי-גָדוֹל יְהוָה;    וַאֲדֹנֵינוּ, מִכָּל-אֱלֹהִים. 5 For I know that the LORD is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.
135.6 ו  כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-חָפֵץ יְהוָה,    עָשָׂה: בַּשָּׁמַיִם וּבָאָרֶץ--    בַּיַּמִּים, וְכָל-תְּהֹמוֹת. 6 Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that hath He done, {N} in heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps;
135.7 ז  מַעֲלֶה נְשִׂאִים,    מִקְצֵה הָאָרֶץ: בְּרָקִים לַמָּטָר עָשָׂה;    מוֹצֵא-רוּחַ, מֵאוֹצְרוֹתָיו. 7 Who causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; {N} He maketh lightnings for the rain; He bringeth forth the wind out of His treasuries.
135.8 ח  שֶׁהִכָּה, בְּכוֹרֵי מִצְרָיִם--    מֵאָדָם, עַד-בְּהֵמָה. 8 Who smote the first-born of Egypt, both of man and beast.
135.9 ט  שָׁלַח, אוֹתֹת וּמֹפְתִים--בְּתוֹכֵכִי מִצְרָיִם:    בְּפַרְעֹה, וּבְכָל-עֲבָדָיו. 9 He sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.
135.10 י  שֶׁהִכָּה, גּוֹיִם רַבִּים;    וְהָרַג, מְלָכִים עֲצוּמִים. 10 Who smote many nations, and slew mighty kings:
135.11 יא  לְסִיחוֹן, מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, וּלְעוֹג, מֶלֶךְ הַבָּשָׁן;    וּלְכֹל, מַמְלְכוֹת כְּנָעַן. 11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;
135.12 יב  וְנָתַן אַרְצָם נַחֲלָה--    נַחֲלָה, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל עַמּוֹ. 12 And gave their land for a heritage, a heritage unto Israel His people.
135.13 יג  יְהוָה, שִׁמְךָ לְעוֹלָם;    יְהוָה, זִכְרְךָ לְדֹר-וָדֹר. 13 O LORD, Thy name endureth for ever; thy memorial, O LORD, throughout all generations.
135.14 יד  כִּי-יָדִין יְהוָה עַמּוֹ;    וְעַל-עֲבָדָיו, יִתְנֶחָם. 14 For the LORD will judge His people, and repent Himself for His servants.
135.15 טו  עֲצַבֵּי הַגּוֹיִם, כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב;    מַעֲשֵׂה, יְדֵי אָדָם. 15 The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
135.16 טז  פֶּה-לָהֶם, וְלֹא יְדַבֵּרוּ;    עֵינַיִם לָהֶם, וְלֹא יִרְאוּ. 16 They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not;
135.17 יז  אָזְנַיִם לָהֶם, וְלֹא יַאֲזִינוּ;    אַף, אֵין-יֶשׁ-רוּחַ בְּפִיהֶם. 17 They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths.
135.18 יח  כְּמוֹהֶם, יִהְיוּ עֹשֵׂיהֶם--    כֹּל אֲשֶׁר-בֹּטֵחַ בָּהֶם. 18 They that make them shall be like unto them; yea, every one that trusteth in them.
135.19 יט  בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה;    בֵּית אַהֲרֹן, בָּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה. 19 O house of Israel, bless ye the LORD; O house of Aaron, bless ye the LORD;
135.20 כ  בֵּית הַלֵּוִי, בָּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה;    יִרְאֵי יְהוָה, בָּרְכוּ אֶת-יְהוָה. 20 O house of Levi, bless ye the LORD; ye that fear the LORD, bless ye the LORD.
135.21 כא  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, מִצִּיּוֹן--    שֹׁכֵן יְרוּשָׁלִָם:הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 21 Blessed be the LORD out of Zion, who dwelleth at Jerusalem. Hallelujah. {P}
136.1 א  הוֹדוּ לַיהוָה כִּי-טוֹב:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 1 O give thanks unto the LORD, for He is good, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.2 ב  הוֹדוּ, לֵאלֹהֵי הָאֱלֹהִים:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 2 O give thanks unto the God of gods, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.3 ג  הוֹדוּ, לַאֲדֹנֵי הָאֲדֹנִים:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 3 O give thanks unto the Lord of lords, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.4 ד  לְעֹשֵׂה נִפְלָאוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת לְבַדּוֹ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 4 To Him who alone doeth great wonders, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.5 ה  לְעֹשֵׂה הַשָּׁמַיִם, בִּתְבוּנָה:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 5 To Him that by understanding made the heavens, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.6 ו  לְרֹקַע הָאָרֶץ, עַל-הַמָּיִם:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 6 To Him that spread forth the earth above the waters, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.7 ז  לְעֹשֵׂה, אוֹרִים גְּדֹלִים:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 7 To Him that made great lights, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.8 ח  אֶת-הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ, לְמֶמְשֶׁלֶת בַּיּוֹם:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 8 The sun to rule by day, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.9 ט  אֶת-הַיָּרֵחַ וְכוֹכָבִים, לְמֶמְשְׁלוֹת בַּלָּיְלָה:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 9 The moon and stars to rule by night, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.10 י  לְמַכֵּה מִצְרַיִם, בִּבְכוֹרֵיהֶם:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 10 To Him that smote Egypt in their first-born, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.11 יא  וַיּוֹצֵא יִשְׂרָאֵל, מִתּוֹכָם:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 11 And brought out Israel from among them, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.12 יב  בְּיָד חֲזָקָה, וּבִזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 12 With a strong hand, and with an outstretched arm, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.13 יג  לְגֹזֵר יַם-סוּף, לִגְזָרִים:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 13 To Him who divided the Red Sea in sunder, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.14 יד  וְהֶעֱבִיר יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּתוֹכוֹ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 14 And made Israel to pass through the midst of it, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.15 טו  וְנִעֵר פַּרְעֹה וְחֵילוֹ בְיַם-סוּף:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 15 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.16 טז  לְמוֹלִיךְ עַמּוֹ, בַּמִּדְבָּר:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 16 To Him that led His people through the wilderness, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.17 יז  לְמַכֵּה, מְלָכִים גְּדֹלִים:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 17 To Him that smote great kings; for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.18 יח  וַיַּהֲרֹג, מְלָכִים אַדִּירִים:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 18 And slew mighty kings, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.19 יט  לְסִיחוֹן, מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 19 Sihon king of the Amorites, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.20 כ  וּלְעוֹג, מֶלֶךְ הַבָּשָׁן:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 20 And Og king of Bashan, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.21 כא  וְנָתַן אַרְצָם לְנַחֲלָה:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 21 And gave their land for a heritage, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.22 כב  נַחֲלָה, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל עַבְדּוֹ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 22 Even a heritage unto Israel His servant, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.23 כג  שֶׁבְּשִׁפְלֵנוּ, זָכַר לָנוּ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 23 Who remembered us in our low estate, for His mercy endureth for ever;
136.24 כד  וַיִּפְרְקֵנוּ מִצָּרֵינוּ:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 24 And hath delivered us from our adversaries, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.25 כה  נֹתֵן לֶחֶם, לְכָל-בָּשָׂר:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 25 Who giveth food to all flesh, for His mercy endureth for ever.
136.26 כו  הוֹדוּ, לְאֵל הַשָּׁמָיִם:    כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ. 26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven, for His mercy endureth for ever. {P}
137.1 א  עַל נַהֲרוֹת, בָּבֶל--שָׁם יָשַׁבְנוּ, גַּם-בָּכִינוּ:    בְּזָכְרֵנוּ, אֶת-צִיּוֹן. 1 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion.
137.2 ב  עַל-עֲרָבִים בְּתוֹכָהּ--    תָּלִינוּ, כִּנֹּרוֹתֵינוּ. 2 Upon the willows in the midst thereof we hanged up our harps.
137.3 ג  כִּי שָׁם שְׁאֵלוּנוּ שׁוֹבֵינוּ, דִּבְרֵי-שִׁיר--    וְתוֹלָלֵינוּ שִׂמְחָה: שִׁירוּ לָנוּ,    מִשִּׁיר צִיּוֹן. 3 For there they that led us captive asked of us words of song, and our tormentors asked of us mirth: {N} 'Sing us one of the songs of Zion.'
137.4 ד  אֵיךְ--נָשִׁיר אֶת-שִׁיר-יְהוָה:    עַל, אַדְמַת נֵכָר. 4 How shall we sing the LORD'S song in a foreign land?
137.5 ה  אִם-אֶשְׁכָּחֵךְ יְרוּשָׁלִָם--    תִּשְׁכַּח יְמִינִי. 5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.
137.6 ו  תִּדְבַּק-לְשׁוֹנִי, לְחִכִּי--    אִם-לֹא אֶזְכְּרֵכִי: אִם-לֹא אַעֲלֶה, אֶת-יְרוּשָׁלִַם--    עַל, רֹאשׁ שִׂמְחָתִי. 6 Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I remember thee not; {N} if I set not Jerusalem above my chiefest joy.
137.7 ז  זְכֹר יְהוָה, לִבְנֵי אֱדוֹם--    אֵת, יוֹם יְרוּשָׁלִָם: הָאֹמְרִים, עָרוּ עָרוּ--    עַד, הַיְסוֹד בָּהּ. 7 Remember, O LORD, against the children of Edom the day of Jerusalem; {N} who said: 'Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.'
137.8 ח  בַּת-בָּבֶל,    הַשְּׁדוּדָה: אַשְׁרֵי שֶׁיְשַׁלֶּם-לָךְ--    אֶת-גְּמוּלֵךְ, שֶׁגָּמַלְתְּ לָנוּ. 8 O daughter of Babylon, that art to be destroyed; {N} happy shall he be, that repayeth thee as thou hast served us.
137.9 ט  אַשְׁרֵי, שֶׁיֹּאחֵז וְנִפֵּץ אֶת-עֹלָלַיִךְ--    אֶל-הַסָּלַע. 9 Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the rock. {P}
138.1 א  לְדָוִד:  אוֹדְךָ בְכָל-לִבִּי;    נֶגֶד אֱלֹהִים אֲזַמְּרֶךָּ. 1 [A Psalm] of David. I will give Thee thanks with my whole heart, in the presence of the mighty will I sing praises unto Thee.
138.2 ב  אֶשְׁתַּחֲוֶה אֶל-הֵיכַל קָדְשְׁךָ,    וְאוֹדֶה אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ-- עַל-חַסְדְּךָ    וְעַל-אֲמִתֶּךָ: כִּי-הִגְדַּלְתָּ עַל-כָּל-שִׁמְךָ,    אִמְרָתֶךָ. 2 I will bow down toward Thy holy temple, and give thanks unto Thy name {N} for Thy mercy and for Thy truth; {N} for Thou hast magnified Thy word above all Thy name.
138.3 ג  בְּיוֹם קָרָאתִי, וַתַּעֲנֵנִי;    תַּרְהִבֵנִי בְנַפְשִׁי עֹז. 3 In the day that I called, Thou didst answer me; Thou didst encourage me in my soul with strength.
138.4 ד  יוֹדוּךָ יְהוָה, כָּל-מַלְכֵי-אָרֶץ:    כִּי שָׁמְעוּ, אִמְרֵי-פִיךָ. 4 All the kings of the earth shall give Thee thanks, O LORD, for they have heard the words of Thy mouth.
138.5 ה  וְיָשִׁירוּ, בְּדַרְכֵי יְהוָה:    כִּי-גָדוֹל, כְּבוֹד יְהוָה. 5 Yea, they shall sing of the ways of the LORD; for great is the glory of the LORD.
138.6 ו  כִּי-רָם יְהוָה, וְשָׁפָל יִרְאֶה;    וְגָבֹהַּ, מִמֶּרְחָק יְיֵדָע. 6 For though the LORD be high, yet regardeth He the lowly, and the haughty He knoweth from afar.
138.7 ז  אִם-אֵלֵךְ, בְּקֶרֶב צָרָה--    תְּחַיֵּנִי: עַל אַף אֹיְבַי, תִּשְׁלַח יָדֶךָ;    וְתוֹשִׁיעֵנִי יְמִינֶךָ. 7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, Thou quickenest me; {N} Thou stretchest forth Thy hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and Thy right hand doth save me.
138.8 ח  יְהוָה, יִגְמֹר בַּעֲדִי:    יְהוָה, חַסְדְּךָ לְעוֹלָם; מַעֲשֵׂי יָדֶיךָ אַל-תֶּרֶף. 8 The LORD will accomplish that which concerneth me; Thy mercy, O LORD, endureth for ever; forsake not the work of Thine own hands. {P}
139.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, לְדָוִד מִזְמוֹר: יְהוָה חֲקַרְתַּנִי,    וַתֵּדָע. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. {N} O LORD, Thou hast searched me, and known me.
139.2 ב  אַתָּה יָדַעְתָּ, שִׁבְתִּי וְקוּמִי;    בַּנְתָּה לְרֵעִי, מֵרָחוֹק. 2 Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, Thou understandest my thought afar off.
139.3 ג  אָרְחִי וְרִבְעִי זֵרִיתָ;    וְכָל-דְּרָכַי הִסְכַּנְתָּה. 3 Thou measurest my going about and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.
139.4 ד  כִּי אֵין מִלָּה, בִּלְשׁוֹנִי;    הֵן יְהוָה, יָדַעְתָּ כֻלָּהּ. 4 For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O LORD, Thou knowest it altogether.
139.5 ה  אָחוֹר וָקֶדֶם צַרְתָּנִי;    וַתָּשֶׁת עָלַי כַּפֶּכָה. 5 Thou hast hemmed me in behind and before, and laid Thy hand upon me.
139.6 ו  פלאיה (פְּלִיאָה) דַעַת מִמֶּנִּי;    נִשְׂגְּבָה, לֹא-אוּכַל לָהּ. 6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; too high, I cannot attain unto it.
139.7 ז  אָנָה, אֵלֵךְ מֵרוּחֶךָ;    וְאָנָה, מִפָּנֶיךָ אֶבְרָח. 7 Whither shall I go from Thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from Thy presence?
139.8 ח  אִם אֶסַּק שָׁמַיִם, שָׁם אָתָּה;    וְאַצִּיעָה שְּׁאוֹל הִנֶּךָּ. 8 If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art there; if I make my bed in the nether-world, behold, Thou art there.
139.9 ט  אֶשָּׂא כַנְפֵי-שָׁחַר;    אֶשְׁכְּנָה, בְּאַחֲרִית יָם. 9 If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;
139.10 י  גַּם-שָׁם, יָדְךָ תַנְחֵנִי;    וְתֹאחֲזֵנִי יְמִינֶךָ. 10 Even there would Thy hand lead me, and Thy right hand would hold me.
139.11 יא  וָאֹמַר, אַךְ-חֹשֶׁךְ יְשׁוּפֵנִי;    וְלַיְלָה, אוֹר בַּעֲדֵנִי. 11 And if I say: 'Surely the darkness shall envelop me, and the light about me shall be night';
139.12 יב  גַּם-חֹשֶׁךְ,    לֹא-יַחְשִׁיךְ מִמֶּךָּ: וְלַיְלָה, כַּיּוֹם יָאִיר--    כַּחֲשֵׁיכָה, כָּאוֹרָה. 12 Even the darkness is not too dark for Thee, {N} but the night shineth as the day; the darkness is even as the light.
139.13 יג  כִּי-אַתָּה, קָנִיתָ כִלְיֹתָי;    תְּסֻכֵּנִי, בְּבֶטֶן אִמִּי. 13 For Thou hast made my reins; Thou hast knit me together in my mother's womb.
139.14 יד  אוֹדְךָ--    עַל כִּי נוֹרָאוֹת, נִפְלֵיתִי: נִפְלָאִים מַעֲשֶׂיךָ;    וְנַפְשִׁי, יֹדַעַת מְאֹד. 14 I will give thanks unto Thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; {N} wonderful are Thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.
139.15 טו  לֹא-נִכְחַד עָצְמִי,    מִמֶּךָּ: אֲשֶׁר-עֻשֵּׂיתִי בַסֵּתֶר;    רֻקַּמְתִּי, בְּתַחְתִּיּוֹת אָרֶץ. 15 My frame was not hidden from Thee, {N} when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
139.16 טז  גָּלְמִי, רָאוּ עֵינֶיךָ,    וְעַל-סִפְרְךָ, כֻּלָּם יִכָּתֵבוּ: יָמִים יֻצָּרוּ;    ולא (וְלוֹ) אֶחָד בָּהֶם. 16 Thine eyes did see mine unformed substance, and in Thy book they were all written-- {N} even the days that were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.
139.17 יז  וְלִי--מַה-יָּקְרוּ רֵעֶיךָ אֵל;    מֶה עָצְמוּ, רָאשֵׁיהֶם. 17 How weighty also are Thy thoughts unto me, O God! How great is the sum of them!
139.18 יח  אֶסְפְּרֵם, מֵחוֹל יִרְבּוּן;    הֱקִיצֹתִי, וְעוֹדִי עִמָּךְ. 18 If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand; were I to come to the end of them, I would still be with Thee.
139.19 יט  אִם-תִּקְטֹל אֱלוֹהַּ רָשָׁע;    וְאַנְשֵׁי דָמִים, סוּרוּ מֶנִּי. 19 If Thou but wouldest slay the wicked, O God--depart from me therefore, ye men of blood;
139.20 כ  אֲשֶׁר יֹמְרוּךָ, לִמְזִמָּה;    נָשׂוּא לַשָּׁוְא עָרֶיךָ. 20 Who utter Thy name with wicked thought, they take it for falsehood, even Thine enemies--
139.21 כא  הֲלוֹא-מְשַׂנְאֶיךָ יְהוָה אֶשְׂנָא;    וּבִתְקוֹמְמֶיךָ, אֶתְקוֹטָט. 21 Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate Thee? And do not I strive with those that rise up against Thee?
139.22 כב  תַּכְלִית שִׂנְאָה שְׂנֵאתִים;    לְאוֹיְבִים, הָיוּ לִי. 22 I hate them with utmost hatred; I count them mine enemies.
139.23 כג  חָקְרֵנִי אֵל, וְדַע לְבָבִי;    בְּחָנֵנִי, וְדַע שַׂרְעַפָּי. 23 Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts;
139.24 כד  וּרְאֵה, אִם-דֶּרֶךְ-עֹצֶב בִּי;    וּנְחֵנִי, בְּדֶרֶךְ עוֹלָם. 24 And see if there be any way in me that is grievous, and lead me in the way everlasting. {P}
140.1 א  לַמְנַצֵּחַ, מִזְמוֹר לְדָוִד. חַלְּצֵנִי יְהוָה, מֵאָדָם רָע;    מֵאִישׁ חֲמָסִים תִּנְצְרֵנִי. 1 For the Leader. A Psalm of David. Deliver me, O LORD, from the evil man; preserve me from the violent man;
140.2 ב אֲשֶׁר חָשְׁבוּ רָעוֹת בְּלֵב;    כָּל-יוֹם, יָגוּרוּ מִלְחָמוֹת.   2  Who devise evil things in their heart; every day do they stir up wars.
140.3 ג שָׁנְנוּ לְשׁוֹנָם, כְּמוֹ-נָחָשׁ:    חֲמַת עַכְשׁוּב--תַּחַת שְׂפָתֵימוֹ סֶלָה.   3  They have sharpened their tongue like a serpent; vipers' venom is under their lips. Selah
140.4 ד שָׁמְרֵנִי יְהוָה, מִידֵי רָשָׁע--    מֵאִישׁ חֲמָסִים תִּנְצְרֵנִי: אֲשֶׁר חָשְׁבוּ,    לִדְחוֹת פְּעָמָי.   4  Keep me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from the violent man; {N} who have purposed to make my steps slip.
140.5 ה טָמְנוּ גֵאִים, פַּח לִי--    וַחֲבָלִים, פָּרְשׂוּ רֶשֶׁת לְיַד-מַעְגָּל; מֹקְשִׁים שָׁתוּ-לִי    סֶלָה.   5  The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the wayside; {N} they have set gins for me. Selah
140.6 ו אָמַרְתִּי לַיהוָה, אֵלִי אָתָּה;    הַאֲזִינָה יְהוָה, קוֹל תַּחֲנוּנָי.   6  I have said unto the LORD: 'Thou art my God'; give ear, O LORD, unto the voice of my supplications.
140.7 ז יְהוִה אֲדֹנָי, עֹז יְשׁוּעָתִי;    סַכֹּתָה לְרֹאשִׁי, בְּיוֹם נָשֶׁק.   7  O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, who hast screened my head in the day of battle,
140.8 ח אַל-תִּתֵּן יְהוָה, מַאֲוַיֵּי רָשָׁע;    זְמָמוֹ אַל-תָּפֵק, יָרוּמוּ סֶלָה.   8  Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked; further not his evil device, so that they exalt themselves. Selah
140.9 ט   9 רֹאשׁ מְסִבָּי--    עֲמַל שְׂפָתֵימוֹ יכסומו (יְכַסֵּימוֹ)  10 As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them.
140.10 י  . ימיטו (יִמּוֹטוּ) עֲלֵיהֶם, גֶּחָלִים:    בָּאֵשׁ יַפִּלֵם; בְּמַהֲמֹרוֹת, בַּל-יָקוּמוּ.  Let burning coals fall upon them; let them be cast into the fire, into deep pits, that they rise not up again.
140.11 י אִישׁ לָשׁוֹן, בַּל-יִכּוֹן בָּאָרֶץ:    אִישׁ-חָמָס רָע--יְצוּדֶנּוּ, לְמַדְחֵפֹת.א   11  A slanderer shall not be established in the earth; the violent and evil man shall be hunted with thrust upon thrust.
140.12 י ידעת (יָדַעְתִּי)--כִּי-יַעֲשֶׂה יְהוָה, דִּין עָנִי:    מִשְׁפַּט, אֶבְיֹנִים.ב   12  I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the poor, and the right of the needy.
140.13 י אַךְ צַדִּיקִים, יוֹדוּ לִשְׁמֶךָ;    יֵשְׁבוּ יְשָׁרִים, אֶת-פָּנֶיךָ.ג   13  Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto Thy name; the upright shall dwell in Thy presence. {P}
141.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְדָוִד: יְהוָה קְרָאתִיךָ, חוּשָׁה לִּי;    הַאֲזִינָה קוֹלִי, בְּקָרְאִי-לָךְ. 1 A Psalm of David. {N} LORD, I have called Thee; make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I call unto Thee.
141.2 ב  תִּכּוֹן תְּפִלָּתִי קְטֹרֶת לְפָנֶיךָ;    מַשְׂאַת כַּפַּי, מִנְחַת-עָרֶב. 2 Let my prayer be set forth as incense before Thee, the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.
141.3 ג  שִׁיתָה יְהוָה, שָׁמְרָה לְפִי;    נִצְּרָה, עַל-דַּל שְׂפָתָי. 3 Set a guard, O LORD, to my mouth; keep watch at the door of my lips.
141.4 ד  אַל-תַּט-לִבִּי    לְדָבָר רָע, לְהִתְעוֹלֵל עֲלִלוֹת    בְּרֶשַׁע-- אֶת-אִישִׁים    פֹּעֲלֵי-אָוֶן; וּבַל-אֶלְחַם,    בְּמַנְעַמֵּיהֶם. 4 Incline not my heart to any evil thing, {N} to be occupied in deeds of wickedness {N} with men that work iniquity; {N} and let me not eat of their dainties.
141.5 ה  יֶהֶלְמֵנִי צַדִּיק חֶסֶד,    וְיוֹכִיחֵנִי-- שֶׁמֶן רֹאשׁ,    אַל-יָנִי רֹאשִׁי: כִּי-עוֹד וּתְפִלָּתִי,    בְּרָעוֹתֵיהֶם. 5 Let the righteous smite me in kindness, and correct me; {N} oil so choice let not my head refuse; {N} for still is my prayer because of their wickedness.
141.6 ו  נִשְׁמְטוּ בִידֵי-סֶלַע, שֹׁפְטֵיהֶם;    וְשָׁמְעוּ אֲמָרַי, כִּי נָעֵמוּ. 6 Their judges are thrown down by the sides of the rock; and they shall hear my words, that they are sweet.
141.7 ז  כְּמוֹ פֹלֵחַ וּבֹקֵעַ בָּאָרֶץ--    נִפְזְרוּ עֲצָמֵינוּ, לְפִי שְׁאוֹל. 7 As when one cleaveth and breaketh up the earth, our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth.
141.8 ח  כִּי אֵלֶיךָ, יְהוִה אֲדֹנָי עֵינָי;    בְּכָה חָסִיתִי, אַל-תְּעַר נַפְשִׁי. 8 For mine eyes are unto Thee, O GOD the Lord; in Thee have I taken refuge, O pour not out my soul.
141.9 ט  שָׁמְרֵנִי--מִידֵי פַח, יָקְשׁוּ לִי;    וּמֹקְשׁוֹת, פֹּעֲלֵי אָוֶן. 9 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and from the gins of the workers of iniquity.
141.10 י  יִפְּלוּ בְמַכְמֹרָיו רְשָׁעִים;    יַחַד אָנֹכִי, עַד-אֶעֱבוֹר. 10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst I withal escape. {P}
142.1 א  מַשְׂכִּיל לְדָוִד; בִּהְיוֹתוֹ בַמְּעָרָה    תְפִלָּה. קוֹלִי, אֶל-יְהוָה אֶזְעָק;    קוֹלִי, אֶל-יְהוָה אֶתְחַנָּן. 1 Maschil of David, {N} when he was in the cave; a Prayer. With my voice I cry unto the LORD; with my voice I make supplication unto the LORD.
142.2 ב אֶשְׁפֹּךְ לְפָנָיו שִׂיחִי;    צָרָתִי, לְפָנָיו אַגִּיד.   2  I pour out my complaint before Him, I declare before Him my trouble;
142.3 ג בְּהִתְעַטֵּף עָלַי, רוּחִי--    וְאַתָּה, יָדַעְתָּ נְתִיבָתִי: בְּאֹרַח-זוּ אֲהַלֵּךְ--    טָמְנוּ פַח לִי.   3  When my spirit fainteth within me--Thou knowest my path-- {N} in the way wherein I walk have they hidden a snare for me.
142.4 ד הַבֵּיט יָמִין, וּרְאֵה--    וְאֵין-לִי מַכִּיר: אָבַד מָנוֹס מִמֶּנִּי;    אֵין דּוֹרֵשׁ לְנַפְשִׁי.   4  Look on my right hand, and see, for there is no man that knoweth me; {N} I have no way to flee; no man careth for my soul.
142.5 ה זָעַקְתִּי אֵלֶיךָ,    יְהוָה: אָמַרְתִּי, אַתָּה מַחְסִי;    חֶלְקִי, בְּאֶרֶץ הַחַיִּים.   5  I have cried unto Thee, O LORD; {N} I have said: 'Thou art my refuge, my portion in the land of the living.'
142.6 ו הַקְשִׁיבָה, אֶל-רִנָּתִי--    כִּי-דַלּוֹתִי-מְאֹד: הַצִּילֵנִי מֵרֹדְפַי--    כִּי אָמְצוּ מִמֶּנִּי.   6  Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low; {N} deliver me from my persecutors; for they are too strong for me.
142.7 ז הוֹצִיאָה מִמַּסְגֵּר, נַפְשִׁי--    לְהוֹדוֹת אֶת-שְׁמֶךָ: בִּי, יַכְתִּרוּ צַדִּיקִים--    כִּי תִגְמֹל עָלָי.   7  Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto Thy name; {N} the righteous shall crown themselves because of me; for Thou wilt deal bountifully with me. {P}
143.1 א  מִזְמוֹר, לְדָוִד: יְהוָה, שְׁמַע תְּפִלָּתִי--    הַאֲזִינָה אֶל-תַּחֲנוּנַי; בֶּאֱמֻנָתְךָ עֲנֵנִי,    בְּצִדְקָתֶךָ. 1 A Psalm of David. {N} O LORD, hear my prayer, give ear to my supplications; {N} in Thy faithfulness answer me, and in Thy righteousness.
143.2 ב  וְאַל-תָּבוֹא בְמִשְׁפָּט,    אֶת-עַבְדֶּךָ: כִּי לֹא-יִצְדַּק לְפָנֶיךָ    כָל-חָי. 2 And enter not into judgment with Thy servant; {N} for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified.
143.3 ג  כִּי רָדַף אוֹיֵב, נַפְשִׁי--    דִּכָּא לָאָרֶץ, חַיָּתִי; הוֹשִׁבַנִי בְמַחֲשַׁכִּים,    כְּמֵתֵי עוֹלָם. 3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath crushed my life down to the ground; {N} he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead.
143.4 ד  וַתִּתְעַטֵּף עָלַי רוּחִי;    בְּתוֹכִי, יִשְׁתּוֹמֵם לִבִּי. 4 And my spirit fainteth within me; my heart within me is appalled.
143.5 ה  זָכַרְתִּי יָמִים, מִקֶּדֶם--    הָגִיתִי בְכָל-פָּעֳלֶךָ; בְּמַעֲשֵׂה יָדֶיךָ    אֲשׂוֹחֵחַ. 5 I remember the days of old; I meditate on all Thy doing; {N} I muse on the work of Thy hands.
143.6 ו  פֵּרַשְׂתִּי יָדַי אֵלֶיךָ;    נַפְשִׁי, כְּאֶרֶץ-עֲיֵפָה לְךָ סֶלָה. 6 I spread forth my hands unto Thee; my soul [thirsteth] after Thee, as a weary land. Selah
143.7 ז  מַהֵר עֲנֵנִי, יְהוָה--    כָּלְתָה רוּחִי: אַל-תַּסְתֵּר פָּנֶיךָ מִמֶּנִּי;    וְנִמְשַׁלְתִּי, עִם-יֹרְדֵי בוֹר. 7 Answer me speedily, O LORD, my spirit faileth; {N} hide not Thy face from me; lest I become like them that go down into the pit.
143.8 ח  הַשְׁמִיעֵנִי בַבֹּקֶר, חַסְדֶּךָ--    כִּי-בְךָ בָטָחְתִּי: הוֹדִיעֵנִי, דֶּרֶךְ-זוּ אֵלֵךְ--    כִּי-אֵלֶיךָ, נָשָׂאתִי נַפְשִׁי. 8 Cause me to hear Thy lovingkindness in the morning, for in Thee do I trust; {N} cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for unto Thee have I lifted up my soul.
143.9 ט  הַצִּילֵנִי מֵאֹיְבַי יְהוָה--    אֵלֶיךָ כִסִּתִי. 9 Deliver me from mine enemies, O LORD; with Thee have I hidden myself.
143.10 י  לַמְּדֵנִי, לַעֲשׂוֹת רְצוֹנֶךָ--    כִּי-אַתָּה אֱלוֹהָי: רוּחֲךָ טוֹבָה;    תַּנְחֵנִי, בְּאֶרֶץ מִישׁוֹר. 10 Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art my God; {N} let Thy good spirit lead me in an even land.
143.11 יא  לְמַעַן-שִׁמְךָ יְהוָה תְּחַיֵּנִי;    בְּצִדְקָתְךָ, תּוֹצִיא מִצָּרָה נַפְשִׁי. 11 For Thy name's sake, O LORD, quicken me; in Thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble.
143.12 יב  וּבְחַסְדְּךָ, תַּצְמִית אֹיְבָי:    וְהַאֲבַדְתָּ, כָּל-צֹרְרֵי נַפְשִׁי--כִּי, אֲנִי עַבְדֶּךָ. 12 And in Thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that harass my soul; for I am Thy servant. {P}
144.1 א  לְדָוִד:  בָּרוּךְ יְהוָה, צוּרִי--    הַמְלַמֵּד יָדַי לַקְרָב; אֶצְבְּעוֹתַי,    לַמִּלְחָמָה. 1 [A Psalm] of David. Blessed be the LORD my Rock, who traineth my hands for war, {N} and my fingers for battle;
144.2 ב  חַסְדִּי וּמְצוּדָתִי,    מִשְׂגַּבִּי וּמְפַלְטִי-לִי: מָגִנִּי, וּבוֹ חָסִיתִי;    הָרוֹדֵד עַמִּי תַחְתָּי. 2 My lovingkindness, and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer; {N} my shield, and He in whom I take refuge; who subdueth my people under me.
144.3 ג  יְהוָה--מָה-אָדָם, וַתֵּדָעֵהוּ:    בֶּן-אֱנוֹשׁ, וַתְּחַשְּׁבֵהוּ. 3 LORD, what is man, that Thou takest knowledge of him? or the son of man, that Thou makest account of him?
144.4 ד  אָדָם, לַהֶבֶל דָּמָה;    יָמָיו, כְּצֵל עוֹבֵר. 4 Man is like unto a breath; his days are as a shadow that passeth away.
144.5 ה  יְהוָה, הַט-שָׁמֶיךָ וְתֵרֵד;    גַּע בֶּהָרִים וְיֶעֱשָׁנוּ. 5 O LORD, bow Thy heavens, and come down; touch the mountains, that they may smoke.
144.6 ו  בְּרוֹק בָּרָק, וּתְפִיצֵם;    שְׁלַח חִצֶּיךָ, וּתְהֻמֵּם. 6 Cast forth lightning, and scatter them; send out Thine arrows, and discomfit them.
144.7 ז  שְׁלַח יָדֶיךָ, מִמָּרוֹם:    פְּצֵנִי וְהַצִּילֵנִי, מִמַּיִם רַבִּים; מִיַּד, בְּנֵי נֵכָר. 7 Stretch forth Thy hands from on high; rescue me, and deliver me out of many waters, out of the hand of strangers;
144.8 ח  אֲשֶׁר פִּיהֶם, דִּבֶּר-שָׁוְא;    וִימִינָם, יְמִין שָׁקֶר. 8 Whose mouth speaketh falsehood, and their right hand is a right hand of lying.
144.9 ט  אֱלֹהִים--שִׁיר חָדָשׁ, אָשִׁירָה לָּךְ;    בְּנֵבֶל עָשׂוֹר, אֲזַמְּרָה-לָּךְ. 9 O God, I will sing a new song unto Thee, upon a psaltery of ten strings will I sing praises unto Thee;
144.10 י  הַנּוֹתֵן תְּשׁוּעָה, לַמְּלָכִים:    הַפּוֹצֶה, אֶת-דָּוִד עַבְדּוֹ--מֵחֶרֶב רָעָה. 10 Who givest salvation unto kings, who rescuest David Thy servant from the hurtful sword.
144.11 יא  פְּצֵנִי וְהַצִּילֵנִי,    מִיַּד בְּנֵי-נֵכָר: אֲשֶׁר פִּיהֶם, דִּבֶּר-שָׁוְא;    וִימִינָם, יְמִין שָׁקֶר. 11 Rescue me, and deliver me out of the hand of strangers, {N} whose mouth speaketh falsehood, and their right hand is a right hand of lying.
144.12 יב  אֲשֶׁר בָּנֵינוּ, כִּנְטִעִים--    מְגֻדָּלִים בִּנְעוּרֵיהֶם: בְּנוֹתֵינוּ כְזָוִיֹּת--    מְחֻטָּבוֹת, תַּבְנִית הֵיכָל. 12 We whose sons are as plants grown up in their youth; {N} whose daughters are as corner-pillars carved after the fashion of a palace;
144.13 יג  מְזָוֵינוּ מְלֵאִים--    מְפִיקִים מִזַּן, אֶל-זַן: צֹאונֵנוּ מַאֲלִיפוֹת, מְרֻבָּבוֹת--    בְּחוּצוֹתֵינוּ. 13 Whose garners are full, affording all manner of store; {N} whose sheep increase by thousands and ten thousands in our fields;
144.14 יד  אַלּוּפֵינוּ, מְסֻבָּלִים:    אֵין-פֶּרֶץ, וְאֵין יוֹצֵאת; וְאֵין צְוָחָה, בִּרְחֹבֹתֵינוּ. 14 Whose oxen are well laden; with no breach, and no going forth, and no outcry in our broad places;
144.15 טו  אַשְׁרֵי הָעָם, שֶׁכָּכָה לּוֹ:    אַשְׁרֵי הָעָם, שֱׁיְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו. 15 Happy is the people that is in such a case. Yea, happy is the people whose God is the LORD. {P}
145.1 א  תְּהִלָּה, לְדָוִד: אֲרוֹמִמְךָ אֱלוֹהַי הַמֶּלֶךְ;    וַאֲבָרְכָה שִׁמְךָ, לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד. 1 [A Psalm of] praise; of David. {N} I will extol Thee, my God, O King; and I will bless Thy name for ever and ever.
145.2 ב  בְּכָל-יוֹם אֲבָרְכֶךָּ;    וַאֲהַלְלָה שִׁמְךָ, לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד. 2 Every day will I bless Thee; and I will praise Thy name for ever and ever.
145.3 ג  גָּדוֹל יְהוָה וּמְהֻלָּל מְאֹד;    וְלִגְדֻלָּתוֹ, אֵין חֵקֶר. 3 Great is the LORD, and highly to be praised; and His greatness is unsearchable.
145.4 ד  דּוֹר לְדוֹר, יְשַׁבַּח מַעֲשֶׂיךָ;    וּגְבוּרֹתֶיךָ יַגִּידוּ. 4 One generation shall laud Thy works to another, and shall declare Thy mighty acts.
145.5 ה  הֲדַר, כְּבוֹד הוֹדֶךָ--    וְדִבְרֵי נִפְלְאֹתֶיךָ אָשִׂיחָה. 5 The glorious splendour of Thy majesty, and Thy wondrous works, will I rehearse.
145.6 ו  וֶעֱזוּז נוֹרְאֹתֶיךָ יֹאמֵרוּ;    וגדלותיך (וּגְדֻלָּתְךָ) אֲסַפְּרֶנָּה. 6 And men shall speak of the might of Thy tremendous acts; and I will tell of Thy greatness.
145.7 ז  זֵכֶר רַב-טוּבְךָ יַבִּיעוּ;    וְצִדְקָתְךָ יְרַנֵּנוּ. 7 They shall utter the fame of Thy great goodness, and shall sing of Thy righteousness.
145.8 ח  חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם יְהוָה;    אֶרֶךְ אַפַּיִם, וּגְדָל-חָסֶד. 8 The LORD is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great mercy.
145.9 ט  טוֹב-יְהוָה לַכֹּל;    וְרַחֲמָיו, עַל-כָּל-מַעֲשָׂיו. 9 The LORD is good to all; and His tender mercies are over all His works.
145.10 י  יוֹדוּךָ יְהוָה, כָּל-מַעֲשֶׂיךָ;    וַחֲסִידֶיךָ, יְבָרְכוּכָה. 10 All Thy works shall praise Thee, O LORD; and Thy saints shall bless Thee.
145.11 יא  כְּבוֹד מַלְכוּתְךָ יֹאמֵרוּ;    וּגְבוּרָתְךָ יְדַבֵּרוּ. 11 They shall speak of the glory of Thy kingdom, and talk of Thy might;
145.12 יב  לְהוֹדִיעַ, לִבְנֵי הָאָדָם--גְּבוּרֹתָיו;    וּכְבוֹד, הֲדַר מַלְכוּתוֹ. 12 To make known to the sons of men His mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of His kingdom.
145.13 יג  מַלְכוּתְךָ, מַלְכוּת כָּל-עֹלָמִים;    וּמֶמְשַׁלְתְּךָ, בְּכָל-דּוֹר וָדֹר. 13 Thy kingdom is a kingdom for all ages, and Thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.
145.14 יד  סוֹמֵךְ יְהוָה, לְכָל-הַנֹּפְלִים;    וְזוֹקֵף, לְכָל-הַכְּפוּפִים. 14 The LORD upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are bowed down.
145.15 טו  עֵינֵי-כֹל, אֵלֶיךָ יְשַׂבֵּרוּ;    וְאַתָּה נוֹתֵן-לָהֶם אֶת-אָכְלָם בְּעִתּוֹ. 15 The eyes of all wait for Thee, and Thou givest them their food in due season.
145.16 טז  פּוֹתֵחַ אֶת-יָדֶךָ;    וּמַשְׂבִּיעַ לְכָל-חַי רָצוֹן. 16 Thou openest Thy hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favour.
145.17 יז  צַדִּיק יְהוָה, בְּכָל-דְּרָכָיו;    וְחָסִיד, בְּכָל-מַעֲשָׂיו. 17 The LORD is righteous in all His ways, and gracious in all His works.
145.18 יח  קָרוֹב יְהוָה, לְכָל-קֹרְאָיו--    לְכֹל אֲשֶׁר יִקְרָאֻהוּ בֶאֱמֶת. 18 The LORD is nigh unto all them that call upon Him, to all that call upon Him in truth.
145.19 יט  רְצוֹן-יְרֵאָיו יַעֲשֶׂה;    וְאֶת-שַׁוְעָתָם יִשְׁמַע, וְיוֹשִׁיעֵם. 19 He will fulfil the desire of them that fear Him; He also will hear their cry, and will save them.
145.20 כ  שׁוֹמֵר יְהוָה, אֶת-כָּל-אֹהֲבָיו;    וְאֵת כָּל-הָרְשָׁעִים יַשְׁמִיד. 20 The LORD preserveth all them that love Him; but all the wicked will He destroy.
145.21 כא  תְּהִלַּת יְהוָה, יְדַבֶּר-פִּי:    וִיבָרֵךְ כָּל-בָּשָׂר, שֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ--לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד. 21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD; and let all flesh bless His holy name for ever and ever. {P}
146.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: הַלְלִי נַפְשִׁי,    אֶת-יְהוָה. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Praise the LORD, O my soul.
146.2 ב  אֲהַלְלָה יְהוָה בְּחַיָּי;    אֲזַמְּרָה לֵאלֹהַי בְּעוֹדִי. 2 I will praise the LORD while I live; I will sing praises unto my God while I have my being.
146.3 ג  אַל-תִּבְטְחוּ בִנְדִיבִים--    בְּבֶן-אָדָם, שֶׁאֵין לוֹ תְשׁוּעָה. 3 Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.
146.4 ד  תֵּצֵא רוּחוֹ, יָשֻׁב לְאַדְמָתוֹ;    בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, אָבְדוּ עֶשְׁתֹּנֹתָיו. 4 His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his dust; in that very day his thoughts perish.
146.5 ה  אַשְׁרֵי--שֶׁאֵל יַעֲקֹב בְּעֶזְרוֹ:    שִׂבְרוֹ, עַל-יְהוָה אֱלֹהָיו. 5 Happy is he whose help is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in the LORD his God,
146.6 ו  עֹשֶׂה, שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ--    אֶת-הַיָּם וְאֶת-כָּל-אֲשֶׁר-בָּם; הַשֹּׁמֵר אֱמֶת    לְעוֹלָם. 6 Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is; {N} who keepeth truth for ever;
146.7 ז  עֹשֶׂה מִשְׁפָּט, לָעֲשׁוּקִים--נֹתֵן לֶחֶם, לָרְעֵבִים;    יְהוָה, מַתִּיר אֲסוּרִים. 7 Who executeth justice for the oppressed; who giveth bread to the hungry. The LORD looseth the prisoners;
146.8 ח  יְהוָה, פֹּקֵחַ עִוְרִים--יְהוָה, זֹקֵף כְּפוּפִים;    יְהוָה, אֹהֵב צַדִּיקִים. 8 The LORD openeth the eyes of the blind; the LORD raiseth up them that are bowed down; the LORD loveth the righteous;
146.9 ט  יְהוָה, שֹׁמֵר אֶת-גֵּרִים--יָתוֹם וְאַלְמָנָה יְעוֹדֵד;    וְדֶרֶךְ רְשָׁעִים יְעַוֵּת. 9 The LORD preserveth the strangers; He upholdeth the fatherless and the widow; but the way of the wicked He maketh crooked.
146.10 י  יִמְלֹךְ יְהוָה, לְעוֹלָם--    אֱלֹהַיִךְ צִיּוֹן, לְדֹר וָדֹר: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 10 The LORD will reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. {N} Hallelujah.
147.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: כִּי-טוֹב, זַמְּרָה אֱלֹהֵינוּ--    כִּי-נָעִים, נָאוָה תְהִלָּה. 1 Hallelujah; {N} for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant, and praise is comely.
147.2 ב  בּוֹנֵה יְרוּשָׁלִַם יְהוָה;    נִדְחֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל יְכַנֵּס. 2 The LORD doth build up Jerusalem, He gathereth together the dispersed of Israel;
147.3 ג  הָרֹפֵא, לִשְׁבוּרֵי לֵב;    וּמְחַבֵּשׁ, לְעַצְּבוֹתָם. 3 Who healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.
147.4 ד  מוֹנֶה מִסְפָּר, לַכּוֹכָבִים;    לְכֻלָּם, שֵׁמוֹת יִקְרָא. 4 He counteth the number of the stars; He giveth them all their names.
147.5 ה  גָּדוֹל אֲדוֹנֵינוּ וְרַב-כֹּחַ;    לִתְבוּנָתוֹ, אֵין מִסְפָּר. 5 Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; His understanding is infinite.
147.6 ו  מְעוֹדֵד עֲנָוִים יְהוָה;    מַשְׁפִּיל רְשָׁעִים עֲדֵי-אָרֶץ. 6 The LORD upholdeth the humble; He bringeth the wicked down to the ground.
147.7 ז  עֱנוּ לַיהוָה בְּתוֹדָה;    זַמְּרוּ לֵאלֹהֵינוּ בְכִנּוֹר. 7 Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving, sing praises upon the harp unto our God;
147.8 ח  הַמְכַסֶּה שָׁמַיִם, בְּעָבִים--    הַמֵּכִין לָאָרֶץ מָטָר; הַמַּצְמִיחַ הָרִים    חָצִיר. 8 Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, {N} who maketh the mountains to spring with grass.
147.9 ט  נוֹתֵן לִבְהֵמָה לַחְמָהּ;    לִבְנֵי עֹרֵב, אֲשֶׁר יִקְרָאוּ. 9 He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.
147.10 י  לֹא בִגְבוּרַת הַסּוּס יֶחְפָּץ;    לֹא-בְשׁוֹקֵי הָאִישׁ יִרְצֶה. 10 He delighteth not in the strength of the horse; He taketh no pleasure in the legs of a man.
147.11 יא  רוֹצֶה יְהוָה, אֶת-יְרֵאָיו--    אֶת-הַמְיַחֲלִים לְחַסְדּוֹ. 11 The LORD taketh pleasure in them that fear Him, in those that wait for His mercy.
147.12 יב  שַׁבְּחִי יְרוּשָׁלִַם, אֶת-יְהוָה;    הַלְלִי אֱלֹהַיִךְ צִיּוֹן. 12 Glorify the LORD, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.
147.13 יג  כִּי-חִזַּק, בְּרִיחֵי שְׁעָרָיִךְ;    בֵּרַךְ בָּנַיִךְ בְּקִרְבֵּךְ. 13 For He hath made strong the bars of thy gates; He hath blessed thy children within thee.
147.14 יד  הַשָּׂם-גְּבוּלֵךְ שָׁלוֹם;    חֵלֶב חִטִּים, יַשְׂבִּיעֵךְ. 14 He maketh thy borders peace; He giveth thee in plenty the fat of wheat.
147.15 טו  הַשֹּׁלֵחַ אִמְרָתוֹ אָרֶץ;    עַד-מְהֵרָה, יָרוּץ דְּבָרוֹ. 15 He sendeth out His commandment upon earth; His word runneth very swiftly.
147.16 טז  הַנֹּתֵן שֶׁלֶג כַּצָּמֶר;    כְּפוֹר, כָּאֵפֶר יְפַזֵּר. 16 He giveth snow like wool; He scattereth the hoar-frost like ashes.
147.17 יז  מַשְׁלִיךְ קַרְחוֹ כְפִתִּים;    לִפְנֵי קָרָתוֹ, מִי יַעֲמֹד. 17 He casteth forth His ice like crumbs; who can stand before His cold?
147.18 יח  יִשְׁלַח דְּבָרוֹ וְיַמְסֵם;    יַשֵּׁב רוּחוֹ, יִזְּלוּ-מָיִם. 18 He sendeth forth His word, and melteth them; He causeth His wind to blow, and the waters flow.
147.19 יט  מַגִּיד דְּבָרָו לְיַעֲקֹב;    חֻקָּיו וּמִשְׁפָּטָיו, לְיִשְׂרָאֵל. 19 He declareth His word unto Jacob, His statutes and His ordinances unto Israel.
147.20 כ  לֹא עָשָׂה כֵן, לְכָל-גּוֹי--    וּמִשְׁפָּטִים בַּל-יְדָעוּם: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 20 He hath not dealt so with any nation; and as for His ordinances, they have not known them. {N} Hallelujah.
148.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: הַלְלוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, מִן-הַשָּׁמַיִם;    הַלְלוּהוּ, בַּמְּרוֹמִים. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Praise ye the LORD from the heavens; praise Him in the heights.
148.2 ב  הַלְלוּהוּ כָל-מַלְאָכָיו;    הַלְלוּהוּ, כָּל-צְבָאָו. 2 Praise ye Him, all His angels; praise ye Him, all His hosts.
148.3 ג  הַלְלוּהוּ, שֶׁמֶשׁ וְיָרֵחַ;    הַלְלוּהוּ, כָּל-כּוֹכְבֵי אוֹר. 3 Praise ye Him, sun and moon; praise Him, all ye stars of light.
148.4 ד  הַלְלוּהוּ, שְׁמֵי הַשָּׁמָיִם;    וְהַמַּיִם, אֲשֶׁר מֵעַל הַשָּׁמָיִם. 4 Praise Him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that are above the heavens.
148.5 ה  יְהַלְלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה:    כִּי הוּא צִוָּה וְנִבְרָאוּ. 5 Let them praise the name of the LORD; for He commanded, and they were created.
148.6 ו  וַיַּעֲמִידֵם לָעַד לְעוֹלָם;    חָק-נָתַן, וְלֹא יַעֲבוֹר. 6 He hath also established them for ever and ever; He hath made a decree which shall not be transgressed.
148.7 ז  הַלְלוּ אֶת-יְהוָה, מִן-הָאָרֶץ--    תַּנִּינִים, וְכָל-תְּהֹמוֹת. 7 Praise the LORD from the earth, ye sea-monsters, and all deeps;
148.8 ח  אֵשׁ וּבָרָד, שֶׁלֶג וְקִיטוֹר;    רוּחַ סְעָרָה, עֹשָׂה דְבָרוֹ. 8 Fire and hail, snow and vapour, stormy wind, fulfilling His word;
148.9 ט  הֶהָרִים וְכָל-גְּבָעוֹת;    עֵץ פְּרִי, וְכָל-אֲרָזִים. 9 Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars;
148.10 י  הַחַיָּה וְכָל-בְּהֵמָה;    רֶמֶשׂ, וְצִפּוֹר כָּנָף. 10 Beasts and all cattle, creeping things and winged fowl;
148.11 יא  מַלְכֵי-אֶרֶץ, וְכָל-לְאֻמִּים;    שָׂרִים, וְכָל-שֹׁפְטֵי אָרֶץ. 11 Kings of the earth and all peoples, princes and all judges of the earth;
148.12 יב  בַּחוּרִים וְגַם-בְּתוּלוֹת;    זְקֵנִים, עִם-נְעָרִים. 12 Both young men and maidens, old men and children;
148.13 יג  יְהַלְלוּ, אֶת-שֵׁם יְהוָה--    כִּי-נִשְׂגָּב שְׁמוֹ לְבַדּוֹ: הוֹדוֹ,    עַל-אֶרֶץ וְשָׁמָיִם. 13 Let them praise the name of the LORD, for His name alone is exalted; {N} His glory is above the earth and heaven.
148.14 יד  וַיָּרֶם קֶרֶן לְעַמּוֹ,    תְּהִלָּה לְכָל-חֲסִידָיו-- לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל,    עַם קְרֹבוֹ: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 14 And He hath lifted up a horn for His people, a praise for all His saints, {N} even for the children of Israel, a people near unto Him. {N} Hallelujah.
149.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: שִׁירוּ לַיהוָה, שִׁיר חָדָשׁ;    תְּהִלָּתוֹ, בִּקְהַל חֲסִידִים. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Sing unto the LORD a new song, and His praise in the assembly of the saints.
149.2 ב  יִשְׂמַח יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּעֹשָׂיו;    בְּנֵי-צִיּוֹן, יָגִילוּ בְמַלְכָּם. 2 Let Israel rejoice in his Maker; let the children of Zion be joyful in their King.
149.3 ג  יְהַלְלוּ שְׁמוֹ בְמָחוֹל;    בְּתֹף וְכִנּוֹר, יְזַמְּרוּ-לוֹ. 3 Let them praise His name in the dance; let them sing praises unto Him with the timbrel and harp.
149.4 ד  כִּי-רוֹצֶה יְהוָה בְּעַמּוֹ;    יְפָאֵר עֲנָוִים, בִּישׁוּעָה. 4 For the LORD taketh pleasure in His people; He adorneth the humble with salvation.
149.5 ה  יַעְלְזוּ חֲסִידִים בְּכָבוֹד;    יְרַנְּנוּ, עַל-מִשְׁכְּבוֹתָם. 5 Let the saints exult in glory; let them sing for joy upon their beds.
149.6 ו  רוֹמְמוֹת אֵל, בִּגְרוֹנָם;    וְחֶרֶב פִּיפִיּוֹת בְּיָדָם. 6 Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand;
149.7 ז  לַעֲשׂוֹת נְקָמָה, בַּגּוֹיִם;    תּוֹכֵחוֹת, בַּלְאֻמִּים. 7 To execute vengeance upon the nations, and chastisements upon the peoples;
149.8 ח  לֶאְסֹר מַלְכֵיהֶם בְּזִקִּים;    וְנִכְבְּדֵיהֶם, בְּכַבְלֵי בַרְזֶל. 8 To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron;
149.9 ט  לַעֲשׂוֹת בָּהֶם, מִשְׁפָּט כָּתוּב--    הָדָר הוּא, לְכָל-חֲסִידָיו: הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 9 To execute upon them the judgment written; He is the glory of all His saints. {N} Hallelujah.
150.1 א  הַלְלוּ-יָהּ: הַלְלוּ-אֵל בְּקָדְשׁוֹ;    הַלְלוּהוּ, בִּרְקִיעַ עֻזּוֹ. 1 Hallelujah. {N} Praise God in His sanctuary; praise Him in the firmament of His power.
150.2 ב  הַלְלוּהוּ בִגְבוּרֹתָיו;    הַלְלוּהוּ, כְּרֹב גֻּדְלוֹ. 2 Praise Him for His mighty acts; praise Him according to His abundant greatness.
150.3 ג  הַלְלוּהוּ, בְּתֵקַע שׁוֹפָר;    הַלְלוּהוּ, בְּנֵבֶל וְכִנּוֹר. 3 Praise Him with the blast of the horn; praise Him with the psaltery and harp.
150.4 ד  הַלְלוּהוּ, בְּתֹף וּמָחוֹל;    הַלְלוּהוּ, בְּמִנִּים וְעֻגָב. 4 Praise Him with the timbrel and dance; praise Him with stringed instruments and the pipe.
150.5 ה  הַלְלוּהוּ בְצִלְצְלֵי-שָׁמַע;    הַלְלוּהוּ, בְּצִלְצְלֵי תְרוּעָה. 5 Praise Him with the loud-sounding cymbals; praise Him with the clanging cymbals.
150.6 ו  כֹּל הַנְּשָׁמָה, תְּהַלֵּל יָהּ:            הַלְלוּ-יָהּ. 6 Let every thing that hath breath praise the LORD. {S} Hallelujah. {P}
