1.1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To the saints who are also faithful in Christ Jesus:  
1.2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.  
1.3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places,  
1.4 even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him. 
1.5 He destined us in love to be his sons through Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will, 
1.6 to the praise of his glorious grace which he freely bestowed on us in the Beloved. 
1.7 In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace 
1.8 which he lavished upon us. 
1.9 For he has made known to us in all wisdom and insight the mystery of his will, according to his purpose which he set forth in Christ 
1.10 as a plan for the fulness of time, to unite all things in him, things in heaven and things on earth. 
1.11 In him, according to the purpose of him who accomplishes all things according to the counsel of his will,  
1.12 we who first hoped in Christ have been destined and appointed to live for the praise of his glory. 
1.13 In him you also, who have heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, 
1.14 which is the guarantee of our inheritance until we acquire possession of it, to the praise of his glory. 
1.15 For this reason, because I have heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love toward all the saints,  
1.16 I do not cease to give thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers, 
1.17 that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him, 
1.18 having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope to which he has called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints, 
1.19 and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power in us who believe, according to the working of his great might 
1.20 which he accomplished in Christ when he raised him from the dead and made him sit at his right hand in the heavenly places, 
1.21 far above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in that which is to come; 
1.22 and he has put all things under his feet and has made him the head over all things for the church, 
1.23 which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all. 
2.1 And you he made alive, when you were dead through the trespasses and sins  
2.2 in which you once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience. 
2.3 Among these we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, following the desires of body and mind, and so we were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind. 
2.4 But God, who is rich in mercy, out of the great love with which he loved us, 
2.5 even when we were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ (by grace you have been saved), 
2.6 and raised us up with him, and made us sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, 
2.7 that in the coming ages he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. 
2.8 For by grace you have been saved through faith; and this is not your own doing, it is the gift of God -- 
2.9 not because of works, lest any man should boast. 
2.10 For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them. 
2.11 Therefore remember that at one time you Gentiles in the flesh, called the uncircumcision by what is called the circumcision, which is made in the flesh by hands --  
2.12 remember that you were at that time separated from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. 
2.13 But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off have been brought near in the blood of Christ. 
2.14 For he is our peace, who has made us both one, and has broken down the dividing wall of hostility, 
2.15 by abolishing in his flesh the law of commandments and ordinances, that he might create in himself one new man in place of the two, so making peace, 
2.16 and might reconcile us both to God in one body through the cross, thereby bringing the hostility to an end. 
2.17 And he came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near; 
2.18 for through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father. 
2.19 So then you are no longer strangers and sojourners, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God, 
2.20 built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone, 
2.21 in whom the whole structure is joined together and grows into a holy temple in the Lord; 
2.22 in whom you also are built into it for a dwelling place of God in the Spirit. 
3.1 For this reason I, Paul, a prisoner for Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles --  
3.2 assuming that you have heard of the stewardship of God's grace that was given to me for you, 
3.3 how the mystery was made known to me by revelation, as I have written briefly. 
3.4 When you read this you can perceive my insight into the mystery of Christ, 
3.5 which was not made known to the sons of men in other generations as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; 
3.6 that is, how the Gentiles are fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel. 
3.7 Of this gospel I was made a minister according to the gift of God's grace which was given me by the working of his power.  
3.8 To me, though I am the very least of all the saints, this grace was given, to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, 
3.9 and to make all men see what is the plan of the mystery hidden for ages in God who created all things; 
3.10 that through the church the manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the principalities and powers in the heavenly places. 
3.11 This was according to the eternal purpose which he has realized in Christ Jesus our Lord, 
3.12 in whom we have boldness and confidence of access through our faith in him. 
3.13 So I ask you not to lose heart over what I am suffering for you, which is your glory. 
3.14 For this reason I bow my knees before the Father,  
3.15 from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named, 
3.16 that according to the riches of his glory he may grant you to be strengthened with might through his Spirit in the inner man, 
3.17 and that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; that you, being rooted and grounded in love, 
3.18 may have power to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, 
3.19 and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fulness of God. 
3.20 Now to him who by the power at work within us is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think,  
3.21 to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, for ever and ever. Amen. 
4.1 I therefore, a prisoner for the Lord, beg you to lead a life worthy of the calling to which you have been called,  
4.2 with all lowliness and meekness, with patience, forbearing one another in love, 
4.3 eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 
4.4 There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to the one hope that belongs to your call, 
4.5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 
4.6 one God and Father of us all, who is above all and through all and in all. 
4.7 But grace was given to each of us according to the measure of Christ's gift. 
4.8 Therefore it is said, "When he ascended on high he led a host of captives, and he gave gifts to men."
4.9 (In saying, "He ascended," what does it mean but that he had also descended into the lower parts of the earth? 
4.10 He who descended is he who also ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.) 
4.11 And his gifts were that some should be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teachers, 
4.12 to equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up the body of Christ, 
4.13 until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; 
4.14 so that we may no longer be children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the cunning of men, by their craftiness in deceitful wiles. 
4.15 Rather, speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, 
4.16 from whom the whole body, joined and knit together by every joint with which it is supplied, when each part is working properly, makes bodily growth and upbuilds itself in love. 
4.17 Now this I affirm and testify in the Lord, that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds;  
4.18 they are darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them, due to their hardness of heart; 
4.19 they have become callous and have given themselves up to licentiousness, greedy to practice every kind of uncleanness. 
4.20 You did not so learn Christ! -- 
4.21 assuming that you have heard about him and were taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus. 
4.22 Put off your old nature which belongs to your former manner of life and is corrupt through deceitful lusts, 
4.23 and be renewed in the spirit of your minds, 
4.24 and put on the new nature, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness. 
4.25 Therefore, putting away falsehood, let every one speak the truth with his neighbor, for we are members one of another.  
4.26 Be angry but do not sin; do not let the sun go down on your anger, 
4.27 and give no opportunity to the devil. 
4.28 Let the thief no longer steal, but rather let him labor, doing honest work with his hands, so that he may be able to give to those in need. 
4.29 Let no evil talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for edifying, as fits the occasion, that it may impart grace to those who hear. 
4.30 And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. 
4.31 Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away from you, with all malice, 
4.32 and be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God in Christ forgave you. 
5.1 Therefore be imitators of God, as beloved children.  
5.2 And walk in love, as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us, a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God. 
5.3 But fornication and all impurity or covetousness must not even be named among you, as is fitting among saints.  
5.4 Let there be no filthiness, nor silly talk, nor levity, which are not fitting; but instead let there be thanksgiving. 
5.5 Be sure of this, that no fornicator or impure man, or one who is covetous (that is, an idolater), has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 
5.6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for it is because of these things that the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience. 
5.7 Therefore do not associate with them, 
5.8 for once you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord; walk as children of light 
5.9 (for the fruit of light is found in all that is good and right and true), 
5.10 and try to learn what is pleasing to the Lord. 
5.11 Take no part in the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead expose them. 
5.12 For it is a shame even to speak of the things that they do in secret; 
5.13 but when anything is exposed by the light it becomes visible, for anything that becomes visible is light. 
5.14 Therefore it is said, "Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give you light."
5.15 Look carefully then how you walk, not as unwise men but as wise,  
5.16 making the most of the time, because the days are evil. 
5.17 Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is. 
5.18 And do not get drunk with wine, for that is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, 
5.19 addressing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord with all your heart, 
5.20 always and for everything giving thanks in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father. 
5.21 Be subject to one another out of reverence for Christ.  
5.22 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as to the Lord. 
5.23 For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, and is himself its Savior. 
5.24 As the church is subject to Christ, so let wives also be subject in everything to their husbands. 
5.25 Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her, 
5.26 that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water with the word, 
5.27 that he might present the church to himself in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish. 
5.28 Even so husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. 
5.29 For no man ever hates his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as Christ does the church, 
5.30 because we are members of his body. 
5.31 "For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh." 
5.32 This mystery is a profound one, and I am saying that it refers to Christ and the church; 
5.33 however, let each one of you love his wife as himself, and let the wife see that she respects her husband. 
6.1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.  
6.2 "Honor your father and mother" (this is the first commandment with a promise), 
6.3 "that it may be well with you and that you may live long on the earth." 
6.4 Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. 
6.5 Slaves, be obedient to those who are your earthly masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of heart, as to Christ;  
6.6 not in the way of eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, 
6.7 rendering service with a good will as to the Lord and not to men, 
6.8 knowing that whatever good any one does, he will receive the same again from the Lord, whether he is a slave or free. 
6.9 Masters, do the same to them, and forbear threatening, knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and that there is no partiality with him. 
6.10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might.  
6.11 Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 
6.12 For we are not contending against flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the world rulers of this present darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places. 
6.13 Therefore take the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. 
6.14 Stand therefore, having girded your loins with truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness, 
6.15 and having shod your feet with the equipment of the gospel of peace; 
6.16 besides all these, taking the shield of faith, with which you can quench all the flaming darts of the evil one. 
6.17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. 
6.18 Pray at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints, 
6.19 and also for me, that utterance may be given me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel, 
6.20 for which I am an ambassador in chains; that I may declare it boldly, as I ought to speak. 
6.21 Now that you also may know how I am and what I am doing, Tych'icus the beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord will tell you everything.  
6.22 I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage your hearts. 
6.23 Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.  
6.24 Grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with love undying.  