1.1 I, Paul, am on special assignment for Christ, carrying out God's plan laid out in the Message of Life by Jesus.
1.2 I write this to you, Timothy, the son I love so much. All the best from our God and Christ be yours!
1.3 Every time I say your name in prayer - which is practically all the time - I thank God for you, the God I worship with my whole life in the tradition of my ancestors.
1.4 I miss you a lot, especially when I remember that last tearful good-bye, and I look forward to a joy-packed reunion.
1.5 That precious memory triggers another: your honest faith - and what a rich faith it is, handed down from your grandmother Lois to your mother Eunice, and now to you!
1.6 And the special gift of ministry you received when I laid hands on you and prayed - keep that ablaze!
1.7 God doesn't want us to be shy with his gifts, but bold and loving and sensible.
1.8 So don't be embarrassed to speak up for our Master or for me, his prisoner. Take your share of suffering for the Message along with the rest of us. We can only keep on going, after all, by the power of God,
1.9 who first saved us and then called us to this holy work. We had nothing to do with it. It was all his idea, a gift prepared for us in Jesus long before we knew anything about it.
1.10 But we know it now. Since the appearance of our Savior, nothing could be plainer: death defeated, life vindicated in a steady blaze of light, all through the work of Jesus.
1.11 This is the Message I've been set apart to proclaim as preacher, emissary, and teacher.
1.12 It's also the cause of all this trouble I'm in. But I have no regrets. I couldn't be more sure of my ground - the One I've trusted in can take care of what he's trusted me to do right to the end.
1.13 So keep at your work, this faith and love rooted in Christ, exactly as I set it out for you. It's as sound as the day you first heard it from me.
1.14 Guard this precious thing placed in your custody by the Holy Spirit who works in us.
1.15 I'm sure you know by now that everyone in the province of Asia deserted me, even Phygelus and Hermogenes.
1.16 But God bless Onesiphorus and his family! Many's the time I've been refreshed in that house. And he wasn't embarrassed a bit that I was in jail.
1.17 The first thing he did when he got to Rome was look me up.
1.18 May God on the Last Day treat him as well as he treated me. And then there was all the help he provided in Ephesus - but you know that better than I.
2.1 So, my son, throw yourself into this work for Christ.
2.2 Pass on what you heard from me - the whole congregation saying Amen! - to reliable leaders who are competent to teach others.
2.3 When the going gets rough, take it on the chin with the rest of us, the way Jesus did.
2.4 A soldier on duty doesn't get caught up in making deals at the marketplace. He concentrates on carrying out orders.
2.5 An athlete who refuses to play by the rules will never get anywhere.
2.6 It's the diligent farmer who gets the produce.
2.7 Think it over. God will make it all plain.
2.8 Fix this picture firmly in your mind: Jesus, descended from the line of David, raised from the dead. It's what you've heard from me all along.
2.9 It's what I'm sitting in jail for right now - but God's Word isn't in jail!
2.10 That's why I stick it out here - so that everyone God calls will get in on the salvation of Christ in all its glory.
2.11 This is a sure thing: If we die with him, we'll live with him;
2.12 If we stick it out with him, we'll rule with him; If we turn our backs on him, he'll turn his back on us;
2.13 If we give up on him, he does not give up -  for there's no way he can be false to himself.
2.14 Repeat these basic essentials over and over to God's people. Warn them before God against pious nitpicking, which chips away at the faith. It just wears everyone out.
2.15 Concentrate on doing your best for God, work you won't be ashamed of, laying out the truth plain and simple.
2.16 Stay clear of pious talk that is only talk. Words are not mere words, you know. If they're not backed by a godly life,
2.17 they accumulate as poison in the soul. Hymenaeus and Philetus are examples,
2.18 throwing believers off stride and missing the truth by a mile by saying the resurrection is over and done with.
2.19 Meanwhile, God's firm foundation is as firm as ever, these sentences engraved on the stones: God knows who belongs to him. spurn evil, all you who name god as god.
2.20 In a well-furnished kitchen there are not only crystal goblets and silver platters, but waste cans and compost buckets - some containers used to serve fine meals, others to take out the garbage.
2.21 Become the kind of container God can use to present any and every kind of gift to his guests for their blessing.
2.22 Run away from infantile indulgence. Run after mature righteousness - faith, love, peace - joining those who are in honest and serious prayer before God.
2.23 Refuse to get involved in inane discussions; they always end up in fights.
2.24 God's servant must not be argumentative, but a gentle listener and a teacher who keeps cool,
2.25 working firmly but patiently with those who refuse to obey. You never know how or when God might sober them up with a change of heart and a turning to the truth,
2.26 enabling them to escape the Devil's trap, where they are caught and held captive, forced to run his errands.
3.1 Don't be naive. There are difficult times ahead.
3.2 As the end approaches, people are going to be self-absorbed, money-hungry, self-promoting, stuck-up, profane, contemptuous of parents, crude, coarse,
3.3 dog-eat-dog, unbending, slanderers, impulsively wild, savage, cynical,
3.4 treacherous, ruthless, bloated windbags, addicted to lust, and allergic to God.
3.5 They'll make a show of religion, but behind the scenes they're animals. Stay clear of these people.
3.6 These are the kind of people who smooth-talk themselves into the homes of unstable and needy women and take advantage of them; women who, depressed by their sinfulness, take up with every new religious fad that calls itself "truth."
3.7 They get exploited every time and never really learn.
3.8 These men are like those old Egyptian frauds Jannes and Jambres, who challenged Moses. They were rejects from the faith, twisted in their thinking, defying truth itself.
3.9 But nothing will come of these latest impostors. Everyone will see through them, just as people saw through that Egyptian hoax.
3.10 You've been a good apprentice to me, a part of my teaching, my manner of life, direction, faith, steadiness, love, patience,
3.11 troubles, sufferings - suffering along with me in all the grief I had to put up with in Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. And you also well know that God rescued me!
3.12 Anyone who wants to live all out for Christ is in for a lot of trouble; there's no getting around it.
3.13 Unscrupulous con men will continue to exploit the faith. They're as deceived as the people they lead astray. As long as they are out there, things can only get worse.
3.14 But don't let it faze you. Stick with what you learned and believed, sure of the integrity of your teachers -
3.15 why, you took in the sacred Scriptures with your mother's milk! There's nothing like the written Word of God for showing you the way to salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
3.16 Every part of Scripture is God-breathed and useful one way or another - showing us truth, exposing our rebellion, correcting our mistakes, training us to live God's way.
3.17 Through the Word we are put together and shaped up for the tasks God has for us.
4.1 I can't impress this on you too strongly. God is looking over your shoulder. Christ himself is the Judge, with the final say on everyone, living and dead. He is about to break into the open with his rule,
4.2 so proclaim the Message with intensity; keep on your watch. Challenge, warn, and urge your people. Don't ever quit. Just keep it simple.
4.3 You're going to find that there will be times when people will have no stomach for solid teaching, but will fill up on spiritual junk food - catchy opinions that tickle their fancy.
4.4 They'll turn their backs on truth and chase mirages.
4.5 But you - keep your eye on what you're doing; accept the hard times along with the good; keep the Message alive; do a thorough job as God's servant.
4.6 You take over. I'm about to die, my life an offering on God's altar.
4.7 This is the only race worth running. I've run hard right to the finish, believed all the way.
4.8 All that's left now is the shouting - God's applause! Depend on it, he's an honest judge. He'll do right not only by me, but by everyone eager for his coming.
4.9 Get here as fast as you can.
4.10 Demas, chasing fads, went off to Thessalonica and left me here. Crescens is in Galatia province, Titus in Dalmatia.
4.11 Luke is the only one here with me. Bring Mark with you; he'll be my right-hand man
4.12 since I'm sending Tychicus to Ephesus.
4.13 Bring the winter coat I left in Troas with Carpus; also the books and parchment notebooks.
4.14 Watch out for Alexander the coppersmith.
4.15 Fiercely opposed to our Message, he caused no end of trouble. God will give him what he's got coming.
4.16 At my preliminary hearing no one stood by me. They all ran like scared rabbits. But it doesn't matter -
4.17 the Master stood by me and helped me spread the Message loud and clear to those who had never heard it. I was snatched from the jaws of the lion!
4.18 God's looking after me, keeping me safe in the kingdom of heaven. All praise to him, praise forever! Oh, yes!
4.19 Say hello to Priscilla and Aquila; also, the family of Onesiphorus.
4.20 Erastus stayed behind in Corinth. I had to leave Trophimus sick in Miletus.
4.21 Try hard to get here before winter. Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all your friends here send greetings.
4.22 God be with you. Grace be with you.
