1.1 The memoirs of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah.
1.2 Hanani, one of my brothers, had just arrived from Judah with some fellow Jews. I asked them about the conditions among the Jews there who had survived the exile, and about Jerusalem.
1.3 They told me, "The exile survivors who are left there in the province are in bad shape. Conditions are appalling. The wall of Jerusalem is still rubble; the city gates are still cinders."
1.4 When I heard this, I sat down and wept. I mourned for days, fasting and praying before the God-of-Heaven.
1.5 I said, "God, God-of-Heaven, the great and awesome God, loyal to his covenant and faithful to those who love him and obey his commands:
1.6 Look at me, listen to me. Pay attention to this prayer of your servant that I'm praying day and night in intercession for your servants, the People of Israel, confessing the sins of the People of Israel. And I'm including myself, I and my ancestors, among those who have sinned against you.
1.7 "We've treated you like dirt: We haven't done what you told us, haven't followed your commands, and haven't respected the decisions you gave to Moses your servant.
1.8 All the same, remember the warning you posted to your servant Moses: 'If you betray me, I'll scatter you to the four winds,
1.9 but if you come back to me and do what I tell you, I'll gather up all these scattered peoples from wherever they ended up and put them back in the place I chose to mark with my Name.'
1.10 "Well, there they are - your servants, your people whom you so powerfully and impressively redeemed.
1.11 O Master, listen to me, listen to your servant's prayer - and yes, to all your servants who delight in honoring you - and make me successful today so that I get what I want from the king." I was cupbearer to the king.
2.1 It was the month of Nisan in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king. At the hour for serving wine I brought it in and gave it to the king. I had never been hangdog in his presence before,
2.2 so he asked me, "Why the long face? You're not sick are you? Or are you depressed?"
2.3 I said, "Long live the king! And why shouldn't I be depressed when the city, the city where all my family is buried, is in ruins and the city gates have been reduced to cinders?"
2.4 The king then asked me, "So what do you want?"
2.5 I said, "If it please the king, and if the king thinks well of me, send me to Judah, to the city where my family is buried, so that I can rebuild it."
2.6 The king, with the queen sitting alongside him, said, "How long will your work take and when would you expect to return?"  I gave him a time, and the king gave his approval to send me.
2.7 Then I said, "If it please the king, provide me with letters to the governors across the Euphrates that authorize my travel through to Judah;
2.8 and also an order to Asaph, keeper of the king's forest, to supply me with timber for the beams of The Temple fortress, the wall of the city, and the house where I'll be living."
2.9 When I met the governors across The River (the Euphrates) I showed them the king's letters. The king even sent along a cavalry escort.
2.10 When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard about this, they were very upset, angry that anyone would come to look after the interests of the People of Israel. "Come - Let's Build the Wall of Jerusalem"
2.11 And so I arrived in Jerusalem. After I had been there three days,
2.12 I got up in the middle of the night, I and a few men who were with me. I hadn't told anyone what my God had put in my heart to do for Jerusalem. The only animal with us was the one I was riding.
2.13 Under cover of night I went past the Valley Gate toward the Dragon's Fountain to the Dung Gate looking over the walls of Jerusalem, which had been broken through and whose gates had been burned up.
2.14 I then crossed to the Fountain Gate and headed for the King's Pool but there wasn't enough room for the donkey I was riding to get through.
2.15 So I went up the valley in the dark continuing my inspection of the wall. I came back in through the Valley Gate.
2.16 The local officials had no idea where I'd gone or what I was doing - I hadn't breathed a word to the Jews, priests, nobles, local officials, or anyone else who would be working on the job.
2.17 Then I gave them my report: "Face it: we're in a bad way here. Jerusalem is a wreck; its gates are burned up. Come - let's build the wall of Jerusalem and not live with this disgrace any longer."
2.18 I told them how God was supporting me and how the king was backing me up.  They said, "We're with you. Let's get started." They rolled up their sleeves, ready for the good work.
2.19 When Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the Ammonite official, and Geshem the Arab heard about it, they laughed at us, mocking, "Ha! What do you think you're doing? Do you think you can cross the king?"
2.20 I shot back, "The God-of-Heaven will make sure we succeed. We're his servants and we're going to work, rebuilding. You can keep your nose out of it. You get no say in this - Jerusalem's none of your business!"
3.1 The high priest Eliashib and his fellow priests were up and at it: They went to work on the Sheep Gate; they repaired it and hung its doors, continuing on as far as the Tower of the Hundred and the Tower of Hananel.
3.2 The men of Jericho worked alongside them; and next to them, Zaccur son of Imri.
3.3 The Fish Gate was built by the Hassenaah brothers; they repaired it, hung its doors, and installed its bolts and bars.
3.4 Meremoth son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, worked; next to him Meshullam son of Berekiah, the son of Meshezabel; next to him Zadok son of Baana;
3.5 and next to him the Tekoites (except for their nobles, who wouldn't work with their master and refused to get their hands dirty with such work).
3.6 The Jeshanah Gate was rebuilt by Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah; they repaired it, hung its doors, and installed its bolts and bars.
3.7 Melatiah the Gibeonite, Jadon the Meronothite, and the men of Gibeon and Mizpah, which was under the rule of the governor from across the Euphrates, worked alongside them.
3.8 Uzziel son of Harhaiah of the goldsmiths' guild worked next to him, and next to him Hananiah, one of the perfumers. They rebuilt the wall of Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall.
3.9 The next section was worked on by Rephaiah son of Hur, mayor of a half-district of Jerusalem.
3.10 Next to him Jedaiah son of Harumaph rebuilt the front of his house; Hattush son of Hashabneiah worked next to him.
3.11 Malkijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-Moab rebuilt another section that included the Tower of Furnaces.
3.12 Working next to him was Shallum son of Hallohesh, mayor of the other half-district of Jerusalem, along with his daughters.
3.13 The Valley Gate was rebuilt by Hanun and villagers of Zanoah; they repaired it, hung its doors, and installed its bolts and bars. They went on to repair 1,500 feet of the wall, as far as the Dung Gate.
3.14 The Dung Gate itself was rebuilt by Malkijah son of Recab, the mayor of the district of Beth Hakkerem; he repaired it, hung its doors, and installed its bolts and bars.
3.15 The Fountain Gate was rebuilt by Shallun son of Col-Hozeh, mayor of the Mizpah district; he repaired it, roofed it, hung its doors, and installed its bolts and bars. He also rebuilt the wall of the Pool of Siloam at the King's Garden as far as the steps that go down from the City of David.
3.16 After him came Nehemiah son of Azbuk, mayor of half the district of Beth Zur. He worked from just in front of the Tomb of David as far as the Pool and the House of Heroes.
3.17 Levites under Rehum son of Bani were next in line. Alongside them, Hashabiah, mayor of half the district of Keilah, represented his district in the rebuilding.
3.18 Next to him their brothers continued the rebuilding under Binnui son of Henadad, mayor of the other half-district of Keilah.
3.19 The section from in front of the Ascent to the Armory as far as the Angle was rebuilt by Ezer son of Jeshua, the mayor of Mizpah.
3.20 From the Angle to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest was done by Baruch son of Zabbai.
3.21 Meremoth son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, took it from the door of Eliashib's house to the end of Eliashib's house.
3.22 Priests from the neighborhood went on from there.
3.23 Benjamin and Hasshub worked on the wall in front of their house, and Azariah son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, did the work alongside his house.
3.24 The section from the house of Azariah to the Angle at the Corner was rebuilt by Binnui son of Henadad.
3.25 Palal son of Uzai worked opposite the Angle and the tower that projects from the Upper Palace of the king near the Court of the Guard. Next to him Pedaiah son of Parosh
3.26 and The Temple support staff who lived on the hill of Ophel worked up to the point opposite the Water Gate eastward and the projecting tower.
3.27 The men of Tekoa did the section from the great projecting tower as far as the wall of Ophel.
3.28 Above the Horse Gate the priests worked, each priest repairing the wall in front of his own house.
3.29 After them Zadok son of Immer rebuilt in front of his house and after him Shemaiah son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the East Gate;
3.30 then Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun, the sixth son of Zalaph; then Meshullam son of Berekiah rebuilt the wall in front of his storage shed.
3.31 Malkijah the goldsmith repaired the wall as far as the house of The Temple support staff and merchants, up to the Inspection Gate, and the Upper Room at the Corner.
3.32 The goldsmiths and the merchants made the repairs between the Upper Room at the Corner and the Sheep Gate.
4.1 When Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall he exploded in anger, vilifying the Jews.
4.2 In the company of his Samaritan cronies and military he let loose: "What are these miserable Jews doing? Do they think they can get everything back to normal overnight? Make building stones out of make-believe?"
4.3 At his side, Tobiah the Ammonite jumped in and said, "That's right! What do they think they're building? Why, if a fox climbed that wall, it would fall to pieces under his weight."
4.4 Nehemiah prayed, "Oh listen to us, dear God. We're so despised: Boomerang their ridicule on their heads; have their enemies cart them off as war trophies to a land of no return;
4.5 don't forgive their iniquity, don't wipe away their sin - they've insulted the builders!"
4.6 We kept at it, repairing and rebuilding the wall. The whole wall was soon joined together and halfway to its intended height because the people had a heart for the work.
4.7 When Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabs, the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites heard that the repairs of the walls of Jerusalem were going so well - that the breaks in the wall were being fixed - they were absolutely furious.
4.8 They put their heads together and decided to fight against Jerusalem and create as much trouble as they could.
4.9 We countered with prayer to our God and set a round-the-clock guard against them.
4.10 But soon word was going around in Judah,  The builders are pooped, the rubbish piles up; We're in over our heads, we can't build this wall.
4.11 And all this time our enemies were saying, "They won't know what hit them. Before they know it we'll be at their throats, killing them right and left. That will put a stop to the work!"
4.12 The Jews who were their neighbors kept reporting, "They have us surrounded; they're going to attack!" If we heard it once, we heard it ten times.
4.13 So I stationed armed guards at the most vulnerable places of the wall and assigned people by families with their swords, lances, and bows.
4.14 After looking things over I stood up and spoke to the nobles, officials, and everyone else: "Don't be afraid of them. Put your minds on the Master, great and awesome, and then fight for your brothers, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your homes."
4.15 Our enemies learned that we knew all about their plan and that God had frustrated it. And we went back to the wall and went to work.
4.16 From then on half of my young men worked while the other half stood guard with lances, shields, bows, and mail armor. Military officers served as backup for everyone in Judah who was at work rebuilding the wall.
4.17 The common laborers held a tool in one hand and a spear in the other.
4.18 Each of the builders had a sword strapped to his side as he worked. I kept the trumpeter at my side to sound the alert.
4.19 Then I spoke to the nobles and officials and everyone else: "There's a lot of work going on and we are spread out all along the wall, separated from each other.
4.20 When you hear the trumpet call, join us there; our God will fight for us."
4.21 And so we kept working, from first light until the stars came out, half of us holding lances.
4.22 I also instructed the people, "Each person and his helper is to stay inside Jerusalem - guards by night and workmen by day."
4.23 We all slept in our clothes - I, my brothers, my workmen, and the guards backing me up. And each one kept his spear in his hand, even when getting water.
5.1 A great protest was mounted by the people, including the wives, against their fellow Jews.
5.2 Some said, "We have big families, and we need food just to survive."
5.3 Others said, "We're having to mortgage our fields and vineyards and homes to get enough grain to keep from starving."
5.4 And others said, "We're having to borrow money to pay the royal tax on our fields and vineyards.
5.5 Look: We're the same flesh and blood as our brothers here; our children are just as good as theirs. Yet here we are having to sell our children off as slaves - some of our daughters have already been sold - and we can't do anything about it because our fields and vineyards are owned by somebody else."
5.6 I got really angry when I heard their protest and complaints.
5.7 After thinking it over, I called the nobles and officials on the carpet. I said, "Each one of you is gouging his brother."
5.8 I told them, "We did everything we could to buy back our Jewish brothers who had to sell themselves as slaves to foreigners. And now you're selling these same brothers back into debt slavery! Does that mean that we have to buy them back again?" They said nothing. What could they say?
5.9 "What you're doing is wrong. Is there no fear of God left in you? Don't you care what the nations around here, our enemies, think of you?
5.10 "I and my brothers and the people working for me have also loaned them money. But this gouging them with interest has to stop.
5.11 Give them back their foreclosed fields, vineyards, olive groves, and homes right now. And forgive your claims on their money, grain, new wine, and olive oil."
5.12 They said, "We'll give it all back. We won't make any more demands on them. We'll do everything you say."
5.13 Then I emptied my pockets, turning them inside out, and said, "So may God empty the pockets and house of everyone who doesn't keep this promise - turned inside out and emptied." Everyone gave a wholehearted "Yes, we'll do it!" and praised God. And the people did what they promised. "Remember in My Favor, O My God"
5.14 From the time King Artaxerxes appointed me as their governor in the land of Judah - from the twentieth to the thirty-second year of his reign, twelve years - neither I nor my brothers used the governor's food allowance.
5.15 Governors who had preceded me had oppressed the people by taxing them forty shekels of silver (about a pound) a day for food and wine while their underlings bullied the people unmercifully. But out of fear of God I did none of that.
5.16 I had work to do; I worked on this wall. All my men were on the job to do the work. We didn't have time to line our own pockets.
5.17 I fed one hundred and fifty Jews and officials at my table in addition to those who showed up from the surrounding nations.
5.18 One ox, six choice sheep, and some chickens were prepared for me daily, and every ten days a large supply of wine was delivered. Even so, I didn't use the food allowance provided for the governor - the people had it hard enough as it was.
5.19 Remember in my favor, O my God, Everything I've done for these people.
6.1 When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arab, and the rest of our enemies heard that I had rebuilt the wall and that there were no more breaks in it - even though I hadn't yet installed the gates
6.2 - Sanballat and Geshem sent this message: "Come and meet with us at Kephirim in the valley of Ono."
6.3 so I sent messengers back with this: "I'm doing a great work; I can't come down. Why should the work come to a standstill just so I can come down to see you?"
6.4 Four times they sent this message and four times I gave them my answer.
6.5 The fifth time - same messenger, same message - Sanballat sent an unsealed letter
6.6 with this message:
6.7 and that you have appointed prophets to announce in Jerusalem, 'There's a king in Judah!' The king is going to be told all this - don't you think we should sit down and have a talk?"
6.8 I sent him back this: "There's nothing to what you're saying. You've made it all up."
6.9 They were trying to intimidate us into quitting. They thought, "They'll give up; they'll never finish it." I prayed, "Give me strength."
6.10 Then I met secretly with Shemaiah son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabel, at his house. He said:  Let's meet at the house of God, inside The Temple; Let's find safety behind locked doors because they're coming to kill you, Yes, coming by night to kill you.
6.11 I said, "Why would a man like me run for cover? And why would a man like me use The Temple as a hideout? I won't do it."
6.12 I sensed that God hadn't sent this man. The so-called prophecy he spoke to me was the work of Tobiah and Sanballat; they had hired him.
6.13 He had been hired to scare me off - trick me - a layman, into desecrating The Temple and ruining my good reputation so they could accuse me.
6.14 "O my God, don't let Tobiah and Sanballat get by with all the mischief they've done. And the same goes for the prophetess Noadiah and the other prophets who have been trying to undermine my confidence."
6.15 The wall was finished on the twenty-fifth day of Elul. It had taken fifty-two days.
6.16 When all our enemies heard the news and all the surrounding nations saw it, our enemies totally lost their nerve. They knew that God was behind this work.
6.17 All during this time letters were going back and forth constantly between the nobles of Judah and Tobiah.
6.18 Many of the nobles had ties to him because he was son-in-law to Shecaniah son of Arah and his son Jehohanan had married the daughter of Meshullam son of Berekiah.
6.19 They kept telling me all the good things he did and then would report back to him anything I would say. And then Tobiah would send letters to intimidate me.
7.1 After the wall was rebuilt and I had installed the doors, and the security guards, the singers, and the Levites were appointed,
7.2 I put my brother Hanani, along with Hananiah the captain of the citadel, in charge of Jerusalem because he was an honest man and feared God more than most men.
7.3 I gave them this order: "Don't open the gates of Jerusalem until the sun is up. And shut and bar the gates while the guards are still on duty. Appoint the guards from the citizens of Jerusalem and assign them to posts in front of their own homes."
7.4 The city was large and spacious with only a few people in it and the houses not yet rebuilt.
7.5 God put it in my heart to gather the nobles, the officials, and the people in general to be registered. I found the genealogical record of those who were in the first return from exile. This is the record I found:
7.6 These are the people of the province who returned from the captivity of the Exile, the ones Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had carried off captive; they came back to Jerusalem and Judah, each going to his own town.
7.7 They came back in the company of Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah.  The numbers of the men of the People of Israel by families of origin:
7.8 Parosh, 2,172
7.9 Shephatiah, 372
7.10 Arah, 652
7.11 Pahath-Moab (sons of Jeshua and Joab), 2,818
7.12 Elam, 1,254
7.13 Zattu, 845
7.14 Zaccai, 760
7.15 Binnui, 648
7.16 Bebai, 628
7.17 Azgad, 2,322
7.18 Adonikam, 667
7.19 Bigvai, 2,067
7.20 Adin, 655
7.21 Ater (sons of Hezekiah), 98
7.22 Hashum, 328
7.23 Bezai, 324
7.24 Hariph, 112
7.25 Gibeon, 95.
7.26 Israelites identified by place of origin: Bethlehem and Netophah, 188
7.27 Anathoth, 128
7.28 Beth Azmaveth, 42
7.29 Kiriath Jearim, Kephirah, and Beeroth, 743
7.30 Ramah and Geba, 621
7.31 Micmash, 122
7.32 Bethel and Ai, 123
7.33 Nebo (the other one), 52
7.34 Elam (the other one), 1,254
7.35 Harim, 320
7.36 Jericho, 345
7.37 Lod, Hadid, and Ono, 721
7.38 Senaah, 3,930.
7.39 Priestly families: Jedaiah (sons of Jeshua), 973
7.40 Immer, 1,052
7.41 Pashhur, 1,247
7.42 Harim, 1,017.
7.43 Levitical families:  Jeshua (sons of Kadmiel and of Hodaviah), 74.
7.44 Singers: Asaph's family line, 148.
7.45 Security guard families: Shallum, Ater, Talmon, Akkub, Hatita, and Shobai, 138.
7.46 Families of support staff: Ziha, Hasupha, Tabbaoth,
7.47 Keros, Sia, Padon,
7.48 Lebana, Hagaba, Shalmai,
7.49 Hanan, Giddel, Gahar,
7.50 Reaiah, Rezin, Nekoda,
7.51 Gazzam, Uzza, Paseah,
7.52 Besai, Meunim, Nephussim,
7.53 Bakbuk, Hakupha, Harhur,
7.54 Bazluth, Mehida, Harsha,
7.55 Barkos, Sisera, Temah,
7.56 Neziah, and Hatipha.
7.57 Families of Solomon's servants: Sotai, Sophereth, Perida,
7.58 Jaala, Darkon, Giddel,
7.59 Shephatiah, Hattil, Pokereth-Hazzebaim, and Amon.
7.60 The Temple support staff and Solomon's servants added up to 392.
7.61 These are those who came from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Kerub, Addon, and Immer. They weren't able to prove their ancestry, whether they were true Israelites or not:
7.62 The sons of Delaiah, Tobiah, and Nekoda, 642.
7.63 Likewise with these priestly families: -The sons of Hobaiah, Hakkoz, and Barzillai, who had married a daughter of Barzillai the Gileadite and took that name.
7.64 They looked high and low for their family records but couldn't find them. And so they were barred from priestly work as ritually unclean.
7.65 The governor ruled that they could not eat from the holy food until a priest could determine their status by using the Urim and Thummim.
7.66 The total count for the congregation was 42,360.
7.67 That did not include the male and female slaves who numbered 7,337. There were also 245 male and female singers.
7.68 And there were 736 horses, 245 mules,
7.69 435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys.
7.70 Some of the heads of families made voluntary offerings for the work. The governor made a gift to the treasury of 1,000 drachmas of gold (about nineteen pounds), 50 bowls, and 530 garments for the priests.
7.71 Some of the heads of the families made gifts to the treasury for the work; it came to 20,000 drachmas of gold and 2,200 minas of silver (about one and a third tons).
7.72 Gifts from the rest of the people totaled 20,000 drachmas of gold (about 375 pounds), 2,000 minas of silver, and 67 garments for the priests.
7.73 The priests, Levites, security guards, singers, and Temple support staff, along with some others, and the rest of the People of Israel, all found a place to live in their own towns.
8.1 By the time the seventh month arrived, the People of Israel were settled in their towns. Then all the people gathered as one person in the town square in front of the Water Gate and asked the scholar Ezra to bring the Book of The Revelation of Moses that God had commanded for Israel.
8.2 So Ezra the priest brought The Revelation to the congregation, which was made up of both men and women - everyone capable of understanding. It was the first day of the seventh month.
8.3 He read it facing the town square at the Water Gate from early dawn until noon in the hearing of the men and women, all who could understand it. And all the people listened - they were all ears - to the Book of The Revelation.
8.4 The scholar Ezra stood on a wooden platform constructed for the occasion. He was flanked on the right by Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, and on the left by Pedaiah, Mishael, Malkijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
8.5 Ezra opened the book. Every eye was on him (he was standing on the raised platform) and as he opened the book everyone stood.
8.6 Then Ezra praised God, the great God, and all the people responded, "Oh Yes! Yes!" with hands raised high. And then they fell to their knees in worship of God, their faces to the ground.
8.7 Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, and Pelaiah, all Levites, explained The Revelation while people stood, listening respectfully.
8.8 They translated the Book of The Revelation of God so the people could understand it and then explained the reading.
8.9 Nehemiah the governor, along with Ezra the priest and scholar and the Levites who were teaching the people, said to all the people, "This day is holy to God, your God. Don't weep and carry on." They said this because all the people were weeping as they heard the words of The Revelation.
8.10 He continued, "Go home and prepare a feast, holiday food and drink; and share it with those who don't have anything: This day is holy to God. Don't feel bad. The joy of God is your strength!"
8.11 The Levites calmed the people, "Quiet now. This is a holy day. Don't be upset."
8.12 So the people went off to feast, eating and drinking and including the poor in a great celebration. Now they got it; they understood the reading that had been given to them.
8.13 On the second day of the month the family heads of all the people, the priests, and the Levites gathered around Ezra the scholar to get a deeper understanding of the words of The Revelation.
8.14 They found written in The Revelation that God commanded through Moses that the People of Israel are to live in booths during the festival of the seventh month.
8.15 So they published this decree and had it posted in all their cities and in Jerusalem: "Go into the hills and collect olive branches, pine branches, myrtle branches, palm branches, and any other leafy branches to make booths, as it is written."
8.16 So the people went out, brought in branches, and made themselves booths on their roofs, courtyards, the courtyards of The Temple of God, the Water Gate plaza, and the Ephraim Gate plaza.
8.17 The entire congregation that had come back from exile made booths and lived in them. The People of Israel hadn't done this from the time of Joshua son of Nun until that very day - a terrific day! Great joy!
8.18 Ezra read from the Book of The Revelation of God each day, from the first to the last day - they celebrated the feast for seven days. On the eighth day they held a solemn assembly in accordance with the decree.
9.1 Then on the twenty-fourth day of this month, the People of Israel gathered for a fast, wearing burlap and faces smudged with dirt as signs of repentance.
9.2 The Israelites broke off all relations with foreigners, stood up, and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their parents.
9.3 While they stood there in their places, they read from the Book of The Revelation of God, their God, for a quarter of the day. For another quarter of the day they confessed and worshiped their God.
9.4 A group of Levites - Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Kenani - stood on the platform and cried out to God, their God, in a loud voice.
9.5 The Levites Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah said, "On your feet! Bless God, your God, for ever and ever!"  Blessed be your glorious name, exalted above all blessing and praise!
9.6 You're the one, God, you alone; You made the heavens, the heavens of heavens, and all angels; The earth and everything on it, the seas and everything in them; You keep them all alive; heaven's angels worship you!
9.7 You're the one, God, the God who chose Abram And brought him from Ur of the Chaldees and changed his name to Abraham.
9.8 You found his heart to be steady and true to you and signed a covenant with him,  A covenant to give him the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, The Perizzites, Jebusites, and Girgashites,  - to give it to his descendants.  And you kept your word because you are righteous.
9.9 You saw the anguish of our parents in Egypt. You heard their cries at the Red Sea;
9.10 You amazed Pharaoh, his servants, and the people of his land  with wonders and miracle-signs. You knew their bullying arrogance against your people; you made a name for yourself that lasts to this day.
9.11 You split the sea before them; they crossed through and never got their feet wet; You pitched their pursuers into the deep; they sank like a rock in the storm-tossed sea.
9.12 By day you led them with a Pillar of Cloud, and by night with a Pillar of Fire  To show them the way they were to travel.
9.13 You came down onto Mount Sinai, you spoke to them out of heaven; You gave them instructions on how to live well, true teaching, sound rules and commands;
9.14 You introduced them  to your Holy Sabbath; Through your servant Moses you decreed commands, rules, and instruction.
9.15 You gave bread from heaven for their hunger, you sent water from the rock for their thirst. You told them to enter and take the land, which you promised to give them.
9.16 But they, our ancestors, were arrogant; bullheaded, they wouldn't obey your commands.
9.17 They turned a deaf ear, they refused  to remember the miracles you had done for them; They turned stubborn, got it into their heads to return to their Egyptian slavery. And you, a forgiving God, gracious and compassionate, Incredibly patient, with tons of love -  you didn't dump them.
9.18 Yes, even when they cast a sculpted calf  and said, "This is your god Who brought you out of Egypt,"  and continued from bad to worse,
9.19 You in your amazing compassion  didn't walk off and leave them in the desert. The Pillar of Cloud didn't leave them;  daily it continued to show them their route; The Pillar of Fire did the same by night, showed them the right way to go.
9.20 You gave them your good Spirit to teach them to live wisely. You never stinted with your manna, gave them plenty of water to drink.
9.21 You supported them forty years in that desert; they had everything they needed; Their clothes didn't wear out and their feet never blistered.
9.22 You gave them kingdoms and peoples, establishing generous boundaries. They took over the country of Sihon king of Heshbon and the country of Og king of Bashan.
9.23 You multiplied children for them, rivaling the stars in the night skies, And you brought them into the land  that you promised their ancestors  they would get and own.
9.24 Well, they entered all right, they took it and settled in. The Canaanites who lived there you brought to their knees before them. You turned over their land, kings, and peoples  to do with as they pleased.
9.25 They took strong cities and fertile fields, they took over well-furnished houses, Cisterns, vineyards, olive groves, and lush, extensive orchards.  And they ate, grew fat on the fat of the land; they reveled in your bountiful goodness.
9.26 But then they mutinied, rebelled against you, threw out your laws and killed your prophets, The very prophets who tried to get them back on your side -  and then things went from bad to worse.
9.27 You turned them over to their enemies, who made life rough for them. But when they called out for help in their troubles you listened from heaven; And in keeping with your bottomless compassion you gave them saviors: Saviors who saved them from the cruel abuse of their enemies.
9.28 But as soon as they had it easy again they were right back at it - more evil. So you turned away and left them again to their fate, to the enemies who came right back.  They cried out to you again; in your great compassion you heard and helped them again. This went on over and over and over.
9.29 ou warned them to return to your Revelation,  they responded with haughty arrogance: They flouted your commands, spurned your rules  - the very words by which men and women live! They set their jaws in defiance, they turned their backs on you and didn't listen.
9.30 You put up with them year after year  and warned them by your spirit through your prophets;  But when they refused to listen you abandoned them to foreigners.
9.31 Still, because of your great compassion, you didn't make a total end to them. You didn't walk out and leave them for good; yes, you are a God of grace and compassion.
9.32 And now, our God, the great God, God majestic and terrible, loyal in covenant and love, Don't treat lightly the trouble that has come to us, to our kings and princes, our priests and prophets, Our ancestors, and all your people from the time of the Assyrian kings right down to today.
9.33 You are not to blame for all that has come down on us; You did everything right, we did everything wrong.
9.34 None of our kings, princes, priests, or ancestors followed your Revelation; They ignored your commands, dismissed the warnings you gave them.
9.35 Even when they had their own kingdom and were enjoying your generous goodness,  Living in that spacious and fertile land that you spread out before them, They didn't serve you  or turn their backs on the practice of evil.
9.36 And here we are, slaves again today; and here's the land you gave our ancestors So they could eat well and enjoy a good life,  and now look at us - no better than slaves on this land.
9.37 Its wonderful crops go to the kings you put over us because of our sins; They act like they own our bodies  and do whatever they like with our cattle.  We're in deep trouble.
9.38 "Because of all this we are drawing up a binding pledge, a sealed document signed by our princes, our Levites, and our priests."
10.1 The sealed document bore these signatures: Nehemiah the governor, son of Hacaliah,
10.2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
10.3 Pashhur, Amariah, Malkijah,
10.4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
10.5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
10.6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
10.7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
10.8 Maaziah, Bilgai, and Shemaiah.  These were the priests.
10.9 The Levites: Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel,
10.10 and their kinsmen: Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
10.11 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,
10.12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
10.13 Hodiah, Bani, and Beninu.
10.14 The heads of the people: Parosh, Pahath-Moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,
10.15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
10.16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
10.17 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
10.18 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
10.19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
10.20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
10.21 Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
10.22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
10.23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,
10.24 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
10.25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
10.26 Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,
10.27 Malluch, Harim, and Baanah.
10.28 The rest of the people, priests, Levites, security guards, singers, Temple staff, and all who separated themselves from the foreign neighbors to keep The Revelation of God, together with their wives, sons, daughters - everyone old enough to understand
10.29 - all joined their noble kinsmen in a binding oath to follow The Revelation of God given through Moses the servant of God, to keep and carry out all the commandments of God our Master, all his decisions and standards.
10.30 Thus:  We will not marry our daughters to our foreign neighbors nor let our sons marry their daughters.
10.31 When the foreign neighbors bring goods or grain to sell on the Sabbath we won't trade with them - not on the Sabbath or any other holy day.  Every seventh year we will leave the land fallow and cancel all debts.
10.32 We accept the responsibility for paying an annual tax of one-third of a shekel (about an eighth ounce) for providing The Temple of our God with
10.33 read for the Table regular Grain-Offerings regular Whole-Burnt-Offerings offerings for the Sabbaths, New Moons, and appointed   feasts Dedication-Offerings Absolution-Offerings to atone for Israel maintenance of The Temple of our God.
10.34 We - priests, Levites, and the people - have cast lots to see when each of our families will bring wood for burning on the Altar of our God, following the yearly schedule set down in The Revelation.
10.35 We take responsibility for delivering annually to The Temple of God the firstfruits of our crops and our orchards,
10.36 our firstborn sons and cattle, and the firstborn from our herds and flocks for the priests who serve in The Temple of our God - just as it is set down in The Revelation.
10.37 We will bring the best of our grain, of our contributions, of the fruit of every tree, of wine, and of oil to the priests in the storerooms of The Temple of our God.
10.38 We'll see to it that a priest descended from Aaron will supervise the Levites as they collect the tithes and make sure that they take a tenth of the tithes to the treasury in The Temple of our God.
10.39 We'll see to it that the People of Israel and Levites bring the grain, wine, and oil to the storage rooms where the vessels of the Sanctuary are kept and where the priests who serve, the security guards, and the choir meet.  We will not neglect The Temple of our God.
11.1 The leaders of the people were already living in Jerusalem, so the rest of the people drew lots to get one out of ten to move to Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine remained in their towns.
11.2 The people applauded those who voluntarily offered to live in Jerusalem.
11.3 These are the leaders in the province who resided in Jerusalem (some Israelites, priests, Levites, Temple staff, and descendants of Solomon's slaves lived in the towns of Judah on their own property in various towns;
11.4 others from both Judah and Benjamin lived in Jerusalem): From the family of Judah:
11.5 Maaseiah son of Baruch, the son of Col-Hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.
11.6 The descendants of Perez who lived in Jerusalem numbered 468 valiant men.
11.7 From the family of Benjamin:
11.8 and his brothers Gabbai and Sallai: 928 men.
11.9 Joel son of Zicri was their chief and Judah son of Hassenuah was second in command over the city.
11.10 From the priests:
11.11 Seraiah son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, supervisor of The Temple of God,
11.12 along with their associates responsible for work in The Temple: 822 men. Also Adaiah son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malkijah,
11.13 and his associates who were heads of families: 242 men; Amashsai son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
11.14 and his associates, all valiant men: 128 men. Their commander was Zabdiel son of Haggedolim.
11.15 From the Levites:
11.16 Shabbethai and Jozabad, two of the leaders of the Levites who were in charge of the outside work of The Temple of God;
11.17 Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, the director who led in thanksgiving and prayer; Bakbukiah, second among his associates; and Abda son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
11.18 The Levites in the holy city totaled 284.
11.19 From the security guards: Akkub, Talmon, and their associates who kept watch over the gates: 172 men.
11.20 The rest of the Israelites, priests, and Levites were in all the towns of Judah, each on his own family property.
11.21 The Temple staff lived on the hill Ophel. Ziha and Gishpa were responsible for them.
11.22 The chief officer over the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica. Uzzi was one of Asaph's descendants, singers who led worship in The Temple of God.
11.23 The singers got their orders from the king, who drew up their daily schedule.
11.24 Pethahiah son of Meshezabel, a descendant of Zerah son of Judah, represented the people's concerns at the royal court.
11.25 Some of the Judeans lived in the villages near their farms: Kiriath Arba (Hebron) and suburbs Dibon and suburbs Jekabzeel and suburbs
11.26 eshua  Moladah Beth Pelet
11.27 Hazar Shual Beersheba and suburbs
11.28 Ziklag Meconah and suburbs
11.29 En Rimmon  Zorah  Jarmuth
11.30 Zanoah  Adullam and their towns  Lachish and its fields  Azekah and suburbs. They were living all the way from Beersheba to the Valley of Hinnom.
11.31 The Benjaminites from Geba lived in: Micmash Aijah Bethel and its suburbs
11.32 Anathoth Nob and Ananiah
11.33 Hazor Ramah and Gittaim
11.34 Hadid, Zeboim, and Neballat
11.35 Lod and Ono and the Valley of the Craftsmen.
11.36 Also some of the Levitical groups of Judah were assigned to Benjamin.
12.1 These are the priests and Levites who came up with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and with Jeshua:  Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
12.2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
12.3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
12.4 Iddo, Ginnethon, Abijah,
12.5 Mijamin, Moadiah, Bilgah,
12.6 Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah,
12.7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah.  These were the leaders of the priests during the time of Jeshua.
12.8 And the Levites:
12.9 and their brothers Bakbukiah and Unni stood opposite them in the services of worship.
12.10 Jeshua fathered Joiakim, Joiakim fathered Eliashib, Eliashib fathered Joiada,
12.11 Joiada fathered Jonathan,  and Jonathan fathered Jaddua.
12.12 During the time of Joiakim, these were the heads of the priestly families: of the family of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
12.13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
12.14 of Malluch, Jonathan;  of Shecaniah, Joseph;
12.15 of Harim, Adna;  of Meremoth, Helkai;
12.16 of Iddo, Zechariah;  of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
12.17 of Abijah, Zicri; of Miniamin and Moadiah, Piltai;
12.18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
12.19 of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
12.20 of Sallu, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
12.21 of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; and of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
12.22 During the time of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, the Levites were registered as heads of families. During the reign of Darius the Persian, the priests were registered.
12.23 The Levites who were heads of families were registered in the Book of the Chronicles until the time of Johanan son of Eliashib. These were:
12.24 Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua son of Kadmiel. Their brothers stood opposite them to give praise and thanksgiving, one side responding to the other, as had been directed by David the man of God.
12.25 The security guards included:  Mattaniah, Bakbukiah,  Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub.
12.26 They lived during the time of Joiakim son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, the time of Nehemiah the governor and of Ezra the priest and scholar. Dedication of the Wall
12.27 When it came time for the dedication of the wall, they tracked down and brought in the Levites from all their homes in Jerusalem to carry out the dedication exuberantly: thanksgiving hymns, songs, cymbals, harps, and lutes.
12.28 The singers assembled from all around Jerusalem, from the villages of the Netophathites,
12.29 from Beth Gilgal, from the farms at Geba and Azmaveth - the singers had built villages for themselves all around Jerusalem.
12.30 The priests and Levites ceremonially purified themselves; then they did the same for the people, the gates, and the wall.
12.31 I had the leaders of Judah come up on the wall, and I appointed two large choirs. One proceeded on the wall to the right toward the Dung Gate.
12.32 Hashaiah and half the leaders of Judah followed them,
12.33 including Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam,
12.34 Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, and Jeremiah.
12.35 Some of the young priests had trumpets. Next, playing the musical instruments of David the man of God, came Zechariah son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph,
12.36 and his brothers Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani. Ezra the scholar led them.
12.37 At the Fountain Gate they went straight ahead, up the steps of the City of David using the wall stairway above the house of David to the Water Gate on the east.
12.38 The other choir proceeded to the left. I and half of the people followed them on the wall from the Tower of Furnaces to the Broad Wall,
12.39 over the Ephraim Gate, the Jeshanah Gate, the Fish Gate, the Tower of Hananel, and the Tower of the Hundred as far as the Sheep Gate, stopping at the Prison Gate.
12.40 The two choirs then took their places in The Temple of God. I was there with half of the officials,
12.41 along with the priests Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah with their trumpets.
12.42 Also Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malkijah, Elam, and Ezer. The singers, directed by Jezrahiah, made the rafters ring.
12.43 That day they offered great sacrifices, an exuberant celebration because God had filled them with great joy. The women and children raised their happy voices with all the rest. Jerusalem's jubilation was heard far and wide.
12.44 That same day men were appointed to be responsible for the storerooms for the offerings, the firstfruits, and the tithes. They saw to it that the portion directed by The Revelation for the priests and Levites was brought in from the farms connected to the towns. Judah was so appreciative of the priests and Levites and their service;
12.45 they, along with the singers and security guards, had done everything so well, conducted the worship of their God and the ritual of ceremonial cleansing in a way that would have made David and his son Solomon proud.
12.46 That's the way it was done in the olden days, the days of David and Asaph, when they had choir directors for singing songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
12.47 During the time of Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, all Israel contributed the daily allowances for the singers and security guards. They also set aside what was dedicated to the Levites, and the Levites did the same for the Aaronites.
13.1 Also on that same day there was a reading from the Book of Moses in the hearing of the people. It was found written there that no Ammonite or Moabite was permitted to enter the congregation of God,
13.2 because they hadn't welcomed the People of Israel with food and drink; they even hired Balaam to work against them by cursing them, but our God turned the curse into a blessing.
13.3 When they heard the reading of The Revelation, they excluded all foreigners from Israel.
13.4 Some time before this, Eliashib the priest had been put in charge of the storerooms of The Temple of God. He was close to Tobiah
13.5 and had made available to him a large storeroom that had been used to store Grain-Offerings, incense, worship vessels, and the tithes of grain, wine, and oil for the Levites, singers, and security guards, and the offerings for the priests.
13.6 When this was going on I wasn't there in Jerusalem; in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon, I had traveled back to the king. But later I asked for his permission to leave again.
13.7 I arrived in Jerusalem and learned of the wrong that Eliashib had done in turning over to him a room in the courts of The Temple of God.
13.8 I was angry, really angry, and threw everything in the room out into the street, all of Tobiah's stuff.
13.9 Then I ordered that they ceremonially cleanse the room. Only then did I put back the worship vessels of The Temple of God, along with the Grain-Offerings and the incense.
13.10 And then I learned that the Levites hadn't been given their regular food allotments. So the Levites and singers who led the services of worship had all left and gone back to their farms.
13.11 I called the officials on the carpet, "Why has The Temple of God been abandoned?" I got everyone back again and put them back on their jobs
13.12 so that all Judah was again bringing in the tithe of grain, wine, and oil to the storerooms.
13.13 I put Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, and a Levite named Pedaiah in charge of the storerooms. I made Hanan son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah, their right-hand man. These men had a reputation for honesty and hard work. They were responsible for distributing the rations to their brothers.
13.14 Remember me, O my God, for this. Don't ever forget the devoted work I have done for The Temple of God and its worship.
13.15 During those days, while back in Judah, I also noticed that people treaded wine presses, brought in sacks of grain, and loaded up their donkeys on the Sabbath. They brought wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of stuff to sell on the Sabbath. So I spoke up and warned them about selling food on that day.
13.16 Tyrians living there brought in fish and whatever else, selling it to Judeans - in Jerusalem, mind you! - on the Sabbath.
13.17 I confronted the leaders of Judah: "What's going on here? This evil! Profaning the Sabbath!
13.18 Isn't this exactly what your ancestors did? And because of it didn't God bring down on us and this city all this misery? And here you are adding to it - accumulating more wrath on Jerusalem by profaning the Sabbath."
13.19 As the gates of Jerusalem were darkened by the shadows of the approaching Sabbath, I ordered the doors shut and not to be opened until the Sabbath was over. I placed some of my servants at the gates to make sure that nothing to be sold would get in on the Sabbath day.
13.20 Traders and dealers in various goods camped outside the gates once or twice.
13.21 But I took them to task. I said, "You have no business camping out here by the wall. If I find you here again, I'll use force to drive you off."  And that did it; they didn't come back on the Sabbath.
13.22 Then I directed the Levites to ceremonially cleanse themselves and take over as guards at the gates to keep the sanctity of the Sabbath day.  Remember me also for this, my God. Treat me with mercy according to your great and steadfast love.
13.23 Also in those days I saw Jews who had married women from Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab.
13.24 Half the children couldn't even speak the language of Judah; all they knew was the language of Ashdod or some other tongue.
13.25 So I took those men to task, gave them a piece of my mind, even slapped some of them and jerked them by the hair. I made them swear to God: "Don't marry your daughters to their sons; and don't let their daughters marry your sons - and don't you yourselves marry them!
13.26 Didn't Solomon the king of Israel sin because of women just like these? Even though there was no king quite like him, and God loved him and made him king over all Israel, foreign women were his downfall.
13.27 Do you call this obedience - engaging in this extensive evil, showing yourselves faithless to God by marrying foreign wives?"
13.28 One of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was a son-in-law of Sanballat the Horonite; I drove him out of my presence.
13.29 Remember them, O my God, how they defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priests and Levites.
13.30 All in all I cleansed them from everything foreign. I organized the orders of service for the priests and Levites so that each man knew his job.
13.31 I arranged for a regular supply of altar wood at the appointed times and for the firstfruits.  Remember me, O my God, for good.
