1.1 Adam, Seth, Enos,
1.2 and Cainan, Maleleel, Jared,
1.3 Enoch, Mathusala, Lamech,
1.4 Noe: the sons of Noe, Sem, Cham, Japheth.
1.5 The sons of Japheth, Gamer, Magog, Madaim, Jovan, Helisa, Thobel, Mosoch, and Thiras.
1.6 And the sons of Gamer, Aschanaz, and Riphath, and Thorgama.
1.7 And the sons of Jovan, Helisa, and Tharsis, the Citians, and Rhodians.
1.8 And the sons of Cham, Chus, and Mesraim, Phud and Chanaan.
1.9 And the sons of Chus, Saba, and Evila, and Sabatha, and Regma, and Sebethaca: and the sons of Regma, Saba, and Dadan.
1.10 And Chus begot Nebrod: he began to be a mighty hunter on the earth.
1.11 /
1.12 /
1.13 /
1.14 /
1.15 /
1.16 /
1.17 The sons of Sem, Ælam, and Assur,
1.18 and Arphaxad, Sala,
1.19 /
1.20 /
1.21 /
1.22 /
1.23 /
1.24 /
1.25 Eber, Pheleg, Ragan,
1.26 Seruch, Nachor, Tharrha,
1.27 Abraam.
1.28 And the sons of Abraam, Isaac, and Ismael.
1.29 And these are their generations: the first-born of Ismael, Nabaeoth, and Kedar, Nabdeel, Massam,
1.30 Masma, Iduma, Masse, Chondan, Thaeman,
1.31 Jettur, Naphes, Kedma: these are the sons of Ismael.
1.32 And the sons of Chettura Abraam’s concubine:—and she bore him Zembram, Jexan, Madiam, Madam, Sobac, Soe: and the sons of Jexan; Daedan, and Sabai;
1.33 and the sons of Madiam; Gephar, and Opher, and Enoch, and Abida, and Eldada; all these were the sons of Chettura.
1.34 And Abraam begot Isaac: and the sons of Isaac were Jacob, and Esau.
1.35 The sons of Esau, Eliphaz, and Raguel, and Jeul, and Jeglom, and Core.
1.36 The sons of Eliphaz: Thaeman, and Omar, Sophar, and Gootham, and Kenez, and Thamna, and Amalec.
1.37 And the sons of Raguel, Naches, Zare, Some, and Moze.
1.38 The sons of Seir, Lotan, Sobal, Sebegon, Ana, Deson, Osar, and Disan.
1.39 And the sons of Lotan, Chorri, and Æman; and the sister of Lotan was Thamna.
1.40 The sons of Sobal; Alon, Machanath, Taebel, Sophi, and Onan: and the sons of Sebegon; Æth, and Sonan.
1.41 The sons of Sonan, Daeson: and the sons of Daeson; Emeron, and Asebon, and Jethram, and Charran.
1.42 And the sons of Hosar, Balaam, and Zucam, and Acan: the sons of Disan, Os, and Aran.
1.43 And these are their kings, Balac the son of Beor; and the name of his city was Dennaba.
1.44 And Balac died, and Jobab the son of Zara of Bosorrha reigned in his stead.
1.45 And Jobab died, and Asom of the land of the Thaemanites reigned in his stead.
1.46 And Asom died, and Adad the son of Barad reigned in his stead, who smote Madiam in the plain of Moab: and the name of his city was Gethaim.
1.47 And Adad died, and Sebla of Masecca reigned in his stead.
1.48 And Sebla died, and Saul of Rhoboth by the river reigned in his stead.
1.49 And Saul died, and Balaennor son of Achobor reigned in his stead.
1.50 And Balaennor died, and Adad son of Barad reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Phogor.
1.51 The princes of Edom: prince Thamna, prince Golada, prince Jether,
1.52 prince Elibamas, prince Elas, prince Phinon,
1.53 prince Kenez, prince Thaeman, prince Babsar, prince Magediel,
1.54 prince Zaphoin. These are the princes of Edom.
2.1 These are the names of the sons of Israel;
2.2 Ruben, Symeon, Levi, Juda, Issachar, Zabulon, Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Nephthali, Gad, Aser.
2.3 The sons of Juda; Er, Aunan, Selom. These three were born to him of the daughter of Sava the Chananitish woman: and Er, the first-born of Juda, was wicked before the Lord, and he slew him.
2.4 And Thamar his daughter-in-law bore to him Phares, and Zara: all the sons of Juda were five.
2.5 The sons of Phares, Esrom, and Jemuel.
2.6 And the sons of Zara, Zambri, and Ætham, and Æmuan, and Calchal, and Darad, in all five.
2.7 And the sons of Charmi; Achar the troubler of Israel, who was disobedient in the accursed thing.
2.8 And the sons of Ætham; Azarias,
2.9 and the sons of Esrom who were born to him; Jerameel, and Aram, and Chaleb.
2.10 And Aram begot Aminadab, and Aminadab begot Naasson, chief of the house of Juda.
2.11 And Naasson begot Salmon, and Salmon begot Booz,
2.12 and Booz begot Obed, and Obed begot Jessae.
2.13 And Jessae begot his first-born Eliab, Aminadab was the second, Samaa the third,
2.14 Nathanael the fourth, Zabdai the fifth,
2.15 Asam the sixth, David the seventh.
2.16 And their sister was Saruia, and another Abigaia: and the sons of Saruia were Abisa, and Joab, and Asael, three.
2.17 And Abigaia bore Amessab: and the father of Amessab was Jothor the Ismaelite.
2.18 And Chaleb the son of Esrom took Gazuba to wife, and Jerioth: and these were her sons; Jasar, and Subab, and Ardon.
2.19 And Gazuba died; and Chaleb took to himself Ephrath, and she bore to him Or.
2.20 And Or begot Uri, and Uri begot Beseleel.
2.21 And after this Esron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Galaad, and he took her when he was sixty-five years old; and she bore him Seruch.
2.22 And Seruch begot Jair, and he had twenty-three cities in Galaad.
2.23 And he took Gedsur and Aram, the towns of Jair from them; with Canath and its towns, sixty cities. All these belonged to the sons of Machir the father of Galaad.
2.24 And after the death of Esron, Chaleb came to Ephratha; and the wife of Esron was Abia; and she bore him Ascho the father of Thecoe.
2.25 And the sons of Jerameel the first-born of Esron were, the first-born Ram, and Banaa, and Aram, and Asan his brother.
2.26 And Jerameel had another wife, and her name was Atara: she is the mother of Ozom.
2.27 And the sons of Ram the first-born of Jerameel were Maas, and Jamin, and Acor.
2.28 And the sons of Ozom were, Samai, and Jadae: and the sons of Samai; Nadab, and Abisur.
2.29 And the name of the wife of Abisur was Abichaia, and she bore him Achabar, and Moel.
2.30 And the sons of Nadab; Salad and Apphain; and Salad died without children.
2.31 And the sons of Apphain, Isemiel; and the sons of Isemiel, Sosan; and the sons of Sosan, Dadai.
2.32 And the sons of Dadai, Achisamas, Jether, Jonathan: and Jether died childless.
2.33 And the sons of Jonathan; Phaleth, and Hozam. These were the sons of Jerameel.
2.34 And Sosan had no sons, but daughters. And Sosan had an Egyptian servant, and his name was Jochel.
2.35 And Sosan gave his daughter to Jochel his servant to wife; and she bore him Ethi.
2.36 And Ethi begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabed,
2.37 and Zabed begot Aphamel, and Aphamel begot Obed.
2.38 And Obed begot Jeu, and Jeu begot Azarias.
2.39 And Azarias begot Chelles, and Chelles begot Eleasa,
2.40 and Eleasa begot Sosomai, and Sosomai begot Salum,
2.41 and Salum begot Jechemias, and Jechemias begot Elisama, and Elisama begot Ismael.
2.42 And the sons of Chaleb the brother of Jerameel were, Marisa his first-born, he is the father of Ziph:—and the sons of Marisa the father of Chebron.
2.43 And the sons of Chebron; Core, and Thapphus, and Recom, and Samaa.
2.44 And Samaa begot Raem the father of Jeclan: and Jeclan begot Samai.
2.45 And his son was Maon: and Maon is the father of Baethsur.
2.46 And Gaepha the concubine of Chaleb bore Aram, and Mosa, and Gezue.
2.47 And the sons of Addai were Ragem, and Joatham, and Sogar, and Phalec, and Gaepha, and Sagae.
2.48 And Chaleb’s concubine Mocha bore Saber, and Tharam.
2.49 She bore also Sagae the father of Madmena, and Sau the father of Machabena, and the father of Gaebal: and the daughter of Chaleb was Ascha.
2.50 These were the sons of Chaleb: the sons of Or the first-born of Ephratha; Sobal the father of Cariathiarim,
2.51 Salomon the father of Baetha, Lammon the father of Baethalaem, and Arim the father of Bethgedor.
2.52 And the sons of Sobal the father of Cariathiarim were Araa, and Æsi, and Ammanith,
2.53 and Umasphae, cities of Jair; Æthalim, and Miphithim, and Hesamathim, and Hemasaraim; from these went forth the Sarathaeans, and the sons of Esthaam.
2.54 The sons of Salomon; Baethalaem, the Netophathite, Ataroth of the house of Joab, and half of the family of Malathi, Esari.
2.55 The families of the scribes dwelling in Jabis; Thargathiim, and Samathiim, and Sochathim, these are the Kinaeans that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.
3.1 Now these were the sons of David that were born to him in Chebron; the first-born Amnon, born of Achinaam the Jezraelitess; the second Damniel, of Abigaia the Carmelitess.
3.2 The third, Abessalom, the son of Mocha the daughter of Tholmai king of Gedsur; the fourth, Adonia the son of Aggith.
3.3 The fifth, Saphatia, the son of Abital; the sixth, Jethraam, born of Agla his wife.
3.4 Six were born to him in Chebron; and he reigned there seven years and six months: and he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
3.5 And these were born to him in Jerusalem; Samaa, Sobab, Nathan, and Solomon; four of Bersabee the daughter of Amiel:
3.6 and Ebaar, and Elisa, and Eliphaleth,
3.7 and Nagai, and Naphec, and Japhie,
3.8 and Helisama, and Eliada, and Eliphala, nine.
3.9 All these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines, and there was also Themar their sister.
3.10 The sons of Solomon; Roboam, Abia his son, Asa his son, Josaphat his son,
3.11 Joram his son, Ochozias his son, Joas his son,
3.12 Amasias his son, Azarias his son, Joathan his son,
3.13 Achaz his son, Ezekias his son, Manasses his son,
3.14 Amon his son, Josia his son.
3.15 And the sons of Josia; the first-born Joanan, the second Joakim, the third Sedekias, the fourth Salum.
3.16 And the sons of Joakim; Jechonias his son, Sedekias his son.
3.17 And the sons of Jechonias; Asir, Salathiel his son,
3.18 Melchiram, and Phadaias, and Sanesar, and Jekimia, and Hosamath, and Nabadias.
3.19 And the sons of Phadaias; Zorobabel, and Semei: and the sons of Zorobabel; Mosollam, and Anania, and Salomethi was their sister.
3.20 And Asube, and Ool, and Barachia, and Asadia, and Asobed, five.
3.21 And the sons of Anania, Phalettia, and Jesias his son, Raphal his son, Orna his son, Abdia his son, Sechenias his son.
3.22 And the son of Sechenias; Samaia: and the sons of Samaia; Chattus, and Joel, and Berri and Noadia, and Saphath, six.
3.23 And the sons of Noadia: Elithenan, and Ezekia, and Ezricam, three.
3.24 And the sons of Elithenan; Odolia, and Heliasebon, and Phadaia, and Akub, and Joanan, and Dalaaia, and Anan, seven.
4.1 And the sons of Juda; Phares, Esrom, and Charmi, and Or, Subal,
4.2 and Rada his son; and Subal begot Jeth; and Jeth begot Achimai, and Laad: these are the generations of the Arathites.
4.3 And these are the sons of Ætam; Jezrael and Jesman, and Jebdas: and their sister’s name was Eselebbon.
4.4 And Phanuel the father of Gedor, and Jazer the father of Osan: these are the sons of Or, the first-born of Ephratha, the father of Baethalaen.
4.5 And Asur the father of Thecoe had two wives, Aoda and Thoada.
4.6 And Aoda bore to him Ochaia, and Ephal, and Thaeman, and Aasther: all these were the sons of Aoda.
4.7 And the sons of Thoada; Sereth, and Saar, and Esthanam.
4.8 And Coe begot Enob, and Sabatha, and the progeny of the brother of Rechab, the son of Jarin.
4.9 And Igabes was more famous than his brethren; and his mother called his name Igabes, saying, I have born as a sorrowful one.
4.10 And Igabes called on the God of Israel, saying, O that thou wouldest indeed bless me, and enlarge my coasts, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest make me know that thou wilt not grieve me! And God granted him all that he asked.
4.11 And Chaleb the father of Ascha begot Machir; he was the father of Assathon.
4.12 He begot Bathraias, and Bessee, and Thaeman the founder of the city of Naas the brother of Eselom the Kenezite: these were the men of Rechab.
4.13 And the sons of Kenez; Gothoniel, and Saraia: and the sons of Gothoniel; Athath.
4.14 And Manathi begot Gophera: and Saraia begot Jobab, the father of Ageaddair, for they were artificers.
4.15 And the sons of Chaleb the son of Jephonne; Er, Ada, and Noom: and the sons of Ada, Kenez.
4.16 And the sons of Aleel, Zib, and Zepha, and Thiria, and Eserel.
4.17 And the sons of Esri; Jether, Morad, and Apher, and Jamon: and Jether begot Maron, and Semei, and Jesba the father of Esthaemon.
4.18 And his wife, that is Adia, bore Jared the father of Gedor, and Aber the father of Sochon, and Chetiel the father of Zamon: and these are the sons of Betthia the daughter of Pharao, whom Mored took.
4.19 And the sons of the wife of Iduia the sister of Nachaim the father of Keila; Garmi, and Esthaemon the Nochathite.
4.20 And the sons of Semon; Amnon, and Ana the son of Phana, and Inon: and the sons of Sei, Zoan, and the sons of Zoab.
4.21 The sons of Selom the son of Juda; Er the father of Lechab, and Laada the father of Marisa, and the offspring of the family of Ephrathabac belonging to the house of Esoba.
4.22 And Joakim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joas, and Saraph, who dwelt in Moab, and he changed their names to Abederin and Athukiim.
4.23 These are the potters who dwelt in Ataim and Gadira with the king: they grew strong in his kingdom, and dwelt there.
4.24 The sons of Semeon; Namuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zares, Saul:
4.25 Salem his son, Mabasam his son, Masma his son:
4.26 Amuel his son, Sabud his son, Zacchur his son, Semei his son.
4.27 Semei had sixteen sons, and six daughters; and his brethren had not many sons, neither did all their families multiply as the sons of Juda.
4.28 And they dwelt in Bersabee, and Molada, and in Esersual,
4.29 and in Balaa, and in Æsem, and in Tholad,
4.30 and in Bathuel, and in Herma, and in Sikelag,
4.31 and in Baethmarimoth, and Hemisuseosin, and the house of Baruseorim: these were their cities until the time of king David.
4.32 And their villages were Ætan, and En, Remnon, and Thocca, and Æsar, five cities.
4.33 And all their villages were round about these cities, as far as Baal: this was their possession, and their distribution.
4.34 And Mosobab, and Jemoloch, and Josia the son of Amasia;
4.35 and Joel, and Jeu the son of Asabia, the son of Sarau, the son of Asiel;
4.36 and Elionai, and Jocaba, and Jasuia, and Asaia, and Jediel, and Ismael, and Banaias;
4.37 and Zuza the son of Saphai, the son of Alon, the son of Jedia, the son of Semri, the son of Samaias.
4.38 These went by the names of princes in their families, and they increased abundantly in their fathers’ households.
4.39 And they went till they came to Gerara, to the east of Gai, to seek pasture for their cattle.
4.40 And they found abundant and good pastures, and the land before them was wide, and there was peace and quietness; for there were some of the children of Cham who dwelt there before.
4.41 And these who are written by name came in the days of Ezekias king of Juda, and they smote the people’s houses, and the Minaeans whom they found there, and utterly destroyed them until this day: and they dwelt in their place, because there was pasture there for their cattle.
4.42 And some of them, even of the sons of Symeon, went to mount Seir, even five hundred men; and Phalaettia, and Noadia, and Raphaia, and Oziel, sons of Jesi, were their rulers.
4.43 And they smote the remnant that were left of Amalec, until this day.
5.1 And the sons of Ruben the first-born of Israel (for he was the first-born; but because of his going up to his father’s couch, his father gave his blessing to his son Joseph, even the son of Israel; and he was not reckoned as first-born;
5.2 for Judas was very mighty even among his brethren, and one was to be a ruler out of him: but the blessing was Joseph’s).
5.3 The sons of Ruben the first-born of Israel; Enoch, and Phallus, Asrom, and Charmi.
5.4 The sons of Joel; Semei, and Banaia his son: and the sons of Gug the son of Semei.
5.5 His son was Micha, his son Recha, his son Joel,
5.6 his son Beel, whom Thagla-phallasar king of Assyria carried away captive: he is the chief of the Rubenites.
5.7 And his brethren in his family, in their distribution according to their generations; the chief, Joel, and Zacharia.
5.8 And Balec the son of Azuz, the son of Sama, the son of Joel: he dwelt in Aroer, and even to Naban, and Beelmasson.
5.9 And he dwelt eastward to the borders of the wilderness, from the river Euphrates: for they had much cattle in the land of Galaad.
5.10 And in the days of Saul they made war upon the sojourners in the land; and they fell into their hands, all of them dwelling in their tents eastward of Galaad.
5.11 The sons of Gad dwelt over against them in the land of Basan even to Sela.
5.12 Joel the first-born, and Sapham the second, and Janin the scribe in Basan.
5.13 And their brethren according to the houses of their fathers; Michael, Mosollam, and Sebee, and Joree, and Joachan, and Zue, and Obed, seven.
5.14 These are the sons of Abichaia the son of Uri, the son of Idai, the son of Galaad, the son of Michael, the son of Jesai, the son of Jeddai, the son of Buz,
5.15 who was the brother of the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, he was chief of the house of their families.
5.16 They dwelt in Galaad, in Basan, and in their villages, and in all the country round about Saron to the border.
5.17 The enumeration of them all took place in the days of Joatham king of Juda, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
5.18 The sons of Ruben and Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasse, of mighty men, bearing shields and sword, and bending the bow, and skilled in war, were forty and four thousand and seven hundred and sixty, going forth to battle.
5.19 And they made war with the Agarenes, and Itureans, and Naphiseans, and Nadabeans,
5.20 and they prevailed against them: and the Agaraeans were given into their hands, they and all their tents: for they cried to God in the battle, and he hearkened to them, because they trusted on him.
5.21 And they took captive their store; five thousand camels, and two hundred and fifty thousand sheep, two thousand asses, and a hundred thousand men.
5.22 For many fell slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their place until the captivity.
5.23 And the half-tribe of Manasse dwelt from Basan to Baal, Ermon, and Sanir, and to the mount Aermon: and they increased in Libanus.
5.24 And these were the heads of the houses of their families; Opher, and Sei, and Eliel, and Jeremia, and Oduia, and Jediel, mighty men of valour, men of renown, heads of the houses of their families.
5.25 But they rebelled against the God of their fathers, and went a-whoring after the gods of the nations of the land, whom God cast out from before them.
5.26 And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Phaloch king of Assyria, and the spirit of Thagla-phallasar king of Assyria, and carried away Ruben and Gaddi, and the half-tribe of Manasse, and brought them to Chaach, and Chabor, and to the river Gozan, until this day.
6.1 The sons of Levi: Gedson, Caath, and Merari.
6.2 And the sons of Caath; Ambram, and Issaar, Chebron, and Oziel.
6.3 And the sons of Ambram; Aaron, and Moses, and Mariam: and the sons of Aaron; Nadab, and Abiud, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
6.4 Eleazar begot Phinees, Phinees begot Abisu;
6.5 Abisu begot Bokki, and Bokki begot Ozi;
6.6 Ozi begot Zaraia, Zaraia begot Mariel;
6.7 and Mariel begot Amaria, and Amaria begot Achitob;
6.8 and Achitob begot Sadoc, and Sadoc begot Achimaas;
6.9 and Achimaas begot Azarias, and Azarias begot Joanan;
6.10 and Joanan begot Azarias: he ministered as priest in the house which Solomon built in Jerusalem.
6.11 And Azarias begot Amaria, and Amaria begot Achitob;
6.12 and Achitob begot Sadoc, and Sadoc begot Salom;
6.13 and Salom begot Chelcias, and Chelcias begot Azarias;
6.14 and Azarias begot Saraia, and Saraias begot Josadac.
6.15 And Josadac went into captivity with Juda and Jerusalem under Nabuchodonosor.
6.16 The sons of Levi: Gedson, Caath, and Merari.
6.17 And these are the names of the sons of Gedson; Lobeni, and Semei.
6.18 The sons of Caath; Ambram, and Issaar, Chebron, and Oziel.
6.19 The sons of Merari; Mooli and Musi: and these are the families of Levi, according to their families.
6.20 To Gedson—to Lobeni his son—were born Jeth his son, Zammath his son,
6.21 Joab his son, Addi his son, Zara his son, Jethri his son.
6.22 The sons of Caath; Aminadab his son, Core his son, Aser his son;
6.23 Helcana his son, Abisaph his son, Aser his son:
6.24 Thaath his son, Uriel his son, Ozia his son, Saul his son.
6.25 And the sons of Helcana; Amessi, and Achimoth.
6.26 Helcana his son, Suphi his son, Cainaath his son;
6.27 Eliab his son, Jeroboam his son, Helcana his son.
6.28 The sons of Samuel; the first-born Sani, and Abia.
6.29 The sons of Merari; Mooli, Lobeni his son, Semei his son, Oza his son;
6.30 Samaa his son, Angia his son, Asaias his son.
6.31 And these were the men whom David set over the service of the singers in the house of the Lord when the ark was at rest.
6.32 And they ministered in front of the tabernacle of witness playing on instruments, until Solomon built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem; and they stood according to their order for their services.
6.33 And these were the men that stood, and their sons, of the sons of Caath: Æman the psalm singer, son of Joel, the son of Samuel,
6.34 the son of Helcana, the son of Jeroboam, the son of Eliel, the son of Thoas,
6.35 the son of Suph, the son of Helcana, the son of Maath, the son of Amathi,
6.36 the son of Helcana, the son of Joel, the son of Azarias, the son of Japhanias,
6.37 the son of Thaath, the son of Aser, the son of Abiasaph, the son of Core,
6.38 the son of Isaar, the son of Caath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.
6.39 And his brother Asaph, who stood at his right hand; Asaph the son of Barachias, the son of Samaa,
6.40 the son of Michael, the son of Baasia, the son of Melchia,
6.41 the son of Athani, the son of Zaarai,
6.42 the son of Adai, the son of Ætham, the son of Zammam, the son of Semei,
6.43 the son of Jeeth, the son of Gedson, the son of Levi.
6.44 And the sons of Merari their brethren on the left hand: Ætham the son of Kisa, the son of Abai, the son of Maloch,
6.45 the son of Asebi,
6.46 the son of Amessias, the son of Bani, the son of Semer,
6.47 the son of Mooli, the son of Musi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.
6.48 And their brethren according to the houses of their fathers, were the Levites who were appointed to all the work of ministration of the tabernacle of the house of God.
6.49 And Aaron and his sons were to burn incense on the altar of whole-burnt-offerings, and on the altar of incense, for all the ministry in the holy of holies, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all things that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded.
6.50 And these are the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinees his son, Abisu his son,
6.51 Bokki his son, Ozi his son, Saraia his son,
6.52 Mariel his son, Amaria his son, Achitob his son,
6.53 Sadoc his son, Achimaas his son.
6.54 And these are their residences in their villages, in their coasts, to the sons of Aaron, to their family the Caathites: for they had the lot.
6.55 And they gave them Chebron in the land of Juda, and its suburbs round about it.
6.56 But the fields of the city, and its villages, they gave to Chaleb the son of Jephonne.
6.57 And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge, even Chebron, and Lobna and her suburbs round about, and Selna and her suburbs, and Esthamo and her suburbs,
6.58 and Jethar and her suburbs, and Dabir and her suburbs,
6.59 and Asan and her suburbs, and Baethsamys and her suburbs:
6.60 and of the tribe of Benjamin Gabai and her suburbs, and Galemath and her suburbs, and Anathoth and her suburbs: all their cities were thirteen cities according to their families.
6.61 And to the sons of Caath that were left of their families, there were given out of the tribe, namely, out of the half-tribe of Manasse, by lot, ten cities.
6.62 And to the sons of Gedson according to their families there were given thirteen cities of the tribe of Issachar, of the tribe of Aser, of the tribe of Nephthali, of the tribe of Manasse in Basan.
6.63 And to the sons of Merari according to their families there were given, by lot, twelve cities of the tribe of Ruben, of the tribe of Gad, and of the tribe of Zabulon.
6.64 So the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities and their suburbs.
6.65 And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Juda, and out of the tribe of the children of Symeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities which they call by name.
6.66 And to the members of the families of the sons of Caath there were also given the cities of their borders out of the tribe of Ephraim.
6.67 And they gave them the cities of refuge, Sychem and her suburbs in mount Ephraim, and Gazer and her suburbs,
6.68 and Jecmaan and her suburbs, and Baethoron and her suburbs,
6.69 and Ælon and her suburbs, and Gethremmon and her suburbs:
6.70 and of the half-tribe of Manasse Anar and her suburbs, and Jemblaan and her suburbs, to the sons of Caath that were left, according to each several family.
6.71 To the sons of Gedson from the families of the half-tribe of Manasse they gave Golan of Basan and her suburbs, and Aseroth and her suburbs.
6.72 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kedes and her suburbs, and Deberi and her suburbs, and Dabor and her suburbs,
6.73 and Ramoth, and Ænan and her suburbs.
6.74 And of the tribe of Aser; Maasal and her suburbs, and Abdon and her suburbs,
6.75 and Acac and her suburbs, and Roob and her suburbs.
6.76 And of the tribe of Nephthali; Kedes in Galilee and her suburbs, and Chamoth and her suburbs, and Kariathaim and her suburbs.
6.77 To the sons of Merari that were left, they gave out of the tribe of Zabulon Remmon and her suburbs, and Thabor and her suburbs:
6.78 out of the country beyond Jordan; Jericho westward of Jordan: out of the tribe of Ruben; Bosor in the wilderness and her suburbs, and Jasa and her suburbs,
6.79 and Kadmoth and her suburbs, and Maephla and her suburbs.
6.80 Out of the tribe of Gad; Rammoth Galaad and her suburbs, and Maanaim and her suburbs,
6.81 and Esebon and her suburbs, and Jazer and her suburbs.
7.1 And as to the sons of Issachar, they were Thola, and Phua, and Jasub, and Semeron, four.
7.2 And the sons of Thola; Ozi, Raphaia, and Jeriel, and Jamai, and Jemasan, and Samuel, chiefs of their fathers’ houses belonging to Thola, men of might according to their generations; their number in the days of David was twenty and two thousand and six hundred.
7.3 And the sons of Ozi; Jezraia: and the sons of Jezraia; Michael, Abdiu, and Joel, and Jesia, five, all rulers.
7.4 And with them, according to their generations, according to the houses of their families, were men mighty to set armies in array for war, thirty and six thousand, for they had multiplied their wives and children.
7.5 And their brethren among all the families of Issachar, also mighty men, were eighty-seven thousand—this was the number of them all.
7.6 The sons of Benjamin; Bale, and Bachir, and Jediel, three.
7.7 And the sons of Bale; Esebon, and Ozi, and Oziel, and Jerimuth, and Uri, five; heads of houses of families, mighty men; and their number was twenty and two thousand and thirty-four.
7.8 And the sons of Bachir; Zemira, and Joas, and Eliezer, and Elithenan, and Amaria, and Jerimuth, and Abiud, and Anathoth, and Eleemeth: all these were the sons of Bachir.
7.9 And their number according to their generations, (they were chiefs of their fathers’ houses, men of might), was twenty thousand and two hundred.
7.10 And the sons of Jediel; Balaan: and the sons of Balaan; Jaus, and Benjamin, and Aoth, and Chanana, and Zaethan, and Tharsi, and Achisaar.
7.11 All these were the sons of Jediel, chiefs of their families, men of might, seventeen thousand and two hundred, going forth to war with might.
7.12 And Sapphin, and Apphin, and the sons of Or, Asom, whose son was Aor.
7.13 The sons of Nephthali; Jasiel, Goni, and Aser, and Sellum, his sons, Balam his son.
7.14 The sons of Manasse; Esriel, whom his Syrian concubine bore; and she bore to him also Machir the father of Galaad.
7.15 And Machir took a wife for Apphin and Sapphin, and his sister’s name was Moocha; and the name of the second son was Sapphaad; and to Sapphaad were born daughters.
7.16 And Moocha the wife of Machir bore a son, and called his name Phares; and his brother’s name was Surus; his sons were Ulam, and Rocom.
7.17 And the sons of Ulam; Badam. These were the sons of Galaad, the son of Machir, the son of Manasse.
7.18 And his sister Malecheth bore Isud, and Abiezer, and Maela.
7.19 And the sons of Semira were, Aim, and Sychem, and Lakim, and Anian.
7.20 And the sons of Ephraim; Sothalath, and Barad his son, and Thaath his son, Elada his son, Saath his son,
7.21 and Zabad his son, Sothele his son, and Azer, and Elead: and the men of Geth who were born in the land slew them, because they went down to take their cattle.
7.22 And their father Ephraim mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him.
7.23 And he went in to his wife, and she conceived, and bore a son, and he called his name Beria, because, said he, he was afflicted in my house.
7.24 And his daughter was Saraa, and he was among them that were left, and he built Baethoron the upper and the lower. And the descendants of Ozan were Seera,
7.25 and Raphe his son, Saraph and Thalees his sons, Thaen his son.
7.26 To Laadan his son was born his son Amiud, his son Helisamai, his son
7.27 Nun, his son Jesue, these were his sons.
7.28 And their possession and their dwelling were Baethel and her towns, to the east Noaran, westward Gazer and her towns, and Sychem and her towns, as far as Gaza and her towns.
7.29 And as far as the borders of the sons of Manasse, Baethsaan and her towns, Thanach and her towns, Mageddo and her towns, Dor and her towns. In this the children of Joseph the son of Israel dwelt.
7.30 The sons of Aser; Jemna, and Suia, and Isui, and Beria, and Sore their sister.
7.31 And the sons of Beria; Chaber, and Melchiel; he was the father of Berthaith.
7.32 And Chaber begot Japhlet, and Samer, and Chothan, and Sola their sister.
7.33 And the sons of Japhlet; Phasec, and Bamael, and Asith: these are the sons of Japhlet.
7.34 And the sons of Semmer; Achir, and Rooga, and Jaba, and Aram.
7.35 And the sons of Elam his brother; Sopha, and Imana, and Selles, and Amal.
7.36 The sons of Sopha; Sue, and Arnaphar, and Suda, and Barin, and Imran,
7.37 and Basan, and Oa, and Sama, and Salisa, and Jethra, and Beera.
7.38 And the sons of Jether, Jephina, and Phaspha, and Ara.
7.39 And the sons of Ola; Orech, Aniel, and Rasia.
7.40 All these were the sons of Aser, all heads of families, choice, mighty men, chief leaders: their number for battle array—their number was twenty-six thousand men.
8.1 Now Benjamin begot Bale his first-born, and Asbel his second son, Aara the third, Noa the fourth,
8.2 and Rapha the fifth.
8.3 And the sons of Bale were, Adir, and Gera, and Abiud,
8.4 and Abessue, and Noama, and Achia,
8.5 and Gera, and Sephupham, and Uram.
8.6 These were the sons of Aod: these are the heads of families to them that dwell in Gabee, and they removed them to Machanathi:
8.7 and Nooma, and Achia and Gera, he removed them, and he begot Aza, and Jachicho.
8.8 And Saarin begot children in the plain of Moab, after that he had sent away Osin and Baada his wives.
8.9 And he begot of his wife Ada, Jolab, and Sebia, and Misa, and Melchas,
8.10 and Jebus, and Zabia, and Marma: these were heads of families.
8.11 And of Osin he begot Abitol, and Alphaal.
8.12 And the sons of Alphaal; Obed, Misaal, Semmer: he built Ona, and Lod, and its towns:
8.13 and Beria, and Sama; these were heads of families among the dwellers in Elam, and they drove out the inhabitants of Geth.
8.14 And his brethren were Sosec, and Arimoth,
8.15 and Zabadia, and Ored, and Eder,
8.16 and Michael, and Jespha, and Joda, the sons of Beria:
8.17 and Zabadia, and Mosollam, and Azaki, and Abar,
8.18 and Isamari, and Jexlias, and Jobab, the sons of Elphaal:
8.19 and Jakim, and Zachri, and Zabdi,
8.20 and Elionai, and Salathi,
8.21 and Elieli, and Adaia, and Baraia, and Samarath, sons of Samaith:
8.22 and Jesphan, and Obed, and Eliel,
8.23 and Abdon, and Zechri, and Anan,
8.24 and Anania, and Ambri, and Ælam, and Anathoth,
8.25 and Jathin, and Jephadias, and Phanuel, the sons of Sosec:
8.26 and Samsari, and Saarias, and Gotholia,
8.27 and Jarasia, and Eria, and Zechri, son of Iroam.
8.28 These were heads of families, chiefs according to their generations: these dwelt in Jerusalem.
8.29 And the father of Gabaon dwelt in Gabaon; and his wife’s name was Moacha.
8.30 And her first-born son was Abdon, and Sur, and Kis, and Baal, and Nadab, and Ner,
8.31 and Gedur and his brother, and Zacchur, and Makeloth.
8.32 And Makeloth begot Samaa: for these dwelt in Jerusalem in the presence of their brethren with their brethren.
8.33 And Ner begot Kis, and Kis begot Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan, and Melchisue, and Aminadab, and Asabal.
8.34 And the son of Jonathan was Meribaal; and Meribaal begot Micha.
8.35 And the sons of Micha; Phithon, and Melach, and Tharach, and Achaz.
8.36 And Achaz begot Jada, and Jada begot Salaemath, and Asmoth, and Zambri; and Zambri begot Maesa;
8.37 and Maesa begot Baana: Rhaphaea was his son, Elasa his son, Esel his son.
8.38 And Esel had six sons, and these were their name; Ezricam his first-born, and Ismael, and Saraia, and Abdia, and Anan, and Asa: all these were the sons of Esel.
8.39 And the sons of Asel his brother; Ælam his first-born, and Jas the second, and Eliphalet the third.
8.40 And the sons of Ælam were mighty men, bending the bow, and multiplying sons and grandsons, a hundred and fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.
9.1 And this is all Israel, even their enrolment: and these are written down in the book of the kings of Israel and Juda, with the names of them that were carried away to Babylon for their transgressions.
9.2 And they that dwelt before in their possessions in the cities of Israel, the priests, the Levites, and the appointed ones.
9.3 And there dwelt in Jerusalem some of the children of Juda, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasse.
9.4 And Gnothi, and the son of Samiud, the son of Amri, the son of Ambraim, the son of Buni, son of the sons of Phares, the son of Juda.
9.5 And of the Selonites; Asaia his first-born, and his sons.
9.6 Of the sons of Zara; Jeel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety.
9.7 And of the sons of Benjamin; Salom, son of Mosollam, son of Odouia, son of Asinu.
9.8 And Jemnaa son of Jeroboam, and Elo: these are the sons of Ozi the son of Machir: and Mosollam, son of Saphatia, son of Raguel, son of Jemnai;
9.9 and their brethren according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty-six, all the men were heads of families according to the houses of their fathers.
9.10 And of the priests; Jodae, and Joarim, and Jachin,
9.11 and Azaria the son of Chelcias, the son of Mosollam, the son of Sadoc, the son of Maraioth, the son of Achitob, the ruler of the house of God;
9.12 and Adaia son of Iraam, son of Phascor, son of Melchia, and Maasaia son of Adiel, son of Ezira, son of Mosollam, son of Maselmoth, son of Emmer;
9.13 and their brethren, chiefs of their families, a thousand seven hundred and sixty, mighty men for the work of the ministration of the house of God.
9.14 And of the Levites; Samaia son of Asob, son of Ezricam, son of Asabia, of the sons of Merari.
9.15 And Bacbacar, and Ares, and Galaal, and Matthanias son of Micha, son of Zechri, son of Asaph;
9.16 and Abdia, son of Samia, son of Galaal, son of Idithun, and Barachia son of Ossa, son of Helcana—who dwelt in the villages of the Notephatites.
9.17 The door-keepers; Salom, Acum, Telmon, and Diman, and their brethren; Salom was the chief;
9.18 and he waited hitherto in the king’s gate eastward: these are the gates of the companies of the sons of Levi.
9.19 And Sellum the son of Core, the son of Abiasaph, the son of Core, and his brethren belonging to the house of his father, the Corites were over the works of the service, keeping the watches of the tabernacle, and their fathers over the camp of the Lord, keeping the entrance.
9.20 And Phinees son of Eleazar was head over them before the Lord, and these were with him.
9.21 Zacharias the son of Mosollami was keeper of the door of the tabernacle of witness.
9.22 All the chosen porters in the gates were two hundred and twelve, these were in their courts, this was their distribution: these David and Samuel the seer established in their charge.
9.23 And these and their sons were over the gates in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the tabernacle, to keep watch.
9.24 The gates were toward the four winds, eastward, westward, northward, southward.
9.25 And their brethren were in their courts, to enter in weekly from time to time with these.
9.26 For four strong men have the charge of the gates; and the Levites were over the chambers, and they keep watch over the treasures of the house of God.
9.27 For the charge was upon them, and these were charged with the keys to open the doors of the temple every morning.
9.28 And some of them were appointed over the vessels of service, that they should carry them in by number, and carry them out by number.
9.29 And some of them were appointed over the furniture, and over all the holy vessels, and over the fine flour, the wine, the oil, the frankincense, and the spices.
9.30 And some of the priests were makers of the ointment, and appointed to prepare the spices.
9.31 And Matthathias of the Levites, (he was the first-born of Salom the Corite,)was set in charge over the sacrifices of meat-offering of the pan belonging to the high priest.
9.32 And Banaias the Caathite, from among their brethren, was set over the shewbread, to prepare it every sabbath.
9.33 And these were the singers, heads of families of the Levites, to whom were established daily courses, for they were employed in the services day and night.
9.34 These were the heads of the families of the Levites according to their generations; these chiefs dwelt in Jerusalem.
9.35 And Jeel the father of Gabaon dwelt in Gabaon; and his wife’s name was Moocha.
9.36 And his first-born son was Abdon, and he had Sur, and Kis, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab,
9.37 and Gedur and his brother, and Zacchur, and Makeloth.
9.38 And Makeloth begot Samaa: and these dwelt in the midst of their brethren in Jerusalem, even in the midst of their brethren.
9.39 And Ner begot Kis, and Kis begot Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan, and Melchisue, and Aminadab, and Asabal.
9.40 And the son of Jonathan was Meribaal: and Meribaal begot Micha.
9.41 And the sons of Micha were Phithon and Malach, and Tharach.
9.42 And Achaz begot Jada: and Jada begot Galemeth, and Gazmoth, and Zambri; and Zambri begot Massa.
9.43 And Massa begot Baana, and Rhaphaia was his son, Elasa his son, Esel his son.
9.44 And Esel had six sons, and these were their names; Esricam his first-born, and Ismael, and Saraia, and Abdia, and Anan, and Asa: these were the sons of Esel.
10.1 Now the Philistines warred against Israel; and they fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gelbue.
10.2 And the Philistines pursued after Saul, and after his sons; and the Philistines smote Jonathan, and Aminadab, and Melchisue, sons of Saul.
10.3 And the battle prevailed against Saul, and the archers hit him with bows and arrows, and they were wounded of the bows.
10.4 And Saul said to his armour-bearer, Draw thy sword, and pierce me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come and mock me. But his armour-bearer would not, for he was greatly afraid: so Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.
10.5 And his armour-bearer saw that Saul was dead, and he also fell upon his sword.
10.6 So Saul died, and his three sons on that day, and all his family died at the same time.
10.7 And all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw that Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, and they left their cities, and fled: and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
10.8 And it came to pass on the next day that the Philistines came to strip the slain, and they found Saul and his sons fallen on mount Gelbue.
10.9 And they stripped him, and took his head, and his armour, and sent them into the land of the Philistines round about, to proclaim the glad tidings to their idols, and to the people.
10.10 And they put their armour in the house of their god, and they put his head in the house of Dagon.
10.11 And all the dwellers in Galaad heard of all that the Philistines had done to Saul and to Israel.
10.12 And all the mighty men rose up from Galaad, and they took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabis, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabis, and fasted seven days.
10.13 So Saul died for his transgressions, wherein he transgressed against God, against the word of the Lord, forasmuch as he kept it not, because Saul enquired of a wizard to seek counsel, and Samuel the prophet answered him:
10.14 and he sought not the Lord: so he slew him, and turned the kingdom to David the son of Jesse.
11.1 And all Israel came to David in Chebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bones and thy flesh.
11.2 And heretofore when Saul was king, thou wast he that led Israel in and out, and the Lord of Israel said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be for a ruler over Israel.
11.3 And all the elders of Israel came to the king to Chebron; and king David made a covenant with them in Chebron before the Lord: and they anointed David to be king over Israel, according to the word of the Lord by Samuel.
11.4 And the king and his men went to Jerusalem, this is Jebus; and there the Jebusites the inhabitants of the land said to David,
11.5 Thou shalt not enter in hither. But he took the strong hold of Sion: this is the city of David.
11.6 And David said, Whoever first smites the Jebusite, even he shall be chief and captain. And Joab the son of Saruia went up first, and became chief.
11.7 And David dwelt in the strong hold; therefore he called it the city of David.
11.8 And he fortified the city round about.
11.9 And David continued to increase, and the Lord Almighty was with him.
11.10 And these are the chiefs of the mighty men, whom David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of the Lord concerning Israel.
11.11 And this is the list of the mighty men of David; Jesebada, son of Achaman, first of the thirty: he drew his sword once against three hundred whom he slew at one time.
11.12 And after him Eleazar son of Dodai, the Achochite: he was among the three mighty men.
11.13 He was with David in Phasodamin, and the Philistines were gathered there to battle, and there was a portion of the field full of barley; and the people fled before the Philistines.
11.14 And he stood in the midst of the portion, and rescued it, and smote the Philistines; and the Lord wrought a great deliverance.
11.15 And three of the thirty chiefs went down to the rock to David, to the cave of Odollam, and the camp of the Philistines was in the giants’ valley.
11.16 And David was then in the hold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethleem.
11.17 And David longed, and said, Who will give me water to drink of the well of Bethleem, that is in the gate?
11.18 And the three broke through the camp of the Philistines, and they drew water out of the well that was in Bethleem, which was in the gate, and they took it, and came to David: but David would not drink it, and poured it out to the Lord, and said,
11.19 God forbid that I should do this thing: shall I drink the blood of these men with their lives? for with the peril of their lives they brought it. So he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men.
11.20 And Abisa the brother of Joab, he was chief of three: he drew his sword against three hundred slain at one time, and he had a name among the second three.
11.21 He was more famous than the two others of the three, and he was chief over them; yet he reached not to the first three.
11.22 And Banaia the son of Jodae was the son of a mighty man: many were his acts for Cabasael: he smote two lion-like men of Moab, and he went down and smote a lion in a pit on a snowy day.
11.23 And he smote an Egyptian, a wonderful man five cubits high; and in the hand of the Egyptian there was a spear like a weavers’ beam; and Banaia went down to him with a staff, and took the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.
11.24 These things did Banaia son of Jodae, and his name was among the three mighties.
11.25 He was distinguished beyond the thirty, yet he reached not to the first three: and David set him over his family.
11.26 And the mighty men of the forces were, Asael the brother of Joab, Eleanan the son of Dodoe of Bethleem,
11.27 Samaoth the Arorite, Chelles the Phelonite,
11.28 Ora the son of Ekkis the Thecoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,
11.29 Sobochai the Usathite, Eli the Achonite,
11.30 Marai the Netophathite, Chthaod the son of Nooza the Netophathite,
11.31 Airi the son of Rebie of the hill of Benjamin, Banaias the Pharathonite,
11.32 Uri of Nachali Gaas, Abiel the Garabaethite,
11.33 Azbon the Baromite, Eliaba the Salabonite,
11.34 the son of Asam the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Sola the Ararite,
11.35 Achim the son of Achar the Ararite, Elphat the son of Thyrophar
11.36 the Mechorathrite, Achia the Phellonite,
11.37 Esere the Charmadaite, Naarai the son of Azobai,
11.38 Joel the son of Nathan, Mebaal son of Agari,
11.39 Sele the son of Ammoni, Nachor the Berothite, armour-bearer to the son of Saruia,
11.40 Ira the Jethrite, Gaber the Jethrite,
11.41 Uria the Chettite, Zabet son of Achaia,
11.42 Adina son of Saeza, a chief of Ruben, and thirty with him,
11.43 Anan the son of Moocha, and Josaphat the Matthanite,
11.44 Ozia the Astarothite, Samatha and Jeiel sons of Chotham the Ararite,
11.45 Jediel the son of Sameri, and Jozae his brother the Thosaite,
11.46 Eliel the Maoite, and Jaribi, and Josia his son, Ellaam, and Jethama the Moabite,
11.47 Daliel, and Obeth, and Jessiel of Mesobia.
12.1 And these are they that came to Sikelag, when he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kis; and these were among the mighty, aiding him in war,
12.2 and using the bow with the right hand and with the left, and slingers with stones, and shooters with bows. Of the brethren of Saul of Benjamin,
12.3 the chief was Achiezer, and Joas son of Asma the Gabathite, and Joel and Jophalet, sons of Asmoth, and Berchia, and Jeul of Anathoth,
12.4 and Samaias the Gabaonite a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremia, and Jeziel, and Joanan, and Jozabath of Gadarathiim,
12.5 Azai and Arimuth, and Baalia, and Samaraia, and Saphatias of Charaephiel,
12.6 Helcana, and Jesuni, and Ozriel, and Jozara, and Sobocam, and the Corites,
12.7 and Jelia and Zabadia, sons of Iroam, and the men of Gedor.
12.8 And from Gad these separated themselves to David from the wilderness, strong mighty men of war, bearing shields and spears, and their faces were as the face of a lion, and they were nimble as roes upon the mountains in speed.
12.9 Aza the chief, Abdia the second, Eliab the third,
12.10 Masmana the fourth, Jeremias the fifth,
12.11 Jethi the sixth, Eliab the seventh,
12.12 Joanan the eighth, Eleazer the ninth,
12.13 Jeremia the tenth, Melchabanai the eleventh.
12.14 These were chiefs of the army of the sons of Gad, the least one commander of a hundred, and the greatest one of a thousand.
12.15 These are the men that crossed over Jordan in the first month, and it had overflowed all its banks; and they drove out all the inhabitants of the valleys, from the east to the west.
12.16 And there came some of the sons of Benjamin and Juda to the assistance of David.
12.17 And David went out to meet them, and said to them, If ye are come peaceably to me, let my heart be at peace with you: but if ye are come to betray me to my enemies unfaithfully, the God of your fathers look upon it, and reprove it.
12.18 And the Spirit came upon Amasai, a captain of the thirty, and he said, Go, David, son of Jesse, thou and thy people, peace, peace be to thee, and peace to thy helpers, for thy God has helped thee. And David received them, and made them captains of the forces.
12.19 And some came to David from Manasse, when the Philistines came against Saul to war: and he helped them not, because the captains of the Philistines took counsel, saying, With the heads of those men will he return to his master Saul.
12.20 When David was going to Sikelag, there came to him of Manasse, Edna and Jozabath, and Rodiel, and Michael, and Josabaith, and Elimuth, and Semathi: these are the captains of thousands of Manasse.
12.21 And they fought on the side of David against a troop, for they were all men of might; and they were commanders in the army, because of their might.
12.22 For daily men came to David, till they amounted to a great force, as the force of God.
12.23 And these are the names of the commanders of the army, who came to David to Chebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him according to the word of the Lord.
12.24 The sons of Juda, bearing shields and spears, six thousand and eight hundred mighty in war.
12.25 Of the sons of Symeon mighty for battle, seven thousand and a hundred.
12.26 Of the sons of Levi, four thousand and six hundred.
12.27 And Joadas the chief of the family of Aaron, and with him three thousand and seven hundred.
12.28 And Sadoc, a young man mighty in strength, and there were twenty-two leaders of his father’s house.
12.29 And of the sons of Benjamin, the brethren of Saul, three thousand: and still the greater part of them kept the guard of the house of Saul.
12.30 And of the sons of Ephraim, twenty thousand and eight hundred mighty men, famous in the houses of their fathers.
12.31 And of the half-tribe of Manasse, eighteen thousand, even those who were named by name, to make David king.
12.32 And of the sons of Issachar having wisdom with regard to the times, knowing what Israel should do, two hundred; and all their brethren with them.
12.33 And of Zabulon they that went out to battle, with all weapons of war, were fifty thousand to help David, not weak-handed.
12.34 And of Nephthali a thousand captains, and with them men with shields and spears, thirty-seven thousand.
12.35 And of the Danites men ready for war twenty-eight thousand and eight hundred.
12.36 And of Aser, they that went out to give aid in war, forty thousand.
12.37 And from the country beyond Jordan, from Ruben, and the Gadites, and from the half-tribe of Manasse, a hundred and twenty thousand, with all weapons of war.
12.38 All these were men of war, setting the army in battle array, with a peaceful mind towards him, and they came to Chebron to make David king over all Israel: and the rest of Israel were of one mind to make David king.
12.39 And they were there three days eating and drinking, for their brethren had made preparations.
12.40 And their neighbours, as far as Issachar and Zabulon and Nephthali, brought to them upon camels, and asses, and mules, and upon calves, victuals, meal, cakes of figs, raisins, wine, and oil, calves and sheep abundantly: for there was joy in Israel.
13.1 And David took counsel with the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, even with every commander.
13.2 And David said to the whole congregation of Israel, If it seem good to you, and it should be prospered by the Lord our God, let us send to our brethren that are left in all the land of Israel, and let the priests the Levites who are with them in the cities of their possession come, and let them be gathered to us.
13.3 And let us bring over to us the ark of our God; for men have not enquired at it since the days of Saul.
13.4 And all the congregation said that they would do thus; for the saying was right in the eyes of all the people.
13.5 So David assembled all Israel, from the borders of Egypt even to the entering in of Hemath, to bring in the ark of God from the city of Jarim.
13.6 And David brought it up: and all Israel went up to the city of David, which belonged to Juda, to bring up thence the ark of the Lord God who sits between the cherubim, whose name is called on it.
13.7 And they set the ark of God on a new waggon brought out of the house of Aminadab: and Oza and his brethren drove the waggon.
13.8 And David and all Israel were playing before the Lord with all their might, and that together with singers, and with harps, and with lutes, with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.
13.9 And they came as far as the threshing-floor: and Oza put forth his hand to hold the ark, because the bullock moved it from its place.
13.10 And the Lord was very angry with Oza, and smote him there, because of his stretching forth his hand upon the ark: and he died there before God.
13.11 And David was dispirited, because the Lord had made a breach on Oza: and he called that place the Breach of Oza until this day.
13.12 And David feared God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God in to myself?
13.13 So David brought not the ark home to himself into the city of David, but he turned it aside into the house of Abeddara the Gethite.
13.14 And the ark of God abode in the house of Abeddara three months: and God blessed Abeddara and all that he had.
14.1 And Chiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar timbers, and masons, and carpenters, to build a house for him.
14.2 And David knew that the Lord had designed him to be king over Israel; because his kingdom was highly exalted, on account of his people Israel.
14.3 And David took more wives in Jerusalem: and there were born to David more sons and daughters.
14.4 And these are the names of those that were born, who were born to him in Jerusalem; Samaa, Sobab, Nathan, and Solomon,
14.5 and Baar, and Elisa, and Eliphaleth,
14.6 and Nageth, and Naphath, and Japhie,
14.7 and Elisamae, and Eliade, and Eliphala.
14.8 And the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel: and all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David heard it, and went out to meet them.
14.9 And the Philistines came and assembled together in the giants’ valley.
14.10 And David enquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into my hand? And the Lord said to him, Go up, and I will deliver them into thy hands.
14.11 And he went up to Baal Pharasin, and David smote them there; and David said, God has broken through enemies by my hand like a breach of water: therefore he called the name of that place, the Breach of Pharasin.
14.12 And the Philistines left their gods there; and David gave orders to burn them with fire.
14.13 And the Philistines once more assembled themselves in the giants’ valley.
14.14 And David enquired of God again; and God said to him, Thou shalt not go after them; turn away from them, and thou shalt come upon them near the pear trees.
14.15 And it shall be, when thou shalt hear the sound of their tumult in the tops of the pear trees, then thou shalt go into the battle: for God has gone out before thee to smite the army of the Philistines.
14.16 And he did as God commanded him: and he smote the army of the Philistines from Gabaon to Gazera.
14.17 And the name of David was famous in all the land; and the Lord put the terror of him on all the nations.
15.1 And David made for himself houses in the city of David, and he prepared a place for the ark of God, and made a tent for it.
15.2 Then said David, It is not lawful for any to bear the ark of God, but the Levites; for the Lord has chosen them to bear the ark of the Lord, and to minister to him for ever.
15.3 And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the Lord to the place which he had prepared for it.
15.4 And David gathered together the sons of Aaron the Levites.
15.5 Of the sons of Caath; there was Uriel the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and twenty.
15.6 Of the sons of Merari; Asaia the chief, and his brethren, two hundred and twenty.
15.7 Of the sons of Gedson; Joel the chief, and his brethren, a hundred and thirty.
15.8 Of the sons of Elisaphat; Semei the chief, and his brethren, two hundred.
15.9 Of the sons of Chebrom; Eliel the chief, and his brethren eighty.
15.10 Of the sons of Oziel; Aminadab the chief, and his brethren a hundred and twelve.
15.11 And David called Sadoc and Abiathar the priests, and the Levites, Uriel, Asaia, and Joel, and Semaia, and Eliel, and Aminadab,
15.12 and said to them, Ye are the heads of the families of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, you and your brethren, and ye shall carry up the ark of the God of Israel, to the place which I have prepared for it.
15.13 For because ye were not ready at the first, our God made a breach upon us, because we sought him not according to the ordinance.
15.14 So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves, to bring up the ark of the God of Israel.
15.15 And the sons of the Levites took the ark of God, (as Moses commanded by the word of God according to the scripture) upon their shoulders with staves.
15.16 And David said to the chiefs of the Levites, Set your brethren the singers with musical instruments, lutes, harps, and cymbals, to sound aloud with a voice of joy.
15.17 So the Levites appointed Æman the son of Joel; Asaph the son of Barachias was one of his brethren; and Æthan the son of Kisaeus was of the sons of Merari their brethren;
15.18 and with them their brethren of the second rank, Zacharias, and Oziel, and Semiramoth, and Jeiel, and Elioel, and Eliab, and Banaia, and Maasaia, and Matthathia, and Eliphena, and Makellia, and Abdedom, and Jeiel, and Ozias, the porters.
15.19 And the singers, Æman, Asaph, and Æthan, with brazen cymbals to make a sound to be heard.
15.20 Zacharias, and Oziel, Semiramoth, Jeiel, Oni, Eliab, Maasaeas, Banaeas, with lutes, on alaemoth.
15.21 And Mattathias, and Eliphalu, and Makenia, and Abdedom, and Jeiel, and Ozias, with harps of Amasenith, to make a loud noise.
15.22 And Chonenia chief of the Levites was master of the bands, because he was skilful.
15.23 And Barachia and Elcana were door-keepers of the ark.
15.24 And Somnia, and Josaphat, and Nathanael, and Amasai, and Zacharia, and Banaea, and Eliezer, the priests, were sounding with trumpets before the ark of God: and Abdedom and Jeia were door-keepers of the ark of God.
15.25 So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains of thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant from the house of Abdedom with gladness.
15.26 And it came to pass when God strengthened the Levites bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that they sacrificed seven calves and seven rams.
15.27 And David was girt with a fine linen robe, and all the Levites who were bearing the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the singers, and Chonenias the master of the band of singers; also upon David there was a robe of fine linen.
15.28 And all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting, and with the sound of a horn, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, playing loudly on lutes and harps.
15.29 And the ark of the covenant of the Lord arrived, and came to the city of David; and Melchol the daughter of Saul looked down through the window, and saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in her heart.
16.1 So they brought in the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tabernacle which David pitched for it; and they offered whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before God.
16.2 And David finished offering up whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and blessed the people in the name of the Lord.
16.3 And he divided to every man of Israel (both men and women), to every man one baker’s loaf, and a cake.
16.4 And he appointed before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, Levites to minister and lift up the voice, and to give thanks and praise the Lord God of Israel:
16.5 Asaph was the chief, and next to him Zacharias, Jeiel, Semiramoth, and Jeiel, Mattathias, Eliab, and Banaeas, and Abdedom: and Jeiel sounding with musical instruments, lutes and harps, and Asaph with cymbals:
16.6 and Banaeas and Oziel the priests sounding continually with trumpets before the ark of the covenant of God in that day.
16.7 Then David first gave orders to praise the Lord by the hand of Asaph and his brethren.
16.8 Song. Give thanks to the Lord, call upon him by his name, make known his designs among the people.
16.9 Sing songs to him, and sing hymns to him, relate to all people his wonderful deeds, which the Lord has wrought.
16.10 Praise his holy name, the heart that seeks his pleasure shall rejoice.
16.11 Seek the Lord and be strong, seek his face continually.
16.12 Remember his wonderful works which he has wrought, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth;
16.13 ye seed of Israel his servants, ye seed of Jacob his chosen ones.
16.14 He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth.
16.15 Let us remember his covenant for ever, his word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
16.16 which he covenanted with Abraham, and his oath sworn to Isaac.
16.17 He confirmed it to Jacob for an ordinance, to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
16.18 saying, To thee will I give the land of Chanaan, the line of your inheritance:
16.19 when they were few in number, when they were but little, and dwelt as strangers in it;
16.20 and went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people.
16.21 He suffered not a man to oppress them, and he reproved kings for their sakes,
16.22 saying, Touch not my anointed ones, and deal not wrongfully with my prophets.
16.23 Sing ye to the Lord, all the earth; proclaim his salvation from day to day.
16.24 Declare among the nations his glory, his wondrous deeds among all peoples.
16.25 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.
16.26 For all the gods of the nations are idols; but our God made the heavens.
16.27 Glory and praise are in his presence; strength and rejoicing are in his place.
16.28 Give to the Lord, ye families of the nations, give to the Lord glory and strength.
16.29 Give to the Lord the glory belonging to his name: take gifts and offer them before him; and worship the Lord in his holy courts.
16.30 Let the whole earth fear before him; let the earth be established, and not be moved.
16.31 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth exult; and let them say among the nations, The Lord reigns.
16.32 The sea with its fullness shall resound and the tree of the field, and all things in it.
16.33 Then shall the trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord, for he is come to judge the earth.
16.34 Give thanks to the Lord, for it is good, for his mercy is for ever.
16.35 And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us, and rescue us from among the heathen, that we may praise thy holy name, and glory in thy praises.
16.36 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting and to everlasting: And all the people shall say, Amen. So they praised the Lord.
16.37 And they left there Asaph and his brethren before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, to minister before the ark continually, according to the service of each day: from day to day.
16.38 And Abdedom and his brethren were sixty and eight; and Abdedom the son of Idithun, and Osa, were to be door-keepers.
16.39 And they appointed Sadoc the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the Lord in the high place in Gabaon,
16.40 to offer up whole-burnt-offerings continually morning and evening, and according to all things written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded the children of Israel by Moses the servant of God.
16.41 And with him were Æman and Idithun, and the rest chosen out by name to praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever.
16.42 And with them there were trumpets and cymbals to sound aloud, and musical instruments for the songs of God: and the sons of Idithun were at the gate.
16.43 And all the people went every one to his home: and David returned to bless his house.
17.1 And it came to pass as David dwelt in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Behold, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord is under curtains of skins.
17.2 And Nathan said to David, Do all that is in thy heart; for God is with thee.
17.3 And it came to pass in that night, that the word of the Lord came to Nathan, saying,
17.4 Go and say to David my servant, Thus said the Lord, Thou shalt not build me a house for me to dwell in it.
17.5 For I have not dwelt in a house from the day that I brought up Israel until this day, but I have been in a tabernacle and a tent,
17.6 in all places through which I have gone with all Israel: did I ever speak to any one tribe of Israel whom I commanded to feed my people, saying, Why is it that ye have not built me a house of cedar?
17.7 And now thus shalt thou say to my servant David, Thus saith the Lord Almighty, I took thee from the sheepfold, from following the flocks, to be a ruler over my people Israel:
17.8 and I was with thee in all places whither thou wentest, and I destroyed all thine enemies from before thee, and I made for thee a name according to the name of the great ones that are upon the earth.
17.9 And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and I will plant him, and he shall dwell by himself, and shall no longer be anxious; and the son of iniquity shall no longer afflict him, as at the beginning,
17.10 and from the days when I appointed judges over my people Israel. Also I have humbled all thine enemies, and I will increase thee, and the Lord will build thee a house.
17.11 And it shall come to pass when thy days shall be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.
17.12 He shall build me a house, and I will set up his throne for ever.
17.13 I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son: and my mercy will I not withdraw from him, as I withdrew it from them that were before thee.
17.14 And I will establish him in my house and in his kingdom for ever; and his throne shall be set up for ever.
17.15 According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so spoke Nathan to David.
17.16 And king David came and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou hast loved me for ever?
17.17 And these things were little in thy sight, O God: thou hast also spoken concerning the house of thy servant for a long time to come, and thou hast looked upon me as a man looks upon his fellow, and hast exalted me, O Lord God.
17.18 What shall David do more toward thee to glorify thee? and thou knowest thy servant.
17.19 And thou hast wrought all this greatness according to thine heart.
17.20 O Lord, there is none like thee, and there is no God beside thee, according to all things which we have heard with our ears.
17.21 Neither is there another nation upon the earth such as thy people Israel, whereas God led him in the way, to redeem a people for himself, to make for himself a great and glorious name, to cast out nations from before thy people, whom thou redeemedst out of Egypt.
17.22 And thou hast appointed thy people Israel as a people to thyself for ever; and thou, Lord, didst become a God to them.
17.23 And now, Lord, let the word which thou spokest to thy servant, and concerning his house, be confirmed for ever, and do thou as thou hast spoken.
17.24 And let thy name be established and magnified for ever, men saying, Lord, Lord, Almighty God of Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thee.
17.25 For thou, O Lord my God, hast revealed to the ear of thy servant that thou wilt build him a house; therefore thy servant has found a willingness to pray before thee.
17.26 And now, Lord, thou thyself art God, and thou hast spoken these good things concerning thy servant.
17.27 And now thou hast begun to bless the house of thy servant, so that it should continue for ever before thee: for thou, Lord, hast blessed it, and do thou bless it for ever.
18.1 And it came to pass afterwards, that David smote the Philistines, and routed them, and took Geth and its villages out of the hand of the Philistines.
18.2 And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became servants to David, and tributaries.
18.3 And David smote Adraazar king of Suba of Emath, as he was going to establish power toward the river Euphrates.
18.4 And David took of them a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand infantry: and David houghed all the chariot horses, but there were reserved of them a hundred chariots.
18.5 And the Syrian came from Damascus to help Adraazar king of Suba; and David smote of the Syrian army twenty and two thousand men.
18.6 And David put a garrison in Syria near Damascus; and they became tributary servants to David: and the Lord delivered David wherever he went.
18.7 And David took the golden collars that were on the servants of Adraazar, and brought them to Jerusalem.
18.8 And David took out of Matabeth, and out of the chief cities of Adraazar very much brass: of this Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the brazen vessels.
18.9 And Thoa king of Emath heard that David had smitten the whole force of Adraazar king of Suba.
18.10 And he sent Aduram his son to king David to ask how he was, and to congratulate him because he had fought against Adraazar, and smitten him; for Thoa was the enemy of Adraazar.
18.11 And all the golden and silver and brazen vessels, even these king David consecrated to the Lord, with the silver and the gold which he took from all the nations; from Idumaea, and Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalec.
18.12 And Abesa son of Saruia smote the Idumeans in the valley of Salt, eighteen thousand.
18.13 And he put garrisons in the valley; and all the Idumaeans became David’s servants: and the Lord delivered David wherever he went.
18.14 So David reigned over all Israel; and he executed judgment and justice to all his people.
18.15 And Joab the son of Saruia was over the army, and Josaphat the son of Achilud was recorder.
18.16 And Sadoc son of Achitob, and Achimelech son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Susa was the scribe;
18.17 and Banaeas the son of Jodae was over the Cherethite and the Phelethite, and the sons of David were the chief deputies of the king.
19.1 And it came to pass after this, that Naas the king of the children of Ammon died, and Anan his son reigned in his stead.
19.2 And David said, I will act kindly toward Anan the son of Naas, as his father acted kindly towards me. And David sent messengers to condole with him on the death of his father. So the servants of David came into the land of the children of Ammon to Anan, to comfort him.
19.3 And the chiefs of the children of Ammon said to Anan, Is it to honour thy father before thee, that David has sent comforters to thee? Have not his servants come to thee that they might search the city, and to spy out the land?
19.4 And Anan took the servants of David, and shaved them, and cut off the half of their garments as far as their tunic, and sent them away.
19.5 And there came men to report to David concerning the men: and he sent to meet them, for they were greatly disgraced: and the king said, Dwell in Jericho until your beards have grown, and return.
19.6 And the children of Ammon saw that the people of David were ashamed, and Anan and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire for themselves chariots and horsemen out of Syria of Mesopotamia, and out of Syria Maacha, and from Sobal.
19.7 And they hired for themselves two and thirty thousand chariots, and the king of Maacha and his people; and they came and encamped before Medaba: and the children of Ammon assembled out of their cities, and came to fight.
19.8 And David heard, and sent Joab and all the host of mighty men.
19.9 And the children of Ammon came forth, and set themselves in array for battle by the gate of the city: and the kings that were come forth encamped by themselves in the plain.
19.10 And Joab saw that they were fronting him to fight against him before and behind, and he chose some out of all the young men of Israel, and they set themselves in array against the Syrian.
19.11 And the rest of the people he gave into the hand of his brother Abesai, and they set themselves in array against the children of Ammon.
19.12 And he said, If the Syrian should prevail against me, then shalt thou deliver me: and if the children of Ammon should prevail against thee, then will I deliver thee.
19.13 Be of good courage, and let us be strong, for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the Lord shall do what is good in his eyes.
19.14 So Joab and the people that were with him set themselves in battle array against the Syrians, and they fled from them.
19.15 And the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians fled, and they also fled from before Abesai, and from before Joab his brother, and they came to the city: and Joab came to Jerusalem.
19.16 And the Syrian saw that Israel had defeated him, and he sent messengers, and they brought out the Syrians from beyond the river; and Sophath the commander-in-chief of the forces of Adraazar was before them.
19.17 And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel, and crossed over Jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against them. So David set his army in array to fight against the Syrians, and they fought against him.
19.18 And the Syrians fled from before Israel; and David slew of the Syrians seven thousand riders in chariots, and forty thousand infantry, and he slew Sophath the commander-in-chief of the forces.
19.19 And the servants of Adraazar saw that they were defeated before Israel, and they made peace with David and served him: and the Syrians would not any more help the children of Ammon.
20.1 And it came to pass at the return of the year, at the time of the going forth of kings to war, that Joab gathered the whole force of the army, and they ravaged the land of the children of Ammon; and he came and besieged Rabba. But David abode in Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabba and destroyed it.
20.2 And David took the crown of Molchom their king off his head, and the weight of it was found to be a talent of gold, and on it were precious stones; and it was placed on the head of David: and he brought out the spoils of the city which were very great.
20.3 And he brought out the people that were in it, and sawed them asunder with saws, and cut them with iron axes, and with harrows: and thus David did to all the children of Ammon. And David and all his people returned to Jerusalem.
20.4 And it came to pass afterward that there was again war with the Philistines in Gazer: then Sobochai the Sosathite smote Saphut of the sons of the giants, and laid him low.
20.5 And there was war again with the Philistines; and Eleanan the son of Jair smote Lachmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, and the wood of his spear was as a weavers’ beam.
20.6 And there was again war in Geth, and there was a man of extraordinary size, and his fingers and toes were six on each hand and foot, four and twenty; and he was descended from the giants.
20.7 And he defied Israel, and Jonathan the son of Samaa the brother of David slew him.
20.8 These were born to Rapha in Geth; all four were giants, and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.
21.1 And the devil stood up against Israel, and moved David to number Israel.
21.2 And king David said to Joab and to the captains of the forces, Go, number Israel from Bersabee even to Dan, and bring me the account, and I shall know their number.
21.3 And Joab said, May the Lord add to his people, a hundred-fold as many as they are, and let the eyes of my lord the king see it: all are the servants of my lord. Why does my lord seek this thing? do it not, lest it become a sin to Israel.
21.4 Nevertheless the king’s word prevailed against Joab; and Joab went out and passed through all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.
21.5 And Joab gave the number of the mustering of the people to David: and all Israel was a million and a hundred thousand men that drew sword: and the sons of Juda were four hundred and seventy thousand men that drew sword.
21.6 But he numbered not Levi and Benjamin among them; for the word of the king was painful to Joab.
21.7 And there was evil in the sight of the Lord respecting this thing; and he smote Israel.
21.8 And David said to God, I have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done this thing: and now, I pray thee, remove the sin of thy servant; for I have been exceedingly foolish.
21.9 And the Lord spoke to Gad the seer, saying,
21.10 Go and speak to David, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I bring three things upon thee: choose one of them for thyself, and I will do it to thee.
21.11 And Gad came to David, and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, Choose for thyself,
21.12 either three years of famine, or that thou shouldest flee three months from the face of thine enemies, and the sword of thine enemies shall be employed to destroy thee, or that the sword of the Lord and pestilence should be three days in the land, and the angel of the Lord shall be destroying in all the inheritance of Israel. And now consider what I shall answer to him that sent the message.
21.13 And David said to Gad, They are very hard for me, even all the three: let me fall now into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are very abundant, and let me not fall by any means into the hands of man.
21.14 So the Lord brought pestilence upon Israel: and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.
21.15 And God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was destroying, the Lord saw, and repented for the evil, and said to the angel that was destroying, Let it suffice thee; withhold thine hand. And the angel of the Lord stood by the threshing-floor of Orna the Jebusite.
21.16 And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the Lord, standing between the earth and the heaven, and his sword drawn in his hand, stretched out over Jerusalem: and David and the elders clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.
21.17 And David said to God, Was it not I that gave orders to number the people? and I am the guilty one; I have greatly sinned: but these sheep, what have they done? O Lord God, let thy hand be upon me, and upon my father’s house, and not on thy people for destruction, O Lord!
21.18 And the angel of the Lord told Gad to tell David, that he should go up to erect and altar to the Lord, in the threshing-floor of Orna the Jebusite.
21.19 And David went up according to the word of Gad, which he spoke in the name of the Lord.
21.20 And Orna turned and saw the king; and he hid himself and his four sons with him. Now Orna was threshing wheat.
21.21 And David came to Orna; and Orna came forth from the threshing-floor, and did obeisance to David with his face to the ground.
21.22 And David said to Orna, Give me thy place of the threshing-floor, and I will build upon it an altar to the Lord: give it me for its worth in money, and the plague shall cease from among the people.
21.23 And Orna said to David, Take it to thyself, and let my lord the king do what is right in his eyes: see, I have given the calves for a whole-burnt-offering, and the plough for wood, and the corn for a meat-offering; I have given all.
21.24 And king David said to Orna, Nay; for I will surely buy it for its worth in money: for I will not take thy property for the Lord, to offer a whole-burnt-offering to the Lord without cost to myself.
21.25 And David gave to Orna for his place six hundred shekels of gold by weight.
21.26 And David built there an altar to the Lord, and offered up whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings: and he cried to the Lord, and he answered him by fire out of heaven on the altar of whole-burnt-offerings, and it consumed the whole-burnt-offering.
21.27 And the Lord spoke to the angel; and he put up the sword into its sheath.
21.28 At that time when David saw that the Lord answered him in the threshing-floor of Orna the Jebusite, he also sacrificed there.
21.29 And the tabernacle of the Lord which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of whole-burnt-offerings, were at that time in the high place at Gabaon.
21.30 And David could not go before it to enquire of God; for he hasted not because of the sword of the angel of the Lord.
22.1 And David said, This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar for whole-burnt-offering for Israel.
22.2 And David gave orders to gather all the strangers that were in the land of Israel; and he appointed stone-hewers to hew polished stones to build the house to God.
22.3 And David prepared much iron for the nails of the doors and the gate; the hinges also and brass in abundance, there was no weighing of it.
22.4 And cedar threes without number: for the Sidonians and the Tyrians brought cedar trees in abundance to David.
22.5 And David said, My son Solomon is a tender child, and the house for me to build to the Lord is for superior magnificence for a name and for a glory through all the earth: I will make preparation for it. And David prepared abundantly before his death.
22.6 And he called Solomon his son, and commanded him to build the house for the Lord God of Israel.
22.7 And David said to Solomon, My child, it was in my heart to build a house to the name of the Lord God.
22.8 But the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast carried on great wars: thou shalt not build a house to my name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth before me.
22.9 Behold, a son shall be born to thee, he shall be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days.
22.10 He shall build a house to my name; and he shall be a son to me, and I will be a father to him; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom in Israel for ever.
22.11 And now, my son, the Lord shall be with thee, and prosper thee; and thou shalt build a house to the Lord thy God, as he spoke concerning thee.
22.12 Only may the Lord give thee wisdom and prudence, and strengthen thee over Israel, both to keep and to do the law of the Lord thy God.
22.13 Then will he prosper thee, if thou take heed to do the commandments and judgments which the Lord commanded Moses for Israel: be courageous and strong; fear not, nor be terrified.
22.14 And, behold, I according to my poverty have prepared for the house of the Lord a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a million talents of silver, and brass and iron without measure; for it is abundant; and I have prepared timber and stones; and do thou add to these.
22.15 And of them that are with thee do thou add to the multitude of workmen; let there be artificers and masons, and carpenters, and every skilful workman in every work;
22.16 in gold and silver, brass and iron, of which there is no number. Arise and do, and the Lord be with thee.
22.17 And David charged all the chief men of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying,
22.18 Is not the Lord with you? and he has given you rest round about, for he has given into your hands the inhabitants of the land; and the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people.
22.19 Now set your hearts and souls to seek after the Lord your God: and rise, and build a sanctuary to your God to carry in the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of the Lord.
23.1 And David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel in his stead.
23.2 And he assembled all the chief men of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites.
23.3 And the Levites numbered themselves from thirty years old and upward; and their number by their polls amounted to thirty and eight thousand men.
23.4 Of the overseers over the works of the house of the Lord there were twenty-four thousand, and there were six thousand scribes and judges;
23.5 and four thousand door-keepers, and four thousand to praise the Lord with instruments which he made to praise the Lord.
23.6 And David divided them into daily courses, for the sons of Levi, for Gedson, Caath, and Merari.
23.7 And for the family of Gedson, Edan, and Semei.
23.8 The sons of Edan were Jeiel, the chief, and Zethan, and Joel, three.
23.9 The sons of Semei; Salomith, Jeiel, and Dan, three: these were the chiefs of the families of Edan.
23.10 And to the sons of Semei, Jeth, and Ziza, and Joas, and Beria: these were the four sons of Semei.
23.11 And Jeth was the chief, and Ziza the second: and Joas and Beria did not multiply sons, and they became only one reckoning according to the house of their father.
23.12 The sons of Caath; Ambram, Isaar, Chebron, Oziel, four.
23.13 The sons of Ambram; Aaron and Moses: and Aaron was appointed for the consecration of the most holy things, he and his sons for ever, to burn incense before the Lord, to minister and bless in his name for ever.
23.14 And as for Moses the man of God, his sons were reckoned to the tribe of Levi.
23.15 The sons of Moses; Gersam, and Eliezer.
23.16 The sons of Gersam; Subael the chief.
23.17 And the sons of Eliezer were, Rabia the chief: and Eliezer had no other sons; but the sons of Rabia were very greatly multiplied.
23.18 The sons of Isaar; Salomoth the chief.
23.19 The sons of Chebron; Jeria the chief, Amaria the second, Jeziel the third, Jekemias the fourth.
23.20 The sons of Oziel; Micha the chief, and Isia the second.
23.21 The sons of Merari; Mooli, and Musi: the sons of Mooli; Eleazar, and Kis.
23.22 And Eleazar died, and he had no sons, but daughters: and the sons of Kis, their brethren, took them.
23.23 The sons of Musi; Mooli, and Eder, and Jarimoth, three.
23.24 These are the sons of Levi according to the houses of their fathers; chiefs of their families according to their numbering, according to the number of their names, according to their polls, doing the works of service of the house of the Lord, from twenty years old and upward.
23.25 For David said, The Lord God of Israel has given rest to his people, and has taken up his abode in Jerusalem for ever.
23.26 And the Levites bore not the tabernacle, and all the vessels of it for its service.
23.27 For by the last words of David was the number of the Levites taken from twenty years old and upward.
23.28 For he appointed them to wait on Aaron, to minister in the house of the Lord, over the courts, and over the chambers, and over the purification of all the holy things, and over the works of the service of the house of God;
23.29 and for the shew-bread, and for the fine flour of the meat-offering, and for the unleavened cakes, and for the fried cake, and for the dough, and for every measure;
23.30 and to stand in the morning to praise and give thanks to the Lord, and so in the evening;
23.31 and to be over all the whole-burnt-offerings that were offered up to the Lord on the sabbaths, and at the new moons, and at the feasts, by number, according to the order given to them, continually before the Lord.
23.32 And they are to keep the charge of the tabernacle of witness, and the charge of the holy place, and the charges of the sons of Aaron their brethren, to minister in the house of the Lord.
24.1 And they number the sons of Aaron in their division, Nadab, and Abiud, and Eleazar, and Ithamar.
24.2 And Nadab and Abiud died before their father, and they had no sons: so Eleazar and Ithamar the sons of Aaron ministered as priests.
24.3 And David distributed them, even Sadoc of the sons of Eleazar, and Achimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their numbering, according to their service, according to the houses of their fathers.
24.4 And there were found among the sons of Eleazar more chiefs of the mighty ones, than of the sons of Ithamar: and he divided them, sixteen heads of families to the sons of Eleazar, eight according to their families to the sons of Ithamar.
24.5 And he divided them according to their lots, one with the other; for there were those who had charge of the holy things, and those who had charge of the house of the Lord among the sons of Eleazar, and among the sons of Ithamar.
24.6 And Samaias the son of Nathanael, the scribe, of the family of Levi, wrote them down before the king, and the princes, and Sadoc the priest, and Achimelech the son of Abiathar were present; and the heads of the families of the priests and the Levites, each of a household were assigned one to Eleazar, and one to Ithamar.
24.7 And the first lot came out to Joarim, the second to Jedia,
24.8 the third to Charib, the fourth to Seorim,
24.9 the fifth to Melchias, the sixth to Meiamin,
24.10 the seventh to Cos, the eighth to Abia,
24.11 the ninth to Jesus, the tenth to Sechenias,
24.12 the eleventh to Eliabi, the twelfth to Jacim,
24.13 the thirteenth to Oppha, the fourteenth to Jesbaal,
24.14 the fifteenth to Belga, the sixteenth to Emmer,
24.15 the seventeenth to Chezin, the eighteenth to Aphese,
24.16 the nineteenth to Phetaea, the twentieth to Ezekel,
24.17 the twenty-first to Achim, the twenty-second to Gamul,
24.18 the twenty-third to Adallai, the twenty-fourth to Maasai.
24.19 This is their numbering according to their service to go into the house of the Lord, according to their appointment by the hand of Aaron their father, as the Lord God of Israel commanded.
24.20 And for the sons of Levi that were left, even for the sons of Ambram, Sobael: for the sons of Sobael, Jedia.
24.21 For Raabia, the chief was Isaari,
24.22 and for Isaari, Salomoth: for the sons of Salomoth, Jath.
24.23 The sons of Ecdiu; Amadia the second, Jaziel the third, Jecmoam the fourth.
24.24 For the sons of Oziel, Micha: the sons of Micha; Samer.
24.25 The brother of Micha; Isia, the son of Isia; Zacharia.
24.26 The sons of Merari, Mooli, and Musi: the sons of Ozia,
24.27 That is, the sons of Merari by Ozia, —his sons were Isoam, and Sacchur, and Abai.
24.28 To Mooli were born Eleazar, and Ithamar; and Eleazar died, and had no sons.
24.29 For Kis; the sons of Kis; Jerameel.
24.30 And the sons of Musi; Mooli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites according to the houses of their families.
24.31 And they also received lots as their brethren the sons of Aaron before the king; Sadoc also, and Achimelech, and the chiefs of the families of the priests and of the Levites, principal heads of families, even as their younger brethren.
25.1 And king David and the captains of the host appointed to their services the sons of Asaph, and of Æman, and of Idithun, prophesiers with harps, and lutes, and cymbals: and their number was according to their polls serving in their ministrations.
25.2 The sons of Asaph; Sacchur, Joseph, and Nathanias, and Erael: the sons of Asaph were next the king.
25.3 To Idithun were reckoned the sons of Idithun, Godolias, and Suri, and Iseas, and Asabias, and Matthathias, six after their father Idithun, sounding loudly on the harp thanksgiving and praise to the Lord.
25.4 To Æman were reckoned the sons of Æman, Bukias, and Matthanias, and Oziel, and Subael, and Jerimoth, and Ananias, and Anan, and Heliatha, and Godollathi, and Rometthiezer, and Jesbasaca, and Mallithi, and Otheri, and Meazoth.
25.5 All these were the sons of Æman the king’s chief player in the praises of God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Æman fourteen sons, and three daughters.
25.6 All these sang hymns with their father in the house of God, with cymbals, and lutes, and harps, for the service of the house of God, near the king, and Asaph, and Idithun, and Æman.
25.7 And the number of them after their brethren, those instructed to sing to God, every one that understood singing was two hundred and eighty-eight.
25.8 And they also cast lots for the daily courses, for the great and the small of them, of the perfect ones and the learners.
25.9 And the first lot of his sons and of his brethren came forth to Asaph the son of Joseph, namely, Godolias: the second Heneia, his sons and his brethren being twelve.
25.10 The third Zacchur, his sons and his brethren were twelve:
25.11 the fourth Jesri, his sons and his brethren were twelve:
25.12 the fifth Nathan, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.13 the sixth Bukias, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.14 the seventh Iseriel, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.15 the eighth Josia, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.16 the ninth Matthanias, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.17 the tenth Semeia, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.18 the eleventh Asriel, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.19 the twelfth Asabia, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.20 the thirteenth Subael, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.21 the fourteenth Matthathias, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.22 the fifteenth Jerimoth, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.23 the sixteenth Anania, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.24 the seventeenth Jesbasaca, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.25 the eighteenth Ananias, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.26 the nineteenth Mallithi, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.27 the twentieth Heliatha, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.28 the twenty-first Otheri, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.29 the twenty-second Godollathi, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.30 the twenty-third Meazoth, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
25.31 the twenty-fourth Rometthiezer, his sons and his brethren, twelve:
26.1 And for the divisions of the gates: the sons of the Corites were Mosellemia, of the sons of Asaph.
26.2 And Mosellemia’s first-born son was Zacharias, the second Jadiel, the third Zabadia, the fourth Jenuel,
26.3 the fifth Jolam, the sixth Jonathan, the seventh Elionai, the eighth Abdedom.
26.4 And to Abdedom there were born sons, Samaias the first-born, Jozabath the second, Joath the third, Sachar the fourth, Nathanael the fifth,
26.5 Amiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Phelathi the eighth: for God blessed him.
26.6 And to Samaias his son were born the sons of his first-born, chiefs over the house of their father, for they were mighty.
26.7 The sons of Samai; Othni, and Raphael, and Obed, and Elzabath, and Achiud, mighty men, Heliu, and Sabachia, and Isbacom.
26.8 All these were of the sons of Abdedom, they and their sons and their brethren, doing mightily in service: in all sixty-two born to Abdedom.
26.9 And Mosellemia had eighteen sons and brethren, mighty men.
26.10 And to Osa of the sons of Merari there were born sons, keeping the dominion; though he was not the first-born, yet his father made him chief of the second division.
26.11 Chelcias the second, Tablai the third, Zacharias the fourth: all these were the sons and brethren of Osa, thirteen.
26.12 To these were assigned the divisions of the gates, to the chiefs of the mighty men the daily courses, even their brethren, to minister in the house of the Lord.
26.13 And they cast lots for the small as well as for the great, for the several gates, according to their families.
26.14 And the lot of the east gates fell to Selemias, and Zacharias: the sons of Soaz cast lots for Melchias, and the lot came out northward.
26.15 To Abdedom they gave by lot the south, opposite the house of Esephim.
26.16 They gave the lot for the second to Osa westward, after the gate of the chamber by the ascent, watch against watch.
26.17 Eastward were six watchmen in the day; northward four by the day; southward four by the day; and two at the Esephim,
26.18 to relieve guard, also for Osa westward after the chamber-gate, three. There was a ward over against the ward of the ascent eastward, six men in a day, and four for the north, and four for the south, and at the Esephim two to relieve guard, and four by the west, and two to relieve guard at the pathway.
26.19 These are the divisions of the porters for the sons of Core, and to the sons of Merari.
26.20 And the Levites their brethren were over the treasures of the house of the Lord, and over the treasures of the hallowed things.
26.21 These were the sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gersonite: to Ladan belonged the heads of the families: the son of Ladan the Gersonite was Jeiel.
26.22 The sons of Jeiel were Zethom, and Joel; brethren who were over the treasures of the house of the Lord.
26.23 To Ambram and Issaar belonged Chebron, and Oziel.
26.24 And Subael the son of Gersam, the son of Moses, was over the treasures.
26.25 And Rabias was son to his brother Eliezer, and so was Josias, and Joram, and Zechri, and Salomoth.
26.26 This Salomoth and his brethren were over all the sacred treasures, which David the king and the heads of families consecrated, and the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and princes of the host,
26.27 things which he took out of cities and from the spoils, and consecrated some of them, so that the building of the house of God should not want supplies;
26.28 and over all the holy things of God dedicated by Samuel the prophet, and Saul the son of Kis, and Abenner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Saruia, whatsoever they sanctified was by the hand of Salomoth and his brethren.
26.29 For the Issaarites, Chonenia, and his sons were over the outward ministration over Israel, to record and to judge.
26.30 For the Chebronites, Asabias and his brethren, a thousand and seven hundred mighty men, were over the charge of Israel beyond Jordan westward, for all the service of the Lord and work of the king.
26.31 Of the family of Chebron Urias was chief, even of the Chebronites according to their generations, according to their families. In the fortieth year of his reign they were numbered, and there were found mighty men among them in Jazer of Galaad.
26.32 And his brethren were two thousand seven hundred mighty men, chiefs of their families, and king David set them over the Rubenites, and the Gaddites, and the half-tribe of Manasse, for every ordinance of the Lord, and business of the king.
27.1 Now the sons of Israel according to their number, heads of families, captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and scribes ministering to the king, and for every affair of the king according to their divisions, for every ordinance of coming in and going out monthly, for all the months of the year, one division of them was twenty-four thousand.
27.2 And over the first division of the first month was Isboaz the son of Zabdiel: in his division were twenty-four thousand.
27.3 Of the sons of Tharez one was chief of all the captains of the host for the first month.
27.4 And over the division of the second month was Dodia the son of Ecchoc, and over his division was Makelloth also chief: and in his division were twenty and four thousand, chief men of the host.
27.5 The third for the third month was Banaias the son of Jodae the chief priest: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.6 This Banaeas was more mighty than the thirty, and over the thirty: and Zabad his son was over his division.
27.7 The fourth for the fourth month was Asael the brother of Joab, and Zabadias his son, and his brethren: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.8 The fifth chief for the fifth month was Samaoth the Jezraite: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.9 The sixth for the sixth month was Hoduias the son of Ekkes the Thecoite: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.10 The seventh for the seventh month was Chelles of Phallus of the children of Ephraim: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.11 The eighth for the eighth month was Sobochai the Usathite, belonging to Zarai: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.12 The ninth for the ninth month was Abiezer of Anathoth, of the land of Benjamin: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.13 The tenth for the tenth month was Meera the Netophathite, belonging to Zarai: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.14 The eleventh for the eleventh month was Banaias of Pharathon, of the sons of Ephraim: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.15 The twelfth for the twelfth month was Choldia the Netophathite, belonging to Gothoniel: and in his division were twenty and four thousand.
27.16 And over the tribes of Israel, the chief for Ruben was Eliezer the son of Zechri: for Symeon, Saphatias the son of Maacha:
27.17 for Levi, Asabias the son of Camuel: for Aaron, Sadoc:
27.18 for Juda, Eliab of the brethren of David: for Issachar, Ambri the son of Michael:
27.19 for Zabulon, Samaeas the son of Abdiu: for Nephthali, Jerimoth the son of Oziel:
27.20 for Ephraim, Ose the son of Ozia: for the half-tribe of Manasse, Joel the son of Phadaea:
27.21 for the half-tribe of Manasse in the land of Galaad, Jadai the son of Zadaeas, for the sons of Benjamin, Jasiel the son of Abenner:
27.22 for Dan, Azariel the son of Iroab: these are the chiefs of the tribes of Israel.
27.23 But David took not their number from twenty years old and under: because the Lord said that he would multiply Israel as the stars of the heaven.
27.24 And Joab the son of Saruia began to number the people, and did not finish the work, for there was hereupon wrath on Israel; and the number was not recorded in the book of the chronicles of king David.
27.25 And over the king’s treasures was Asmoth the son of Odiel; and over the treasures in the country, and in the towns, and in the villages, and in the towers, was Jonathan the son of Ozia.
27.26 And over the husbandmen who tilled the ground was Esdri the son of Chelub.
27.27 And over the fields was Semei of Rael; and over the treasures of wine in the fields was Zabdi the son of Sephni.
27.28 And over the oliveyards, and over the sycamores in the plain country was Ballanan the Gedorite; and over the stores of oil was Joas.
27.29 And over the oxen pasturing in Saron was Satrai the Saronite; and over the oxen in the valleys was Sophat the son of Adli.
27.30 And over the camels was Abias the Ismaelite; and over the asses was Jadias of Merathon.
27.31 And over the sheep was Jaziz the Agarite. All these were superintendents of the substance of king David.
27.32 And Jonathan, David’s uncle by the father’s side, was a counsellor, a wise man: and Jeel the son of Achami was with the king’s sons.
27.33 Achitophel was the king’s counsellor: and Chusi the chief friend of the king.
27.34 And after this Achitophel Jodae the son of Banaeas came next, and Abiathar: and Joab was the king’s commander-in-chief.
28.1 And David assembled all the chief men of Israel, the chief of the judges, and all the chief men of the courses of attendance on the person of the king, and the captains of thousands and hundreds, and the treasurers, and the lords of his substance, and of all the king’s property, and of his sons, together with the eunuchs, and the mighty men, and the warriors of the army, at Jerusalem.
28.2 And David stood in the midst of the assembly, and said, Hear me, my brethren, and my people: it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and a place for the feet of our Lord, and I prepared materials suitable for the building:
28.3 but God said, Thou shalt not build me a house to call my name upon it, for thou art a man of war, and hast shed blood.
28.4 Yet the Lord God of Israel chose me out of the whole house of my father to be king over Israel for ever; and he chose Juda as the kingly house, and out of the house of Juda he chose the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he preferred me, that I should be king over all Israel.
28.5 And of all my sons, (for the Lord has given me many sons,)he has chosen Solomon my son, to set him on the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel.
28.6 And God said to me, Solomon thy son shall build my house and my court: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be to him a father.
28.7 And I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he continue to keep my commandments, and my judgments, as at this day.
28.8 And now I charge you before the whole assembly of the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek all the commandments of the Lord our God, that ye may inherit the good land, and leave it for your sons to inherit after you for ever.
28.9 And now, my son Solomon, know the God of thy fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and willing soul: for the Lord searches all hearts, and knows every thought: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou shouldest forsake him, he will forsake thee for ever.
28.10 See now, for the Lord has chosen thee to build him a house for a sanctuary, be strong and do it.
28.11 And David gave Solomon his son the plan of the temple, and its buildings, and its treasuries, and its upper chambers, and the inner store-rooms, and the place of the atonement,
28.12 and the plan which he had in his mind of the courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about, designed for the treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the holy things, and of the chambers for resting:
28.13 and the plan of the courses of the priests and Levites, for all the work of the service of the house of the Lord, and of the stores of vessels for ministration of the service of the house of the Lord.
28.14 And he gave him the account of their weight, both of gold and silver vessels.
28.15 He gave him the weight of the candlesticks, and of the lamps.
28.16 He gave him likewise the weight of the tables of shewbread, of each table of gold, and likewise of the tables of silver:
28.17 also of the flesh-hooks, and vessels for drink-offering, and golden bowls: and the weight of the gold and silver articles, and censers, and bowls, according to the weight of each.
28.18 And he shewed him the weight of the utensils of the altar of incense, which was of pure gold, and the plan of the chariot of the cherubs that spread out their wings, and overshadowed the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
28.19 David gave all to Solomon in the Lord’s handwriting, according to the knowledge given him of the work of the pattern.
28.20 And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong, and play the man, and do: fear not, neither be terrified; for the Lord my God is with thee; he will not forsake thee, and will not fail thee, until thou hast finished all the work of the service of the house of the Lord. And behold the pattern of the temple, even his house, and its treasury, and the upper chambers, and the inner store-rooms, and the place of propitiation, and the plan of the house of the Lord.
28.21 And see, here are the courses of the priests and Levites for all the service of the house of the Lord, and there shall be with thee men for every workmanship, and every one of ready skill in every art: also the chief men and all the people, ready for all thy commands.
29.1 And David the king said to all the congregation, Solomon my son, whom the Lord has chosen, is young and tender, and the work is great; for it is not for man, but for the Lord God.
29.2 I have prepared according to all my might for the house of my God gold, silver, brass, iron, wood, onyx stones, and costly and variegated stones for setting, and every precious stone, and much Parian marble.
29.3 And still farther, because I took pleasure in the house of my God, I have gold and silver which I have procured for myself, and, behold, I have given them to the house of my God over and above, beyond what I have prepared for the holy house.
29.4 Three thousand talents of gold of Suphir, and seven thousand talents of fine silver, for the overlaying of the walls of the sanctuary:
29.5 for thee to use the gold for things of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and for every work by the hand of the artificers. And who is willing to dedicate himself in work this day for the Lord?
29.6 Then the heads of families, and the princes of the children of Israel, and the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and the overseers of the works, and the king’s builders, offered willingly.
29.7 And they gave for the works of the house of the Lord five thousand talents of gold, and ten thousand gold pieces, and ten thousand talents of silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and a hundred thousand talents of iron.
29.8 And they who had precious stone, gave it into the treasuries of the house of the Lord by the hand of Jeiel the Gedsonite.
29.9 And the people rejoiced because of the willingness, for they offered willingly to the Lord with a full heart: and king David rejoiced greatly.
29.10 And king David blessed the Lord before the congregation, saying, Blessed art thou, O Lord God of Israel, our Father, from everlasting and to everlasting.
29.11 Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the might: for thou art Lord of all things that are in heaven and upon the earth: before thy face every king and nation is troubled.
29.12 From thee come wealth and glory: thou, O Lord, rulest over all, the Lord of all dominion, and in thy hand is strength and rule; and thou art almighty with thy hand to increase and establish all things.
29.13 And now, Lord, we give thanks to thee, and praise thy glorious name.
29.14 But who am I, and what is my people, that we have been able to be thus forward in offering to thee? for all things are thine, and of thine own have we given thee,
29.15 for we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as all our fathers were: our days upon the earth are as a shadow, and there is no remaining.
29.16 O Lord our God, as for all this abundance which I have prepared that a house should be built to thy holy name, it is of thy hand, and all is thine.
29.17 And I know, Lord, that thou art he that searches the hearts, and thou lovest righteousness. I have willingly offered all these things in simplicity of heart; and now I have seen with joy thy people here present, willingly offering to thee.
29.18 O Lord God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Israel, our fathers, preserve these things in the thought of the heart of thy people for ever, and direct their hearts to thee.
29.19 And to Solomon my son give a good heart, to perform thy commandments, and to observe thy testimonies, and thine ordinances, and to accomplish the building of thy house.
29.20 And David said to the whole congregation, Bless ye the Lord our God. And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and they bowed the knee and worshipped the Lord, and did obeisance to the king.
29.21 And David sacrificed to the Lord, and offered up whole-burnt-offerings to the Lord on the morrow after the first day, a thousand calves, a thousand rams, a thousand lambs, and their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.
29.22 And they ate and drank joyfully that day before the Lord: and they made Solomon the son of David king a second time, and anointed him king before the Lord, and Sadoc to the priesthood.
29.23 And Solomon sat upon the throne of his father David, and was highly honoured; and all Israel obeyed him.
29.24 The princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons of king David his father, were subject to him.
29.25 And the Lord magnified Solomon over all Israel, and gave him royal glory, such as was not upon any king before him.
29.26 And David the son of Jessae reigned over Israel forty years;
29.27 seven years in Chebron, and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
29.28 And he died in a good old age, full of days, in wealth, and glory: and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
29.29 And the rest of the acts of David, the former and the latter, are written in the history of Samuel the seer, and in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the history of Gad the seer,
29.30 concerning all his reign, and his power, and the times which went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the earth.
