1.1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God according to the promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus, 
1.2 To Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
1.3 I thank God whom I serve with a clear conscience, as did my fathers, when I remember you constantly in my prayers.
1.4 As I remember your tears, I long night and day to see you, that I may be filled with joy. 
1.5 I am reminded of your sincere faith, a faith that dwelt first in your grandmother Lo'is and your mother Eunice and now, I am sure, dwells in you. 
1.6 Hence I remind you to rekindle the gift of God that is within you through the laying on of my hands; 
1.7 for God did not give us a spirit of timidity but a spirit of power and love and self-control. 
1.8 Do not be ashamed then of testifying to our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but share in suffering for the gospel in the power of God,
1.9 who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not in virtue of our works but in virtue of his own purpose and the grace which he gave us in Christ Jesus ages ago, 
1.10 and now has manifested through the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus, who abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. 
1.11 For this gospel I was appointed a preacher and apostle and teacher, 
1.12 and therefore I suffer as I do. But I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am sure that he is able to guard until that Day what has been entrusted to me. 
1.13 Follow the pattern of the sound words which you have heard from me, in the faith and love which are in Christ Jesus; 
1.14 guard the truth that has been entrusted to you by the Holy Spirit who dwells within us. 
1.15 You are aware that all who are in Asia turned away from me, and among them Phy'gelus and Hermog'enes.
1.16 May the Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiph'orus, for he often refreshed me; he was not ashamed of my chains, 
1.17 but when he arrived in Rome he searched for me eagerly and found me -- 
1.18 may the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that Day -- and you well know all the service he rendered at Ephesus. 
2.1 You then, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus,
2.2 and what you have heard from me before many witnesses entrust to faithful men who will be able to teach others also. 
2.3 Share in suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. 
2.4 No soldier on service gets entangled in civilian pursuits, since his aim is to satisfy the one who enlisted him. 
2.5 An athlete is not crowned unless he competes according to the rules. 
2.6 It is the hard-working farmer who ought to have the first share of the crops. 
2.7 Think over what I say, for the Lord will grant you understanding in everything. 
2.8 Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, descended from David, as preached in my gospel,
2.9 the gospel for which I am suffering and wearing fetters like a criminal. But the word of God is not fettered. 
2.10 Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the elect, that they also may obtain salvation in Christ Jesus with its eternal glory. 
2.11 The saying is sure: If we have died with him, we shall also live with him;
2.12 if we endure, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us;
2.13 if we are faithless, he remains faithful -- for he cannot deny himself. 
2.14 Remind them of this, and charge them before the Lord to avoid disputing about words, which does no good, but only ruins the hearers.
2.15 Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a workman who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth. 
2.16 Avoid such godless chatter, for it will lead people into more and more ungodliness, 
2.17 and their talk will eat its way like gangrene. Among them are Hymenae'us and Phile'tus, 
2.18 who have swerved from the truth by holding that the resurrection is past already. They are upsetting the faith of some. 
2.19 But God's firm foundation stands, bearing this seal: "The Lord knows those who are his," and, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord depart from iniquity." 
2.20 In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver but also of wood and earthenware, and some for noble use, some for ignoble.
2.21 If any one purifies himself from what is ignoble, then he will be a vessel for noble use, consecrated and useful to the master of the house, ready for any good work. 
2.22 So shun youthful passions and aim at righteousness, faith, love, and peace, along with those who call upon the Lord from a pure heart. 
2.23 Have nothing to do with stupid, senseless controversies; you know that they breed quarrels. 
2.24 And the Lord's servant must not be quarrelsome but kindly to every one, an apt teacher, forbearing, 
2.25 correcting his opponents with gentleness. God may perhaps grant that they will repent and come to know the truth, 
2.26 and they may escape from the snare of the devil, after being captured by him to do his will. 
3.1 But understand this, that in the last days there will come times of stress.
3.2 For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, proud, arrogant, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy, 
3.3 inhuman, implacable, slanderers, profligates, fierce, haters of good, 
3.4 treacherous, reckless, swollen with conceit, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, 
3.5 holding the form of religion but denying the power of it. Avoid such people. 
3.6 For among them are those who make their way into households and capture weak women, burdened with sins and swayed by various impulses, 
3.7 who will listen to anybody and can never arrive at a knowledge of the truth. 
3.8 As Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these men also oppose the truth, men of corrupt mind and counterfeit faith; 
3.9 but they will not get very far, for their folly will be plain to all, as was that of those two men. 
3.10 Now you have observed my teaching, my conduct, my aim in life, my faith, my patience, my love, my steadfastness,
3.11 my persecutions, my sufferings, what befell me at Antioch, at Ico'nium, and at Lystra, what persecutions I endured; yet from them all the Lord rescued me. 
3.12 Indeed all who desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted, 
3.13 while evil men and impostors will go on from bad to worse, deceivers and deceived. 
3.14 But as for you, continue in what you have learned and have firmly believed, knowing from whom you learned it 
3.15 and how from childhood you have been acquainted with the sacred writings which are able to instruct you for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. 
3.16 All scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, 
3.17 that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work. 
4.1 I charge you in the presence of God and of Christ Jesus who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom:
4.2 preach the word, be urgent in season and out of season, convince, rebuke, and exhort, be unfailing in patience and in teaching. 
4.3 For the time is coming when people will not endure sound teaching, but having itching ears they will accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their own likings, 
4.4 and will turn away from listening to the truth and wander into myths. 
4.5 As for you, always be steady, endure suffering, do the work of an evangelist, fulfil your ministry. 
4.6 For I am already on the point of being sacrificed; the time of my departure has come.
4.7 I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. 
4.8 Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me on that Day, and not only to me but also to all who have loved his appearing. 
4.9 Do your best to come to me soon.
4.10 For Demas, in love with this present world, has deserted me and gone to Thessaloni'ca; Crescens has gone to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. 
4.11 Luke alone is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you; for he is very useful in serving me. 
4.12 Tych'icus I have sent to Ephesus. 
4.13 When you come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Tro'as, also the books, and above all the parchments. 
4.14 Alexander the coppersmith did me great harm; the Lord will requite him for his deeds. 
4.15 Beware of him yourself, for he strongly opposed our message. 
4.16 At my first defense no one took my part; all deserted me. May it not be charged against them! 
4.17 But the Lord stood by me and gave me strength to proclaim the message fully, that all the Gentiles might hear it. So I was rescued from the lion's mouth. 
4.18 The Lord will rescue me from every evil and save me for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
4.19 Greet Prisca and Aq'uila, and the household of Onesiph'orus.
4.20 Eras'tus remained at Corinth; Troph'imus I left ill at Mile'tus. 
4.21 Do your best to come before winter. Eubu'lus sends greetings to you, as do Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brethren. 
4.22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you. 
