1.1 The vision of Obadiah. Thus says the Lord GOD concerning Edom: We have heard a report from the LORD, and a messenger has been sent among the nations: "Rise up! Let us rise against it for battle!"
1.2 Behold, I will make you small among the nations, you shall be utterly despised.
1.3 The pride of your heart has deceived you, you who live in the clefts of the rock, whose dwelling is high, who say in your heart, "Who will bring me down to the ground?"
1.4 Though you soar aloft like the eagle, though your nest is set among the stars, thence I will bring you down, says the LORD.
1.5 If thieves came to you, if plunderers by night -- how you have been destroyed! -- would they not steal only enough for themselves? If grape gatherers came to you, would they not leave gleanings?
1.6 How Esau has been pillaged, his treasures sought out!
1.7 All your allies have deceived you, they have driven you to the border; your confederates have prevailed against you; your trusted friends have set a trap under you -- there is no understanding of it.
1.8 Will I not on that day, says the LORD, destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of Mount Esau?
1.9 And your mighty men shall be dismayed, O Teman, so that every man from Mount Esau will be cut off by slaughter.
1.10 For the violence done to your brother Jacob, shame shall cover you, and you shall be cut off for ever.
1.11 On the day that you stood aloof, on the day that strangers carried off his wealth, and foreigners entered his gates and cast lots for Jerusalem, you were like one of them.
1.12 But you should not have gloated over the day of your brother in the day of his misfortune; you should not have rejoiced over the people of Judah in the day of their ruin; you should not have boasted in the day of distress.
1.13 You should not have entered the gate of my people in the day of his calamity; you should not have gloated over his disaster in the day of his calamity; you should not have looted his goods in the day of his calamity.
1.14 You should not have stood at the parting of the ways to cut off his fugitives; you should not have delivered up his survivors in the day of distress.
1.15 For the day of the LORD is near upon all the nations. As you have done, it shall be done to you, your deeds shall return on your own head.
1.16 For as you have drunk upon my holy mountain, all the nations round about shall drink; they shall drink, and stagger, and shall be as though they had not been.
1.17 But in Mount Zion there shall be those that escape, and it shall be holy; and the house of Jacob shall possess their own possessions.
1.18 The house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau stubble; they shall burn them and consume them, and there shall be no survivor to the house of Esau; for the LORD has spoken. 
1.19 Those of the Negeb shall possess Mount Esau, and those of the Shephe'lah the land of the Philistines; they shall possess the land of E'phraim and the land of Sama'ria and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
1.20 The exiles in Halah who are of the people of Israel shall possess Phoenicia as far as Zar'ephath; and the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Sephar'ad shall possess the cities of the Negeb.
1.21 Saviors shall go up to Mount Zion to rule Mount Esau; and the kingdom shall be the LORD's. 
